Draft version July 3, 2025
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX63

Ground to Dust: Collisional Cascades and the Fate of Kardashev II Megaswarms
Brian C. Lacki1
1 Breakthrough Listen, Department of Physics, Denys Wilkinson Building, Keble Road, Oxford OX1 3RH, UK

arXiv:2504.21151v2 [astro-ph.EP] 2 Jul 2025

ABSTRACT
Extraterrestrial intelligences are speculated to surround stars with structures to collect their energy
or to signal distant observers. If they exist, these most likely are megaswarms, vast constellations of
satellites (elements) in orbit around the hosts. Although long-lived megaswarms are extremely powerful
technosignatures, they are liable to be subject to collisional cascades once guidance systems start
failing. The collisional time is roughly an orbital period divided by the covering fraction of the swarm.
Structuring the swarm orbits does not prolong the initial collisional time as long as there is enough
randomness to ensure collisions, although it can reduce collision velocities. I further show that once
the collisional cascade begins, it can develop extremely rapidly for hypervelocity collisions. Companion
stars or planets in the stellar system induce perturbations through the Lidov-Kozai effect among others,
which can result in orbits crossing within some millions of years. Radiative perturbations, including
the Yarkovsky effect, also can destabilize swarms. Most megaswarms are thus likely to be short-lived
on cosmic timescales without active upkeep. I discuss possible mitigation strategies and implications
for megastructure searches.
Keywords: Search for extraterrestrial intelligence — Technosignatures — Collisional processes — Astrodynamics — Orbits
1. INTRODUCTION

The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligences (SETI)
must deal with the challenge that technological societies
are separated not just in space, but in time. Even if every single star is home to intelligent life at some point
during its lifespan, the odds are against us observing
them unless the lifespan of the technosignatures is many
millions of years. But if they are short-lived, might some
technosignatures greatly outlast their creators? The
long-term survival of actively broadcasting transmitters
is problematic without maintenance – especially ones
visible over interstellar distances. Radio transmitters,
lasers, and broadcasting probes all presumably require
complicated electronics, or even more advanced technology, any of which could eventually break down, and the
former two need to avoid failure while channeling large
amounts of power (e.g., Sheikh 2020). Of course, we can
speculate that such technology could be self-repairing,
or even self-replicating, but arguably the builders’ society is itself a self-repairing mechanism; if even that
Corresponding author: Brian C. Lacki
astrobrianlacki@gmail.com

cannot survive for so long, why should their broadcasting technology?
Technosignatures that are rarely produced but longlived could outnumber those that are universal but
short-lived, and thus have a greater chance of being observable (Kipping et al. 2020; Balbi & Ćirković 2021;
Lacki 2024). A passive technosignature, one that remains detectable without any maintenance simply by
virtue of continuing to exist, would bridge the gap, serving as a fossil of its creators (Carrigan 2012). A probe
within our Solar System could be a robust technosignature even if it is derelict (Rose & Wright 2004; see also
Lacki 2019a). Because they are not operating under
their own power, most conceivable passive technosignatures would be beyond detection at interstellar distances. But the megastructures, a hypothetical class of
artificial objects as big as planets, stars, or even larger,
could make themselves known over vast distances. It is
tempting to imagine such structures as nigh indestructible, so large that any disaster would be a mere scratch,
and that once built, they exist forever. If so, then megastructures bridge both the enormous gulfs of space and
time that SETI must overcome.
The archetypal megastructure is the Dyson sphere, a
shell that completely encloses a star, gathering all its

2
power and providing exponentially more surface area
than planets (Dyson 1960; Wright 2020). The concept
has been remixed many times over the decades – structures with different functions like maximizing computation (Bradbury 2000; Wright 2023) or altering the host’s
evolution (Criswell 1985; Huston & Wright 2022; Scoggins & Kipping 2023); partial structures that only cover
a fraction of the available sightlines or involve translucent swarms (Zackrisson et al. 2018; Suazo et al. 2022);
placing them around different objects like black holes
(Inoue & Yokoo 2011; Semiz & Oğur 2015; Osmanov
2016; Hsiao et al. 2021); and scaling down or up its size.
On the small end are thin shapes the size of planets but
of varying shapes, which could be used to signal the presence of an ETI as their odd shapes distort the transit
light curve (Arnold 2005; Wright et al. 2016). Modulation of pulsar light curves is another possibility (Chennamangalam et al. 2015). Perhaps the largest solid structure proposed is described in Kardashev (1985): a single
parsecs-wide disk built around a galactic nucleus. Nor
are megastructures necessarily isolated oddities: the resources to embark on interstellar voyages are negligible
compared to that to remake a stellar system; perhaps
there are entire galaxies out there whose stellar populations are cloaked by these objects (Wright et al. 2014;
but see Lacki 2019b).
Now, a single solid structure the size of a solar system
is thought impractical with our current understanding
of material sciences. The stresses would be too great
for one to ever be built, and they suffer from gravitational instabilities (Wright 2020). Most conceptions
of megastructures bigger than planets picture them as
dense swarms, each element built with conventional materials, but so numerous that the optical depth can exceed one. The swarm elements orbit the host sun like
any other body. The orbiting swarm concept is very
general; it can be scaled up to galactic scales with the
galactic “blackboxes” of Lacki (2016), in which the elements are artificial dust grains in an interstellar medium.
It can also be scaled down to dense swarms of satellites
orbiting a planet (Socas-Navarro 2018; Sallmen et al.
2019). An orbiting planetary swarm has the advantage
of being feasible and precedented: the growing enormous constellations of satellites in Earth orbit can be
viewed as such a swarm in the earliest stages of development. Even in the earliest days of the Space Age,
the West Ford Project unilaterally spread millions of
copper dipoles in medium Earth orbit to radically alter
the planet’s radio environment (Morrow & MacLellan

Lacki
1961; Shapiro 1966).1 The Kardashev scale, inspired by
Kardashev (1964), presents a natural categorization of
swarms: Type I for planetary, Type II for stellar, and
Type III for galactic.2
Herein lies a major threat to megastructure lifespans:
if abandoned, the individual elements eventually start
crashing into each other at high speeds (as noted in
Lacki 2016; Sallmen et al. 2019; Lacki 2020). Not only
do the collisions destroy the crashed swarm members,
but they spray out many pieces of wreckage. Each of
these pieces is itself moving at high speeds, so that even
pieces much smaller than the original elements can destroy them. Thus, each collision can produce hundreds
of missiles, resulting in a rapid growth of the potentially
dangerous population and accelerating the rate of collisions. The result is a collisional cascade, where the
swarm elements are smashed into fragments, that are
in turn smashed into smaller pieces, and so on, until
the entire structure has been reduced to dust. Collisional cascades are thought to have shaped the evolution of minor Solar System body objects like asteroid
families and the irregular satellites of the giant planets
(Kessler 1981; Nesvorný et al. 2003, 2004; Bottke et al.
2010). They also thin out debris disks, both in and
out of the Solar System (Wyatt 2008; Nesvorný et al.
2010). The specter of the technological collisional cascade was brought up by Kessler & Cour-Palais (1978),
which noted that space debris from our activities in
low Earth orbit posed a threat to operating satellites.
This threat has only grown with the deployment of large
satellite constellations and anti-satellite missile tests (Le
May et al. 2018; Boley & Byers 2021), and this for a
planetary swarm with an optical depth far less than one.
In a structure as dense as a Dyson sphere, the effects can
be immediate.
1.1. The megaswarms considered
Megaswarms are characterized by having a great many
potentially large objects in orbits around the host, but
otherwise their conceptions are very diverse. Both element area and numerosity directly increase the difficulty
of avoiding collisions. I will focus on two cases, which
might be taken as the limits of a dense and rarefied
megaswarm.
1 Both the present day satellite swarms and the West Ford Project

sparked protest from astronomers worried about their impacts
on radio and optical astronomy (e.g., Lovell et al. 1962; Sandage
& Kowal 1963; Hainaut & Williams 2020; McDowell 2020).
2 The Kardashev scale as defined in Kardashev (1964) actually
measures the power used in a broadcast; I am using it in the
common very loose sense of the scale of a technosignature.

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades
The prototypical megaswarm, the Dyson sphere, emphasizes the numerosity of swarm elements – whatever
their individual size, there have to be enough to cover
the star in all directions, implying a literally astronomical number of elements. This is to collect as much
energy as possible from the host sun. Even a partial
Dyson sphere will have a great many. Originally, the elements were considered to be inhabited space stations,
and thus might be kilometers wide (Dyson 1960). A
later conception suggests that they might be used simply to power computers, in which case their sizes might
be arbitrary (e.g., Bradbury 2000; Bradbury et al. 2011;
Wright 2023). Because of this uncertainty in the size, it
is more useful in this paper to consider the mean optical
E
depth of the swarm, ⟨τS ⟩ ∼ ⟨nE
S ⟩⟨AE ⟩⟨rS ⟩, where nS is
the number density of elements in the swarm, AE is the
projected area of each element, and rS is the thickness
of the shell. When τS ≲ 1, it is essentially the covering
factor. A full Dyson swarm is discussed in this paper as
a maximal megaswarm.
On the other hand, an occulter swarm simply places
objects detectable by their transit light curves, which
can give clues to their artificial natures (Arnold 2005).
This means that the individual elements are as wide
as planets (though presumably much thinner, more like
plates or thin bubbles), but there may be relatively few
of them. But like a transiting exoplanet, an artificial occulter has a problem as “beacons” meant to draw notice
to a planetary system: they are seen from only a small
range of inclinations (“the transit zone”; cf., Heller &
Pudritz 2016; Wells et al. 2018). The transit zone has
an angular width of 2R⋆ /RS , for an element that transits a star of radius R⋆ at a distance RS . Since the range
of inclinations is π radians, this means that the number
of elements in the swarm must be


−1
πRS
R⋆
RS
E
NS ≳
≈ 340
(1)
2R⋆
AU
R⊙
to be effective as a beacon along all directions. An occulter swarm with this many elements is referred to herein
as the minimal occulter swarm, and will be considered
as the minimal megaswarm. Actual occulter swarms
may have more elements, to account for the orbital wander of the elements over time from perturbations (Section 4), for especially attention-grabbing transit signatures (Arnold 2005), or so that transits are more frequent than once per orbital period. Lacki (2020) posited
that ETIs might use lenses around accreting neutron
stars to create bright beams visible as X-ray flashes;
this construction too would be denser than a minimal
occulter.
1.2. Outline

3

This paper lays out some dangers of collisional cascades for megastructure swarms, with a particular focus
on the Kardashev type II stellar swarms. I start by
presenting estimates of the initial collisional destruction
time and discuss the likely geometry of a megaswarm
(Section 2). The actual process of collisional cascades
are modeled in Section 3, including the ultimate fate of
the dust. Section 4 discusses the many possible sources
of gravitational perturbations that can lead to orbit
crossing, with a focus on the Lidov-Kozai effect. Radiative thrust, both as a source of lift and as a destabilizing force, is discussed in section 5. The final discussion section (6) lays out the circumstances in which a
megastructure could survive for a very long time: what
sorts of structures around what sorts of objects, and the
implications for SETI. Section 7 summarizes the conclusions.
2. COLLISION TIME ESTIMATES AND THE

STRUCTURE OF MEGASWARMS
When discussing collisional cascades, we must make
a distinction between two different timescales. The
first, treated in this section, is called here the collisional
timescale tcoll . It is the inverse of the rate at which a
megaswarm element collides with other objects: if the
swarm around the element remains the same, we expect
it to have about one collison over tcoll . As used here, the
collisional timescale is an instantaneous quantity defined
for the initial population of the swarm.
The other timescale is the cascade timescale tcasc ,
which describes the actual time it takes for collisions
to grind the swarm down to fragments and is dealt with
in section 3. This can be much faster than the collisional
timescale, because early collisions multiply the number
of potential missiles in the system – as the cascade develops, the environment of an element does not remain
the same. Still, the two are linked: the cascade’s initial
growth is a result of the first collisions in the swarm,
when the conditions are the same as those used for the
collisional time. The collisional time is kinematic, while
the cascade time is evolutionary.
2.1. The collisional time
The naive collisional time is based on the assumption
that the swarm is completely randomized, with each element experiencing a constant flux of projectiles, each
independent of the last. Let us suppose the elements are
mixed into a swarm volume, an isotropic shell with mean
radius RS and thickness rS , for a volume VS ≈ 4πRS2 rS
(Figure 1). The velocity dispersion of the swarm elements is σSv and the mean collisional cross section be-

4

Lacki
the collisional time is
4πRS2 rS
VS
≈
.
(2)
NSE σSv AEE
NSE σSv AEE
p
The circular orbital velocity, υ(a) ≡ GN M⋆ /a for a
body with semimajor axis a, taken at the swarm location, is a characteristic velocity scale. And indeed, if
elements of all different inclinations, or widely varying
eccentricities, are all mixing together, the velocity dispersion should be of this magnitude. The assumption
that σSv ≈ υ(RS ) gives us the naive collisional time,
tcoll
≈
S

t̄coll
≡
S

4πRS2 rS
.
NSE AEE υ(RS )

(3)

We can then write the collisional time in terms of the
characteristic orbital period, torb
E (RS ) ≈ 2πRS /υ(RS ),
and swarm covering fraction, FS ≈ NSE AE /(4πRS2 ) (compare Wyatt et al. 1999, equation 16):

Figure 1. Sketch of the assumed shell geometry of a megaswarm.
The shell contains belts, one example of which is depicted in blue.
Within each belt, elements orbit, possibly slightly displaced from
the belt center by random velocity deviations (black dashed line).
Note that the belts do not fill the entire swarm shell, much of
which may be empty.

tween elements is AEE .3 For a swarm with NSE elements,

tcoll
≈ torb
S
E (RS ) ·

1 rS υ(RS ) AE
.
2πFS RS σSv AEE

(4)

In the limit of a fully randomized Dyson swarm (FS ∼ 1,
σSv /υ(RS ) ∼ 1), then, the collisional time is basically the
orbital period; the swarm self-destructs within a year or
so. Previous studies have noted the need for course correction in Dyson swarms to inhibit gravitational instabilities (Wright 2020), but since the dynamical time is
√
∼ 1/ GN ρS for a swarm mass density ρS , these should
take about a thousand orbital periods to develop (assuming a mass ∼ 10−6 of the host, like a terrestrial
planet might have). Collisional cascades pose a much
more urgent hazard.

The naive collisional time for a minimal occulter swarm is:
 

5/2 
−1/2 
 
−1 
5/2
8RS R⋆
RS
M⋆
AEE
rS
rS
R⋆
coll
≈ 1.0 Myr
.
t̄S ≈ 1/2 1/2
2
R
AU
M
πR
R
R
S
⊙
⊙
S
GN M⋆ AEE
⊕

(5)

While certainly long-lived, it is still vastly shorter than the lifespan of a star unless the occulter swarm is very far from
the star or the occulters are very small; and even if every solar analog hosted one of these swarms at 1 AU once during
its lifespan, only one in twenty thousand might be expected to still have one unless they are actively maintained.4

3 This collisional cross section is different than the geometric or

projected area AE . Two spherical elements of equal radius RE
collide if one comes within 2RE of the other, so the collisional
2 , not πR2 . Of course, collisions at the
cross section is 4πRE
E
maximum range are glancing, and may have different physics,
but that is beyond the scope of this work.
4 When transiting an inner binary, the stars themselves move and
the minimal occulter model no longer applies, but more elements
still means more frequent transits (Lacki 2020).

Table 1 gives some characteristic collisional times
for megaswarms experiencing Earth-like instellations
around various host stars.
2.2. The packing of orbital belts in swarms
The basic estimates of the collisional time may seem
unrealistically short. Surely the builders would not scat-

5

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades
Table 1. Characteristic collisional and cascade times for habitable megaswarms
Host type

M dwarf
K dwarf
Solar twin
Vega twin
Red giant
Red supergiant
White dwarf

Host properties

Swarm properties

L⋆

M⋆

R⋆

RS

υS

torb
E

(L⊙ )

(M⊙ )

(R⊙ )

(AU)

(km s−1 )

(yr)

0.001
0.1
1
50
200
100000
0.0001

0.2
0.7
1
2
1
20
0.6

0.1
0.7
1
2.5
25
700
0.01

0.032
0.32
1.0
7.1
14
320
0.01

75
44
30
16
7.9
7.5
230

0.013
0.21
1.0
13
53
1300
0.0013

Dyson swarm
ṽ

240
140
94
50
25
24
730

t̄coll
S

t̂casc
S

(yr)

(yr)

0.0020
0.034
0.16
2.1
8.5
200
0.00021

1.8 × 10−5
0.00070
0.0063
0.22
2.3
58
2.8 × 10−7

Minimal occulter
NSE

11
110
340
2400
4800
110000
3.4

t̄coll
S

t̂casc
S

(yr)

(yr)

41
49000
1.0 × 106
2.4 × 108
2.0 × 1010
2.9 × 1014
0.13

0.36
1000
41000
2.6 × 107
5.3 × 109
8.4 × 1013
0.00018

Note—The radius RS of the swarm is at the distance where the instellation is the same as the Earth gets from the Sun, with rS = RS .
Each swarm is assumed to be fully randomized (υS ≡ υ(RS ) = σSv ). For the Dyson swarm, the mean optical depth is taken to be 1; for
the minimal occulter swarm, each element has a projected area equal to that of the Earth. The elements in each swarm have an impact
strength of 109 erg g−1 .

ter the element’s orbits at random, knowing about the
threat. And indeed, such issues have already begun
to be considered for humanity’s own little swarms, the
satellite constellations. If none of the orbits of the swarm
elements intersect, then no collisions can occur. This
is why the inner Solar System has not self-destructed
in geological time, because each of the inner planets
has “cleared its orbit” during the process of terrestrial
planet formation. Only if the orbits change drastically,
as might be expected over billions of years, would we
have to worry about them running into one another.
But while it is easy to fit the orbits of four planets (and
the Moon) into the inner Solar System without crossing
one another, would that be true in an occulter swarm
with hundreds of planet-sized bodies? What about a
full-on Dyson swarm with many billions of elements?
Now, when considering this question, an orbital crossing does not require the orbits to intersect exactly, they
must merely come close enough for a collision. Because
each element is spatially extended, the orbits have to
miss by at least the diameter of the largest element.
Effectively, it can be thought of as sweeping out a (generally eccentric) torus as it orbits its host. Several elements may be placed in the same orbit, maintaining a
safe difference apart, where secular perturbations (section 4) leave the orbits coincident, preventing collisions.
To generalize the problem still further, we may imagine these elements on the “same” orbit receive small
kicks over time, so that their orbits misalign, puffing
out the torus (Figure 2). Each torus is an orbital belt,
which serves as a unit of the swarm’s structure. The
inner radius of a belt rB depends on the randomization
of orbital velocities within it. A belt where the randomized velocities are so small that the inner radius is

the radius of an individual element RE is referred to as
“sharp” in this work, whereas “fuzzy” in this work implies RE ≪ rB ≪ RB , where RB is the belt semi-major
axis.
While there could be many elements in a belt, it is
also evident that many belts are needed for some purposes. An occulter swarm presumably needs to ensure
an occultation is seen from any angle, requiring a whole
sweep of the range of inclinations; a Dyson swarm needs
to collect luminosity emitted into all ecliptic latitudes.
The belts are supposed to all fit within a rough shell or
sphere with outer radius RS , so how many are allowed
without crossing?
In a swarm with NSB belts, a plausible “packing factor”
is
ηSB ≡ NSB rB /rS .

(6)

When the orbits are circular, belt intersections must occur if ηSB ≳ 1, through the pigeonhole principle. Then
all orbits that share a semimajor axis RB are great circles on a sphere with that radius, and thus necessarily
intersect. Non-intersecting circular belts thus each clear
out a shell with thickness ∼ rB , and the number of such
shells that can fit in the swarm shell is rS /rB . Likewise,
nested coplanar elliptical orbits intersect if ηSB ≳ 1, with
the nesting also imposing the same eccentricity and argument of pericenter.
This packing factor should also be appropriate for randomly distributed elliptical belts. Consider the midplane of a representative belt, which has a semimajor
axis aB ≈ RS . The other belts, with nonzero inclinations, necessarily pierce the midplane twice. From
their respective definitions, the midplane crossings are
confined within an annulus centered on the host that

6

Lacki

a

b

c

d

e

f

Figure 2. A sketch of a series of coplanar belts heating up with randomized velocities. In panel (a), the belt is a single orbit on which
elements are placed in an orderly fashion. Very small random velocities (meters per second or less) cause small deviations in the elements’
orbits, though so small that the belt is still “sharp”, narrower than the elements themselves (b). The random velocities cause the phases to
desynchronize, leading to collisions, although they are too slow to damage the elements (cyan bursts). The collision time decreases rapidly
in this regime until the belt is as wide as the elements themselves and becomes “fuzzy” (c). The collision time is at its minimum, although
impacts are still too small to cause damage. In panel (d), the belts are still not wide enough to overlap, but relative speeds within the belts
have become fast enough to catastrophically damage elements (yellow explosions), and are much more frequent than the naive collisional
time implies because of the high density within belts. Further heating causes the density to fall and collisions to become rarer until the
belts start to overlap (e). Finally, the belts grow so wide that each belt overlaps several others, with collisions occuring between objects in
different belts too (f), at which point the swarm is largely randomized.

has an area 4πRS rS . We will assume that these are
uniformly distributed; although high eccentricities imply many belt crossings close to the star, this concentration itself should increase the likelihood of an overlap. Overlap occurs whenever one of these crossings occurs within rB of the belt, a target region with area
∼ 4πaB rB ∼ 4πRS rB . Thus, by taking the area ratio,
the expected number of overlaps occurring for this particular belt is ∼ 2NSB rB /rS ≈ 2ηSB . Belt overlaps are
common when ηSB ≳ 1. In fact, the first
p overlap anywhere in the swarm occurs when ηSB ∼ rB /rS , because
we need to repeat this analysis for every single belt,
resulting in quadratic growth of belt crossings. Contrast that with nested circular belts, in which the first
belt overlap anywhere in the swarm also occurs when

ηSB ∼ 1. This argument does not rule out the possibility
that some ordered configuration (possibly with inclination and longitude of ascending node marching in step)
allow for tighter packings.
A swarm with ηSB ≫ 1 is therefore likely to be overpacked, with belt crossings. Overpacked swarms are potentially dangerous from a traffic control perspective.
The phases of the orbits (mean anomalies) must be
maintained, so that elements along belt slip through
gaps in the elements along another. To maintain these
phases in the faces of perturbations, all of the orbiting
elements must maintain propulsion and navigation systems. Thus, overpacked swarms are unlikely to last long
unless they are actively maintained – they should not
be expected to be long-lived passive technosignatures.

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades

7

2.3. The base configuration: how belts are likely to be
arranged
The collision rate is proportional to the differential
velocity of elements with intersecting orbits. The differential velocity also sets the severity of the collision –
the faster the collision, the more debris produced, and
the more of a threat the debris is to the remaining elements (Section 3). As the velocities of elements within
the belt are randomized by perturbations, the belts puff
out (Figure 2). Thus, adjacent belts can be expected
to overlap first. If neighboring belts have high mutual
inclination, then they begin to experience a barrage of
high speed collisions as soon as they start to overlap.
Low mutual inclinations means that the two streams of
elements are moving almost cosynchronously, reducing
the harms of collisions. To minimize the initial severity
of collisions, adjacent belts should have nearly the same
inclinations.
Circular orbits are also likely to be used. When there
are other bodies in the system, elliptical orbits are well
known to have drifting arguments of periastron and longitudes of ascending nodes, and variable inclinations and
eccentricities, caused by secular perturbations like the
Lidov-Kozai mechanism (see sections 4 and 5). An elliptical orbit can be expected to sample the space all
throughout a shell whose thickness spans the periastron
and apoastron within a latitude range defined by the
relative inclination (Kessler 1981). The higher the eccentricity, the thicker the shell segment. This essentially
guarantees that belts overlap at some point. Furthermore, when collisions do happen, they have high velocity – the velocity difference between two elements with
significantly different arguments of periastron, or significantly different eccentricities, is of the same order of
magnitude as the orbital velocity.
As a result, an actual megaswarm built for longevity
would use circular orbits organized on a gradient of inclination as one goes out from the star, increasing (or
decreasing) steadily over a range of semimajor axes: the
base configuration (Figure 3). This reduces the differential velocity of nearby belts. A corollary, however, is
that most of the swarm shell’s volume is unused if belt
collisions are avoided. This has the effect of increasing
the density within the occupied belts that much higher,
shortening the intrabelt collision time.
2.4. Collisions within belts
It makes sense that elements in a belt would originally be placed on exactly the same orbit, only at different phases. That way, long-term secular perturbations
like the Lidov-Kozai effect influence the orbits in the
same way (Section 4), minimizing local velocity changes

Figure 3. Sketch of the “base configuration” posited as a likely
geometry for megaswarms, as viewed edge-on. The swarm includes
circular belts (one example in blue) covering the full range of inclinations, but the semimajor axis gradually increases (or decreases)
as it grows.

and helping to prevent collisions. Still, elements could
acquire slight velocity offsets that desynchronize them
and ultimately enable collisions, perhaps through the
very act of station-keeping.
The elements continue to cluster around the original
belt orbit, but at any time and phase of the orbit, the
elements have a distribution of perturbations ∆v E relative to the circular orbit velocity υ B , with a total spread
v
. As a result, the elements have eccentricities that are
σB
slightly above zero and inclinations spread in a range
around zero. Their orbits thread through a thin torus,
v
/υB ) and total volwith an inner radius rB ∼ RB (σB
4 v2
2
2
ume VB ∼ 2π RB rB ∼ 2πRB σB /(GN M⋆ ), if the vev
locity perturbation distribution has spread σB
and is
5
isotropic.
In a sharp belt, the orbital torus is well within the
tori swept out by the elements as they revolve around
the host. The small offsets in the radial and out-ofplane directions are irrelevant for whether a collision
happens, because they are smaller than the elements
themselves. All that matters is whether the elements
happen to have the same phase, at which point collision
is inevitable. This is a one-dimensional problem, then;
the collision time thus only depends on the linear denE
sity ΛE
B = NB /(2πRB ) and the velocity spread (strictly,
5 If the velocity distribution is anisotropic and has different dis-

persions in-plane and out-of-plane, the inner radii in the corresponding directions are scaled proportionally.

8

Lacki

only the component parallel to the orbit):
E v −1
tcoll
≈
B ≈ (ΛB σB )

torb
2πRB
B RB
≈
E
v
NB σB
NBE rB

(7)

for a circular belt with orbital period torb
Thus
B .
collisions never happen with zero velocity dispersion,
and, assuming well-separated belts, the collision rate
is fastest when the belt reaches the transition to being
fuzzy (rB ∼ RE ), because the linear density is unaffected
by the dispersion. At this threshold,


−1
RB
torb
RE
orb 23,000
B RB
tcoll
·
. (8)
≈
≈
t
·
B
B
AU
R⊕
NBE RE
NBE
Within an occulter swarm, intrabelt collisions can be expected within tens of thousands of years. Other swarms
may have smaller elements, but to achieve a high covering factor, many elements must exist within each belt
(NBE ≫ 1). Of course, the more tightly packed the elements are on the belt, the shorter this time becomes.
The maximum packing occurs when the elements form a
nearly continuous segmented ring, NBE ≈ 2πRB /RE , at
which point the collision time’s minimum is torb
B /(2π).
But the transition to fuzzy belts occurs for very small
velocity dispersions,

  orb −1
2πRE
RE
tB
v
−1
σB ≈ orb ≈ 130 cm sec
. (9)
R⊕
yr
tB
Collisions at these speeds would not harm solidly built
elements, although they might snap off delicate structures. Instead, the objects would probably either bounce
or just stick together.
After this point, as long as the belts remain wellseparated (ηSB ≪ 1), further isotropized velocity dispersion actually prolongs the mean time between collisions
because the torus cross-section puffs out in two dimen3
v
/υB )2
sions. The volume of the torus is VB ≈ π 2 RB
(σB
for an isotropized velocity distribution. Because the elements are randomly distributed in a three dimensional
v
volume, the collision time is VB /(NBE σB
ĀEE ):
 2

 
v
B
2
torb
πRB
πRE
rS
orb ηS
B σB
tcoll
≈
≈
t
B
B
E
FS 4ĀEE
RS
NB υB ĀEE
(10)
for a typical belt in the swarm, noting that FS ≈
2
2
NBE NSB RE
/(4RB
).
As velocity dispersion increases, the belt packing ηSB
also increases, until it reaches ∼ 1 and the belts overlap.
At that point, we have to consider not only intrabelt collisions, but collisions with elements in other belts that
cross the expanded tori, discussed in the next subsection. So, except when the velocity dispersion is essentially zero, the instantaneous collision time is shorter

than the naive collisional time. Again, such collisions
may be too slow to adversely affect the elements (though
see section 3.8), but the speeds required for disruption
are likely much smaller than the orbital speeds.
2.5. When the belts overlap
On the chaotic end, the collisional time reaches a
plateau when the belts have randomized so much that
they overlap, nearing the naive collisional time for the
swarm.
We consider a swarm with NSB circular belts with an
even spacing, ∆RB = rS /NSB , in radius (also the mean
semimajor axis of elements within the belt). Each belt
partially overlaps χBB ≡ ⌊rB /∆RB ⌋ = ⌊ηSB ⌋ belts interior to it, and an equal number exterior. For a random
belt j, the collisional time is
"
#−1
χ
BB
X
coll
−1
coll
coll
−1
tBS (j) ≈ tB (j) +
tBB (j, j + ∆j)
.
∆j=−χBB
∆j̸=0

(11)
The terms include one using an intrabelt collisional time
tcoll
B (j), which is the collisional time only including elements within the belt, and an interbelt collisional time,
tcoll
BB (j, k), which is the collisional time of an element in
belt j due to collisions with elements in belt k only. This
interbelt collisional time is
E
−1
tcoll
, (12)
BB (j, k) = [nB (k)AEE vEE (Bj , Bk )oBB (j, k)]

with vEE (Bj , Bk ) being the typical relative speed of elements in belts j and k and an overlap fraction oBB (j, k),
which is the fraction of the volume of belt Bk that coincides with belt Bj . When the density of elements in all
the belts is roughly equal,

−1
χ
BB
X

 .
tcoll
vEE (Bj , Bj+∆j )oBB (j, j + ∆j)nE
BS (j) ≈
B AEE
∆j=−χBB

(13)
First, what if the belts are coplanar (last panel of Figure 2)? The belts overlap each other at all longitudes,
and because the belts are evenly spaced,


|∆j| · ∆RB
oBB (j, j + ∆j) ≈ max 1 −
,0 .
(14)
rB
The relative velocities between elements in two belts has
two components: the random velocities within the belts
and the difference in circular orbital velocities between
the belts. Now, the whole reason that belts have expanded enough to overlap is that the random velocities
are so high that the orbits intersect. For most of the
v
overlapping belts, then, vEE (Bj , Bj+∆j ) ≈ σB
. Near

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades
the edges of the belt, the difference in circular orbital
velocities is rB · dυB /dRB ≈ rB υB /RB , which is also
v
∼ σB
. This can roughly double the relative speeds, but
the overlap fraction is small near the edges, so we can
ignore this effect at the level of approximation we are
working. It follows that
tcoll
BS ∼

 B E

v −1
ηS nB AEE σB
≈



NSB AEE υB
2πRS2 rS

−1
=

π υB coll
t̄ ,
2 υS S
(15)

with υS = υ(RS ).
On the other hand, if the belts are mutually inclined,
then they overlap only when one belt pierces through
another. The longitude range over which belts with mutual inclination iBB overlap is 4rB /(| sin iBB |RB ), when
| sin iBB | ≳ rB /RB (thus excluding the case when they
are retrograde as well). This means the overlap fraction
is


|∆j| · ∆RB
oBB (j, j + ∆j) ≈ max 1 −
,0
rB
2rB
·
. (16)
π| sin iBB (j, j + ∆j)|RB
Because one belt clears the other entirely for most of its
circumference, the velocity difference caused by vertical
motions is greater than the random velocity dispersion.
It can be shown that inclination causes a relative velocity difference of
vEE (Bj , Bk ) ≈ 2υB | sin(iBB (j, k)/2)|.

(17)

So, in this mutual inclination range
−1

iBB
coll
E
v
⟩
tBS ≈ nB AEE σB χBB ⟨sec
2
≈

π υB t̄coll
S
.
2 υS ⟨sec iBB
2 ⟩

(18)

For small mutual inclinations, sec(iBB√/2) ≈ 1, and even
for perpendicular orbits, it is only 2, so unless the
belts are retrograde, it can be ignored. Once again, the
collision time is near the naive collisional time for the
swarm. This is because the short time spent crossing
the collision zone is approximately compensated by the
faster relative speeds in that region.
2.6. Confinement within wide bands: phase space and
the robustness of the collisional time
Most of the space in the belts model is wasted, even
if they are packed tightly, because a single belt excludes
an entire thin shell. What if instead the elements are
confined to wide bands, wherein every element has the
same semimajor axis but the inclinations have a wide

9

range? It turns out this is no help for the collisional
time. The key is that the velocity spread along the central plane is supposed to consist of the vertical motions
out of the plane along inclined orbits. It amounts to a
vertical velocity spread at the midplane of 2υB sin imax
B .
The density trades against the relative velocity spread.
Whenever the inclination spread imax
is small, the area
B
at the higher latitudes of the shell is empty, and wasted.
This is a fundamental characteristic of the phase space
for objects in circular orbits through a spherical potential. We want the swarm to fill as much physical volume within the shell, while minimizing the volume in
velocity space. But consider the elements in a small
neighborhood around a single point on the midplane at
one instant. After one-quarter period, they all are moving in nearly the same direction, but they are spread to
maximum extent, spanning a distance ∼ RB imax
B . By Liouville’s Theorem, the phase space volume is conserved
over this evolution (Binney & Tremaine 1987). If the
elements started out with a small velocity spread, then
the phase space volume is also small, and the elements
must have a high space density throughout their orbits.
This is also true for elements elsewhere in the orbit, or
that reach the midplane at different phases. One cannot
fill the shell without having high-speed orbital crossings.
That is why the naive collisional time is a robust result.
3. THE TRUE SPEED OF CASCADES IN

RANDOMIZED SWARMS
Once collisions begin occurring, a cascade develops –
large pieces are removed and replaced with showers of
small pieces. These in turn create still further showers,
and so on. Although the average cross section of the
fragments goes down, the number of impactors increases
rapidly; the pieces of debris are what truly destroy the
original swarm.
In this section, I use simple numerical simulations to
demonstrate just how quickly the cascade develops once
it starts. Cascade simulations have been frequently carried out to investigate the process in Earth orbit. These
typically include the spatial configuration of the debris
cloud, at least a radial dependence from Earth, as it can
develop at different rates in different regions (Kessler
& Cour-Palais 1978; Rossi et al. 1994; Wang & Stark
1999; Liou et al. 2004). The spatial configuration of a
megaswarm is not known – the cascade may be developing in a thin belt or a thick shell for all we know – and
in any case a mere order-of-magnitude estimate will suffice. Thus, I will use a one-zone model, where the entire
cascade is assumed to be homogeneous, along the lines
of a particle-in-box model like Talent (1992) or Lewis
et al. (2009). This could apply to the inner core of a

10

Lacki

belt or in the thick of a fully randomized shell swarm,
for example; the assumptions may break down near the
edges, but the results should still give a rough sense for
how the cascade proceeds.
3.1. The cascade equation
Even without any spatial dependence, and adopting a
fixed velocity distribution, the elements differ in their
size, which can be indexed by mass. The changing
mass distribution of swarm elements governs the rate
of fragment generation. The evolution of a distribution function of swarm elements occurs in a state space,
and is analogous to the kinetic evolution of a gas in
phase space. Thus, a Boltzmann-like equation governs
the mass density distribution dn/dm (cf., Wang & Stark
1999; Lewis et al. 2009). For our one-zone model of a
rapid interplanetary cascade, I use


∂ dn
dn
d
dn
= I − γc
−
ṁe
∂t dm
dm dmE
dm

(19)

(cf. Ginzburg & Ptuskin 1976).6 The approach of this
section is to numerically solve this partial differential
equation, although Monte Carlo methods provide another route (Wang & Stark 1999).
The first term, I, is the injection rate of elements, and
describes the mass rate distribution that fragments (including those that retain the majority of the element’s
mass) appear in the swarm. Next is the γc term, the instantaneous rate of destruction of elements as a result of
collisions. This can occur through catastrophic shattering of elements when the impactor is big or fast enough,
but even a non-catastrophic impact may gouge enough
mass out that the element essentially jumps to a much
lower mass, removing it from its current position in the
mass distribution.
The final term is an erosional term that is not included in simulations of Earth orbit cascades. When a
tiny grain hits a massive element at hypervelocity, it still
gouges out a tiny crater and releases mass7 . In a discretized numerical setup, the mass difference from a single impact is negligible compared to the size of the mass
bin, to seemingly no effect. However, a thick enough
cascade releases a tremendous amounts of dust, producing enough grains that the aggregate mass loss can be
significant over a time step. This advective term con6 This equation is familiar from one-zone models of cosmic ray

propagation, where new particles are injected by sources, or are
destroyed or created in collisions. The mass of the fragment plays
an analogous role to the energy or momentum of a cosmic ray.
7 Assuming we can neglect the element’s gravity.

serves number and accounts for this steady erosion of
mass.8
An important difference between the catastrophic and
noncatastrophic collisions is that the rate of catastrophic
destruction is set by the number flux of elements above
threshold, while erosional losses are set by the mass flux
of elements below threshold. As the cascade proceeds,
mass is redistributed from larger pieces to smaller ones.
This preserves the mass in the swarm, but vastly increases the number density.
An excluded term that is usually found in Earth orbit simulations is a lifespan term. Various effects remove small enough grains rapidly from the system. In
Earth orbit, this is primarily due to atmospheric drag
(Kessler & Cour-Palais 1978; Rossi 2005), which can remove macroscopic fragments from low Earth orbit much
more quickly than the decades/centuries it takes for a
cascade to develop. This quickly terminates the mass
distribution and must be accounted for. But in interplanetary space, the range of masses spanned may be
enormous – from the width of planets on the high end
to literally microscopic on the low end. Radiation pressure from the host star may blow dust out, but is a much
less effective way to terminate the cascade (see discussion in section 3.10). For this reason, I model a very
large range of masses and neglect drag.
3.2. Dimensionless variables for a family of solutions
and the terms of the equation
Although there is a multidimensional parameter space
of swarm configurations, include distance from the host,
host mass, element size, and swarm density, the main
controlling factor of equation 19 is the impact speed relative to the impact strength. Otherwise, the different
evolution amounts to a rescaling of variables. Each variable x is scaled to a characteristic value x̄:
x′ = x/x̄.

(20)

This procedure is applied to element mass (m′ ), element
area (A′ ), number density of elements (n′ ), and their relative velocities (v ′ ). A characteristic timescale follows:
t̄ ≡ (n̄v̄ Ā)−1 ,

(21)

and writing the dimensionless equations in terms of t′ =
t/t̄ = t · n̄Āv̄ simplifies them considerably.
8 Since

the maximum mass decrement from cratering (∼ 10%;
Rossi et al. 1994) is of the same order as the mass resolution in
my models (100.01 − 1), I only include the catastrophic collisions
in the destruction rate; all of the cratering or non-catastrophic
losses are included in the erosion rate ṁ′e , even if the largest of
these should decrement the mass by a couple of mass bins.

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades
I consider all the original elements to have an identical mass m̄E and collisional cross-section ĀEE , with
mean relative speeds ⟨vEE ⟩ and local number density
n̄E . When we set these equal to our scaling variables
(m′ = m/m̄E , A′ = A/ĀEE , n′ = n/n̄E , v ′ = v/⟨vEE ⟩),
then the governing timescale becomes the naive collision
time in the original environment (belt or swarm):

t′ = t · n̄E ĀEE ⟨vEE ⟩ = t/t̄coll .

(22)

Finally, I scale the kinetic energy of elements relative to
the kinetic energy needed to shatter one of the original

11

elements:
K ′ = K/(m̄E QE )

(23)

where QE is the characteristic impact strength of the
elements (section 3.3). The main parameter for the system of equations is
p
ṽ = ⟨vEE ⟩/ QE ,
(24)
which determines the amount and mass distribution of
fragments produced by impacts. Thus, the dimensionless equations using these scales describe the progress
of the cascade compared to the naive collision time, as
a function of how severe the collisions are measured by
speed.

The terms in the cascade equation can be recast into these dimensionless forms as well. For the rate of catastrophic
destruction,
Z ∞Z ∞
dn′
′
(m′ , t′ )A′EE (m′E , m′ )fvEE
(v ′ )v ′ dv ′ dm′ .
(25)
γc′ (m′E , t′ ) ≡ γc t̄coll =
′
′
dm
′
′
0
vc (mE ,m )
′
′
, and the (dimensionless)
This integrates over fvEE
, the probability distribution of (dimensionless) relative velocities vEE
′
masses of possible impactors, m . For a fixed impactor mass and target mass, there is a velocity threshold vc′ (m′E , m′ ),
above which the impact becomes catastrophic for the target with mass m′E (section 3.3), which serves as a cutoff in
the relative velocity integral. Finally, the (dimensionless) cross-section for collision is A′EE .
Erosional losses occur through collisions with impactors moving slower than the catastrophic velocity threshold:
Z ∞ Z vc′ (m′E ,m′ )
ṁe t̄coll
dn′
′
′
′
′
′
ṁe (mE , t ) ≡
=
(m′ , t′ )MD′ (m′E ; m′ , vEE
)A′EE (m′E , m′ )fvEE
(v ′ )v ′ dv ′ dm′ .
(26)
m̄E
dm′
0
0

The (dimensionless) mass of debris lost from the target E due to the impact with the projectile of mass m′ is
′
). We can also define a “rate of destruction” set by non-catastrophic losses:
MD′ (m′E ; m′ , vEE
γe′ (m′E , t′ ) ≡

ṁe (mE , t) coll
ṁ′e (m′E , t′ )
=
t̄ ,
m′E
mE

(27)

the fractional mass loss rate of an object.
Last is the injection term, in which pieces with mass m′E are generated by collisions of projectiles onto larger targets:
Z ∞Z ∞Z ∞
′
D
t̄coll m̄E
dn′
′
′
′
′ ′ dn
′ ′ d⟨N1 ⟩
′
I (mE , t ) ≡ I
=
(m
,
t
)
(m
,
t
)
(m′E ; m′1 ; m′2 , v ′ )A′EE (m′1 , m′2 )fvEE
(v ′ )v ′ dv ′ dm′2 dm′1 .
1
2
n′
dm′
dm′
dm′
0
0
0
(28)
Ejecta are the result of the collision of projectiles with (dimensionless) mass m′2 on targets with (dimensionless)
mass m′1 ; the allowed range of both masses must be considered. The mean (dimensionless) mass distribution,
d⟨N1D ⟩/dm′ (m′E ; m′1 ; m′2 , v ′ ), describes the number of pieces of debris with mass m′E ejected from the target (1) when
the projectile (2) hits it. Note it does not include the debris ejected from the projectile; that is included in the integrals
when the values of m′1 and m′2 are interchanged.9 Additionally, it does matter if the debris results from catastrophic
or erosional impacts.
The dimensionless cascade equation is


′
′
∂ dn′
d
′
′
′
′
′
′
′
′ dn
′
′
′
′
′ dn
′
′
ṁ
(m
,
t
)
(m
,
t
)
=
I
(m
,
t
)
−
γ
(m
,
t
)
(m
,
t
)
−
(m
,
t
)
.
(29)
E
c
E
e
E
∂t′ dm′ E
dm′ E
dm′
dm′ E
9 When the masses of the projectile and the target are equal, then

since the pair of masses is covered only once, the debris mass
distribution should be doubled. However, the rate of collisions is
then multiplied by 1/2 to avoid double-counting the same collision. Thus, the integrand remains the same.

12

Lacki

Table 1 may be used to convert the dimensionless
quantities into physical values for habitable swarms in
different host stars.
3.3. The physics of collisions
The production of debris and the destruction of elements is characterized by an impact strength, QE , which
is defined in terms of energy per mass. Consider a target
at rest with mass m1 and a smaller projectile. When
the total kinetic energy of the projectile is below the
threshold energy m1 QE , the impact is non-catastrophic
or “cratering” (erosional). A fraction of the projectile’s
kinetic energy is spent excavating into the target and
launching material as ejecta; some more is spent on excavating or shattering the projectile itself; some into the
kinetic energy of the target; the rest heating the bodies
or damaging their internal structures without ejecting
debris (Fujiwara et al. 1989). Above that threshold energy, the impact is catastrophic, and the target is completely shattered, broken into many pieces.
The integrals also include cases where the target is
smaller than the projectile. A naive application of this
criterion would suggest that even a very slow impact
could completely shatter a small target, just because
the massive projectile contains so much kinetic energy.
However, little of this kinetic energy actually reaches
the target. Greenberg et al. (1978), a canonical work in
Solar System impacts, suggests that, when the projectile is smaller than the target, about half of the kinetic
energy goes into each body, doubling the kinetic energy
needed to shatter the target. For simplicity, I ignore
this halving of the available kinetic energy, which is not
a rigorous assumption and may not apply in all cases.
Instead, I treat the kinetic energy of the projectile to be
that of the smaller of the two in the other’s frame. It
follows that the critical relative velocity for shattering
the target body 1 is, in dimensionless terms,
s
!
√
2
m′1
′
′
′
vc (m1 , m2 ) =
max
,1 .
(30)
ṽ
m′2
With this formulation, the smaller object is always
√
shattered
if the impact speed is greater than 2QE
√
(v ′ ṽ ≥ 2).
Models of the debris use the results of experiments
where hypervelocity projectiles are shot into solid targets, supplemented by inferences from collisionallyevolved populations of minor Solar System bodies like
asteroid families and cratering (Greenberg et al. 1978;
Rossi et al. 1994). The total amount of debris10 de10 Excluding

the mostly intact body when the collision is noncatastrophic.

pends on whether the body is shattered or not. From
Rossi et al. (1994), the mass from the target body 1 is

 1 min(m′ , m′ ) · (ṽv ′ )2 (erosional)
2
1
′
′
′
′
MD (m1 ; m2 , v ) = 20
.
 ′
(collisional)
m1
(31)
Just below the threshold for shattering, 10% of the target mass is excavated.11 The pieces in the ejecta cloud
have a power-law distribution in mass:
d⟨N1D ⟩ ′
(mE ; m′1 ; m′2 , v ′ ) = MD′ (m′1 ; m′2 , v ′ )
dm′

−q
m′E


if q ̸= 2
(2 − q) max′ 2−q
(mD )
− (mmin′
)2−q
D
·
. (32)
−2

m′E


if
q
=
2,
ln(mmax′
/mmin′
D
D )
of the pieces of ejecta is esThe minimum mass mmin′
D
sentially 0; in my models, it is arbitrarily set to be 10−25
for normalization purposes, below the smallest mass in
the simulation.
As the impact becomes more violent, at higher speeds,
the pieces generally become smaller. A maximum mass
for the debris is imposed, with the largest possible piece
of debris having a mass


 21 MD′
(erosional)
 ′ −ξ
max′
′
′
′
mD (m1 , m2 , v ) = 1
v

 m′1
(catastrophic)
2
vc′
(33)
where ξ is an index that depends on the detailed physics
of the collisions. The case for catastrophic collisions
is taken directly from Rossi et al. (1994), who in turn
base it on Fujiwara et al. (1977)’s experiments shooting
hypervelocity projectiles into rock. If this assumption
holds, it can be shown that the secondaries created from
a collision of two equally-sized primaries are never large
enough to destroy the primaries themselves – although
the chunks excavated when the secondaries hit the primaries might be. The power law exponent also steepens
at higher speeds:


5/3
(erosional)
′
′
′
′
q(m1 , m2 , v ) = 2 + mmax′
,
/m
1
D

(catastrophic)

max′
′
1 + mD /m2
(34)
11 Equation 31 implies that some mass is lost at very low speeds, but

√
there is a threshold speed well below QE at which both bodies
simply bounce with no harm done (Greenberg et al. 1978). I do
not include this “rebound” regime in my models here, although
this mechanism could result in thermalization.

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades
asymptoting at 2 in the hypervelocity limit (Rossi et al.
1994). Rossi et al. (1994) use q = 1.8 and mmax′
/m′1 =
D
1/4 for erosional impacts, and according to Greenberg
et al. (1978), the power law exponent varies with severity
of impact and energy transport within the target body
when considering rocky materials; I adopt notional values of q = 5/3 and mmax′
/m′1 = 1/2 to smoothly match
D
up with collisional impacts.
The simple models I present here, like the Rossi et al.
(1994) model of a Kessler cascade, assume a single impact strength, but this is clearly inadequate. Even when
looking at Solar System objects, there are definite divisions in the population as one moves from larger bodies held together by gravity and smaller bodies with
internal strength. The elements of a megaswarm may
lack this division, having a much lower surface density
to maximize area covered. Even so, we can probably
expect different regimes in the impact strength as the
pieces are smashed further and further. Whether or not
they behave like asteroids, which are both expected and
inferred to have size-dependent strengths (Davis et al.
1994; Bottke et al. 2005), artificial objects are probably very heterogeneous. On the largest scale, entire
modules of a satellite may be detached quite readily,
and fragile parts like booms could easily be snapped off.
Below that, the pieces could be broken into individual
structural members like plates and fasteners, with more
strength. We can imagine some materials fraying further
into tiny fibers bound together, like carbon nanotubes or
even textiles. Breaking these would require still harder
impacts.

3.4. Further considerations and methods
I adopt a planar geometry for the mass, each element
having an area A′E = q
m′E /4. The
q collisional cross sec-

tion is then A′EE = (

A′E1 +

A′E2 )2 (as in Kessler

& Cour-Palais 1978, and subsequent works), set equal
to 1 if m′E = m′E = 1. This is the most likely result
if we are imagining giant occulters or solar collectors
that are relatively thin to conserve mass. Beyond a certain point, the ejecta should have a roughly spherical
geometry, as the individual pieces become smaller than
2/3
the original element thickness, with A′EE ∝ m′E . The
trouble is that, very small ejecta collectively have a huge
area; as mass is processed down to smaller and smaller
sizes, the rate of impacts of the tiniest grains on merely
small grains increases, further accelerating the cascade.
Wild numerical instabilities result. As we are mainly
interested in the destruction of the original members of
the swarm and its largest pieces, I only consider planar
geometry. Note that actual satellites and debris area-

13

mass ratios deviate from planar geometry (Kessler &
Cour-Palais 1978; Badhwar & Anz-Meador 1989).
For the relative velocity distribution, I adopt a very
simple single-valued distribution,
fvEE (v) = δ(v − ⟨vEE ⟩).

(35)

This simplifies calculation of the ejecta products, although it may miss effects resulting from a small fraction
of high velocity impacts on the tail.
When simulating cascades in Earth orbit, considering a relatively small range of masses is justified. Small
particles may be removed by atmospheric drag, while
there are clear upper limits to the size of objects we
have placed in Earth orbits. Neither of these applies to
the elements of a megaswarm. Radiation pressure forces
may eject small grains orbiting stars, but depending on
the stellar luminosity, they only operate faster than the
cascade for literally microscopic particles (section 3.10).
On the large end, the original intact elements of the
swarm may be kilometer scale habitats like space stations for inhabited Dyson swarms, or even planetaryscale screens in an occulter swarm. A kilometer scale
solid sphere has 1027 times the mass of a micron-scale
spherical grain, and a planet-sized sheet with surface
density of ∼ 1 g cm−2 can be several orders of magnitude more massive. Furthermore, for the highest relative velocities considered, ṽ = 105 , fragments with mass
m′ ∼ 10−10 can completely shatter the original elements
with m′ = 1, and likewise those fragments in turn can
be shattered by grains with m′ ∼ 10−20 . I choose to
simulate a very wide mass range 10−20 ≤ m′ ≤ 1, using a logarithmically sampled mass distribution with a
resolution of d log10 m′ = 0.01. In some cases, the mass
range may be truncated by dust ejection, in which case
the cascade may proceed more slowly.
The integration of the partial differential cascade
equation is accomplished using a simple explicit (Euler)
method. This lets me use upwind differencing to prevent
mass from “leaking” to m′E > 1. I integrate for 100,000
time steps, each with ∆t′ = 10−3 ṽ −1.5 , which I find to
be small enough to prevent numerical instabilities in the
planar geometry.12 The integration is also stoppped if
t′ ≥ 102.5 t̂′casc , with t̂′casc defined in equation 36.
3.5. Numerical results
There are several ways to define how long the cascade
develops within the models. One aim is to consider how
long the individual original elements last until they experience significant damage; we might then consider how
12 For ṽ ∼ 10–105 , ∆t′ remains in the range ∼ (1–3) × 10−4 t̂′casc

(equation 36).

14

Lacki
elements and the largest fragments converge to:
"

5/3 #−1
t̂casc
1
1 ⟨vEE ⟩
√
t̂
= coll ≡
= 1+
,
t̄
80
1 + ṽ 5/3 /80
QE
(36)
casc
−8/3
(thick orange line), which amounts to a t̂
∝ ṽ
dependence because t̄coll ∝ ⟨vEE ⟩−1 . The estimated
cascade times for habitable megaswarms around some
archetypal stars is given in Table 1.
Why is the cascade so rapid? At high speeds, the debris is extremely small, far too small to catastrophically
damage the primary elements. These secondary fragments do inflict substantial erosional damage, digging
out relatively large craters in the primaries as they impact. Some of the tertiary fragments from these impacts
are large enough to catastrophically destroy the primaries. Since catastrophic destruction is proportional
to the number of elements instead of total mass, the conversion of primaries into these tertiaries greatly speeds
up the destruction of the elements.
This process is illustrated in Figure 5, which depicts
the evolution of the mass distribution of objects in the
swarm as velocity increases. The very first debris is
from the collisions of two primary elements. These secondaries are all small, resulting in a significant gap in
the mass distribution between the primaries and the debris (orange lines). The ejecta from the impacts of this
first generation of the debris creates additional “steps”
in the distribution from tertiaries and higher-order debris, as seen in the figure. At high enough speeds, this
process manages to fill in the “gap” and results in a
roughly power-law mass distribution extending nearly
all the way to m̄E . All along, the total amount of debris continues to build up with time. Eventually, the
combined onslaught of the debris destroys the primaries,
and the cascade proceeds to grind smaller and smaller
elements away.
More insight into the destruction of the primaries is
provided by Figure 6, which presents the mean rate that
a hypothetical object with m′E = 1 would be destroyed
or eroded. Initially, catastrophic destruction (orange
lines) from collisions with other primaries is the main
threat, except when ṽ ∼ 1. By itself, this would lead
to an exponential fall over the collisional time. At early
times, the debris builds up linearly, as does the erosional rate from the secondaries. The rate of increase
is tremendous because of the extremely high speeds involved. At high ṽ, when the losses from debris equal
the losses from primary-primary collisions, the cascade
takes off, with the losses increasing rapidly.
This suggests a criterion for the time for a cascade
to develop: γe′ (tcasc ′ ; m′E = 1) ≈ γc′ (tcasc ′ ; m′E = 1) ≈ 1.

Cascade time

′casc

Relative velocities
Figure 4. Computed time for destruction of original swarm
according to the dimensionless cascade equations. Different line
styles indicate different measures for the survival of the swarm:
number of elements in the original mass bin (solid), number of
elements (dashed) and mass in elements (dotted) at least half as
massive as the original satellites, and total mass in macroscopic
objects (dash-dotted). Black lines are half-lives and blue lines are
e-folding times. An approximation to these times is provided by
equation 36 (orange solid). Refer to Table 1 to convert to physical
times using the listed t̄coll .

long until the number of elements in the original mass
bin falls by a factor e. This is fairly robust if the losses
are all catastrophic, with the original elements always
being reduced to a spray of tiny fragments, but if continuous erosional forces dominate, the times depend on
the width of the mass bin. At the opposite extreme,
we can consider how long until all fragments have been
ground away to “dust” below the minimum considered
size; but this depends on the lower threshold we consider
for mass, the destruction of the smallest fragments by
sub-threshold debris is not modelled, and the models do
not include other forces like Poynting-Robertson drag
that remove dust. A compromise is to consider either
the number of or mass in fragments with m′E ≥ 1/2, at
least half the original size.
However it is defined, the cascade time falls rapidly
with increasing velocity, even relative to the naive collisional time t̄coll (Figure 4). At high velocities, the various ways of computing the destruction of the original

15

Mass distribution

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades

Fragment mass
Figure 5. Mass distribution of the cascade according to the dimensionless cascade equations, as it evolves in cascades with different
characteristic velocities. The distribution evolves from its initial shape (black), with all elements the same mass. After the first time step,
the distribution follows the light orange curves. Later time steps shown correspond to t′ /t̂′casc values of 10−3 (light blue), 10−2 (dark
green), 10−1 (yellow), 10−0.5 (dark blue), 100 (dark orange), 10+0.5 (pink-purple), and 10+1 (grey).

That occurs in a time of ∼ 80/ṽ 2 · t̄coll , a result of the debris being produced by collisions of the original elements
(assuming ṽ ≫ 1). After that, the cascade then needs to
accelerate by several orders of magnitude, which it does
at a subexponential rate as the erosion-induced debris
adds to the erosion (albeit with the debris itself being destroyed by other debris). An upper limit to the cascade
time is found by ignoring this erosional debris-induced
acceleration, only including the debris
√ from the collisions
casc ′
of the original elements: t
≲ 4 10/ṽ. Given that
t̄coll itself is ∝ ṽ −1 , tcasc ′ falls quadratically to cubically
with characterisitc collision velocity.
Complete grinding to dust is slower. This seems to
be because of a residue of objects with masses above
threshold which is not efficiently destroyed, presumably
because the debris from these objects is too small to be
included in the model.

The case where ṽ ∼ 1 requires special consideration
in my models, assuming the physics is accurate. Even
a collision by two elements of equal size does not result
in catastrophic destruction; instead ∼ 10% is broken off
from both. The total mass in the system remains the
same, aside from losses as microscopic dust. Thus, the
cascade is much slower and resembles an exponential fall
over a duration t′ ∼ 10 (Figure 6).
3.6. Implications from the strength of materials
Within the assumption of these models at least, increased speed above the threshold greatly increases the
rate at which the swarm is ground away. But how strong
should we expect the elements to be, and how do orbital
speeds compare?
The canonical impact strength used for Earth satellites in most recent models is 4 × 108 erg g−1 (McKnight

16

Destruction rate

Lacki

Time
Figure 6. Effective rate of destruction that an element of the original mass (m′E = 1, mE = m̄E ) would experience. At first the
destruction is dominated by catastrophic shattering resulting from the original swarm members and the largest fragments (orange). As the
collisional cascade proceeds, erosion from tiny fragments increases (blue) and dominates if the collisions are fast enough. The black line
shows the total from catastrophic and non-catastrophic collisions. Dashed gray lines mark the estimated cascade time t̂′casc .

et al. 1995). Impact experiments have demonstrated
catastrophic effects when the specific kinetic energy is
twice this value (Olivieri et al. 2022). It is well above
the intrinsic impact strength of rocky materials in asteroids ∼ (1–3) × 107 erg g−1 (Davis et al. 1994). As noted
above, the actual behavior is likely too complicated to
model with a single number. Numerical simulations by
Schimmerohn et al. (2021) suggest that the modularity
of satellites, with easily separated pieces, actually saves
parts of the satellites by causing them to break off before
they can shatter.
But suppose we do assume that the elements of a
Dyson swarm are roughly comparable to Earth satellites, rounding up to 109 erg g−1 to account for conservative future advances in material science. The characteristic impact speed for breakup is then

p
QE = 0.32 km s−1



QE
109 erg g−1

1/2
.

(37)

This is much slower than orbital speeds in the Solar
System, or Earth orbit, implying v ′ ∼ 10–100 and potentially very rapid cascades.
Of course, the builders presumably would know this,
and if they want the swarm to survive as long as possible without constant guidance, the swarm would be
arranged in a configuration that is likely denser but has
smaller velocity differences (as in Section 2.3). We might
expect the actual cascade to begin with elements in circular bands, their eccentricities slowly increasing due
to perturbations until they cross equation 37, and then
proceeding at a rate limited by the perturbations.
One could question whether the impact strengths for
Earth satellites is appropriate for an incredibly advanced
Kardashev II ETI. Could they be using some kind of
material that could survive impacts even at the orbital
speeds within the Solar System? There are fundamental chemical limits, however. When the specific energies are sufficient to ionize individual atoms, probably
no chemically or mechanically bonded atomic material

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades
could survive. The ionization energies of elements that
can survive as solid materials in the expected conditions
are at most 15 eV, and the lightest such element likely to
be used is carbon. This suggests a maximum strength
of 1.2 × 1012 erg g−1 , and a characteristic velocity of
11 km s−1 . A dynamically hot swarm of elements in
orbit around the Sun in the inner Solar System would
still suffer a cascade, if a slow one. Short of invoking
some non-atomic material, collisional grinding is possible without careful planning for megaswarms around
stars.
3.7. The time of first impact: discreteness in finite
swarms
The cascade models assume that there is an infinite
supply of elements to initiate the cascade. Thus, debris
begins accumulating immediately. Actual swarms may
have relatively few elements, perhaps about a hundred
for occulter swarms. The cascade cannot begin until the
first collision between the primary elements happens,
releasing the first debris. In a randomized swarm, this
is expected to occur around

t1 ≡

t̄coll
2πRS2 rS
S
.
≈
E
NS
(NSE )2 AEE σSv

(38)

This sets a lower bound on the lifespan of a megaswarm.
It is negligible for the archetypal Dyson swarm concept,
but must be considered for sparse swarms, including
minimal occulters.
An additional source of fragments is the impact of
minor bodies on the elements. Stellar flybys can be
expected to occasionally throw comets from the Oort
cloud into the heart of the system, where they may hit
elements at high speed. Even if the creators empty the
entire Oort cloud, the swarm may experience impacts
from interstellar objects (Loeb 2023).
3.8. Low-velocity cascades: the thermalization threat
The base configuration described earlier suggests that
local velocities start out small, and so the collisions
themselves are slow, possibly well below the speeds
needed for structural damage. Does this mean that cascades are not a threat?
Not necessarily. If the elements do bounce off one another, then there is a transfer of momentum changing
both’s orbits. The problem is that while velocity dispersion starts out small, the span of relative velocities
across the swarm is high because of the need of a full
range of inclinations. Over time, the bounces cause the

17

velocities to randomize, and the swarm is thermalized.13
This is disastrous, as the hypervelocity spread in a randomized swarm annihilates the swarm in far less than
the naive collisional time. Of course, what would actually happen is that the cascade begins long before full
thermalization.
The thermalization process begins in earnest when the
eccentricities of the swarm elements have been raised
enough that their belts can overlap. Non-destructive
collisions then happen, around one per element per collisional time tcoll
S . If the swarm is densely populated but
confined to a relatively few orbits, then the collisions do
not occur until the orbits actually intersect; they have
to find each other first, a process which is governed by
a perturbation timescale for precession. Note this can
be much shorter than a timescale for eccentricity evolution. If the swarm is very sparse, the orbits evolve
quickly compared to the collisions, and thus are essen≈ t̄coll
tially randomized, so that tcoll
S .
S
At first, the velocity dispersion induced by collisions
broadens each belt to only overlap with its nearest neighbors, because of the small velocity gradients in the base
configuration. This alone would allow momentum to be
transmitted from one end of the swarm to the other and
eventually thermalize it, as neighboring belts influenced
each other. That would be a relatively slow process: the
effective sound speed is approximately given by the distance between belts over the collision time. It is likely,
however, that the thermalization accelerates.
Locally thermalized belts should have fuzzy boundaries, and this provides a mechanism for rapid thermalization. If we consider a locally thermalized belt at time
t, the internal velocity dispersion is the result of the
velocity gradient within the belt being converted into
v
∼ dυ/da · rB ∼ υB · rB /rS . The
random motions: σB
relative velocity distribution will be centered at the circular velocity, but on the tails of the distribution are
elements that delve further into the swarm where they
come into contact with elements with high relative velocities. Those collisions transmit energy into the belt,
heating it further, over the collision timescale tcoll
S . This
suggests that, over this timescale, the belt “swallows”
some of the velocity gradient covered by elements on the
velocity tails and thermalizes it. Since the length-scale
13 Thermalization, as used here, refers to the process whereby the

organized gradients in velocities in a swarm are converted into
a random distribution through collisions, without regard to the
internal temperature of the elements and their fragments themselves. As noted in section 3.9, collisions are dissipative, however,
and generate heat too, a separate effect than what is being discussed here.

18

Lacki

v
of the fuzzy edges of the belt is ∼ rB ∼ RB σB
/υB ,
v
v
dσB
rB dυ(RB )
σB
RB
,
∼ coll
∼ coll
dt
dRB
tS
tS rS

so that
v
σB
(t) ∼ exp



RB t
C
rS tcoll
S

(39)


(40)

for some constant C. If this argument holds, the entire
swarm is thermalized (and destroyed) in perhaps tens of
tcoll
S .
To counteract thermalization, megaswarms may be
forced to employ “firebreaks”, large gaps between belts
that must be overcome before momentum transfer can
occur between them. These gaps shorten the collision
time within belts, but this is worth it if the velocity
spread within a belt is small enough to avoid damage
during collisions.
The other possibility is that slow collisions are inelastic, and the elements stick. This does lead to evolution
in the orbits, but thins the swarm as it proceeds, as elements aggregate. Additionally, the collisions tend to
average the element velocities, making it less likely that
some are bumped into the paths of others. Perhaps ETIs
wishing to build long-lived megastructures choose to,
for example, cover their satellites with hooks that snare
with each other like velcro. Still, this also has the effect
of thinning the swarm and reducing its effectiveness. An
occulter swarm, for example, has fewer transits, leaving
some inclinations with no transits. Also, even during
inelastic collisions that are slow enough to prevent shattering of the swarm elements, there is still the possibility
that small, loosely secured appendages break off during
impacts. These form a population of particles that may
themselves thermalize, turning them into high velocity
missiles and dust that can erode the larger intact structures.
3.9. The effects of dissipation on the cascade
By assuming a fixed collision velocity, these models
implicitly assume that no kinetic energy is dissipated in
the collision. This, of course, is a gross simplification.
While energy is dissipated in gases or plasmas by radiative mechanisms, in macroscopic swarms, dissipation
results from the shattering of the structure of each body
and internal heating (Fujiwara et al. 1989), the latter of
which may be radiated away long after the collision. Indeed, the impact strength in equation 31 relates kinetic
energy and debris mass, incorporating the physics of this
energy loss mechanism.
The effects of dissipation are likely to be complex and
geometry dependent. Consider a purely inelastic collision between two equal-mass elements on circular orbits

with the same semimajor axis aE and mutual inclination iEE . The resulting conglomerate is stationary in
the center-of-mass frame. Thus, its inclination is averaged between the two original elements, and this averaging effect leads to a cooling of random velocities in a
belt or swarm. The falling random velocities could slow
down the cascade. One can also show that the fraction
of orbital kinetic energy dissipated is sin2 (iEE /2), which
is also the resultant eccentricity; the new apocenter distance is the former aE . Radial spreading results as the
semimajor axis is slightly lowered. Over time, many
collisions result in the swarm slowly shrinking as bulk
kinetic energy is converted into heat.
Of course, the elements do not stick if the collision
speeds are high enough; there is a spray of debris, each
fragment of which can potentially cause more damage.
Even if these fragments rapidly shed their random motions and settle into a dynamically cold disk, the mostlyintact original elements may still have relatively high
inclinations with that belt. For our purposes, we are
concerned most about whether the cooling suppresses
random velocities before most of the original elements
have been destroyed or eroded away. Drag effects require the element to interact with a mass about equal
to itself. Meanwhile, the mass excavated by m through
erosion is ϵm(σ v )2 /(2QE ), with ϵ = 0.1 in the models.
Dissipational effects greatly alter the cascade if the excavated mass is not much greater than the impactor mass,
which happens when:
1/2 

p
ϵ −1/2
QE
σ v ≲ 2QE /ϵ ≈ 1.4 km s−1
.
109 erg g−1
0.1
(41)
This condition is likely to hold within any isolated, narrow belts. If the belts overlap, however, and the swarm
as a whole starts to thermalize, the random velocities
approach ∼ υS . Then, barring incredibly strong elements, impacts are so severe that objects in the swarm
are obliterated before they can meaningfully damp their
random motions and reduce vEE .
The evolution of the mass spectrum as a whole is
bound to be complicated, however, and a full simulation may be warranted.
3.10. The fate of the dust
The cascade continues to grind down the fragments after the original elements are destroyed, converting more
and more of it into tiny grains. For a brief time, the
star may be shrouded in a veil of dust, a postmortem
technosignature. The optical depth increases strongly
because most of the mass of the original elements is
buried in the interiors, already shadowed by their surfaces. Assuming there are NSG grains, all with the same

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades
radius RG and individual optical depth τG , the optical
depth of the swarm as a whole is τS ≈ τG NSG (RG /RS )2 .
Volume conservation gives us

19

Radiation pressure blows out dust when βG > 0.5 if the
dust start out in circular orbits, which should be true if
the original elements have no radiation pressure support
(cf., Section 5). The blowout occurs in about one orbital
2
NSE (0)VE
3NSE RE
sE
G
period, terminating the cascade and cutting off the mass
NS =
=
(42)
3
VG
4RG
spectrum.
Other effects that operate for larger grains infor plate elements with an initial radius RE and thick14
clude
the forces of the solar wind and the radiationness sE .
Thus, if the initial covering factor of the
induced
Poynting-Robertson drag, which reduces the
swarm is FS (0),
grain’s
semimajor
axis on a timescale tPR
≈
G

−1


3
3τG FS (0)sE
R
s
(16π/3)ρ
R
R
c
/L
(Hughes
et
al.
2018).
However,
G
E
G G S
⋆
max τS =
= 7.5×105 τG FS (0)
.
since tPR
4RG
m
µm
G has the same dependence on grain radius as
(43)
the collisional timescale (since NSG AG ∝ RG ), PoyntingStarting instead with a minimal occulter swarm,
Robertson drag never overcomes the collisional cascade.
This conclusion also holds for Solar System dust popu2
3πτG RE sE
lations (Wyatt & Dent 2002; Nesvorný et al. 2010).
max τS =
16RS R⋆ RG
As for the remnant ion cloud around low lumiosity
2   


−1

sE
RS
R⋆
RG
RE
stars,
a completely thermalized remant cloud in the hab.
= 0.014τG
R⊕
m
AU
R⊙
µm
itable zone around a red dwarf would have a temperature
(44)
around
 2
A star that is ∼ 1% “too dim” would not by itself stand
mH µGN M⋆ σSv
T
≈
out (Zackrisson et al. 2018), but a brief opacity pulse
3kB RS
υS
−1  v 
would easily be detectable in modern photometry (cf.,
 µ  M 
RS
σS
⋆
6
Montet & Simon 2016), and the resultant infrared excess
≈ 2 × 10 K
,
10
0.2
M
0.032
AU
υS
⊙
from reprocessed starlight is likewise visible (Suazo et al.
(46)
2024). One caveat is that the absorption of starlight
by dust grains falls below geometric when the grain is
where µmH is the mean mass of particles in the remnant
smaller than about one wavelength.
plasma, and the other parameters are taken from Table 1
However, given the short timescales for a collisional
for an M dwarf. If we consider a Dyson swarm with
cascade in a megaswarm, this opacity is likely to be
mean surface density ΣS , the mean ion density is around
very short-lived. If nothing else intervened, the grains
ΣS
would continue to grind down into plasma. In a
ni ≈
fully thermalized swarm, even an individual carbon
µi mH rS
  

−1
atom has a kinetic energy of (1/2)mC GN M⋆ /RS =
µi −1
rS
ΣS
13
−3
≈
1
×
10
cm
−1
56 eV (M⋆ /M⊙ )(RS /AU) , enough to ensure ioniza100 g cm−2
10
0.032 AU
tion during collisions unless the swarm starts out very
(47)
far from the host star.
Radiation forces from the star are likely to blow out
with µi mH being the mean mass of an ion. Both
the dust grains unless the star is much dimmer than the
the temperature and density would be higher for a
sun, as is well-known from the dust supplied by minor
megaswarm in the habitable zone of a white dwarf. The
body collisions in planetary systems (see also Section 5).
plasma should thus be both very dense and highly ionThe key quantity is the ratio of radiation pressure forces
ized. If it is optically thin, it could cool very quickly
to gravitational forces (Burns et al. 1979, equation 19),
if it contains metals like iron or silicon, which radiate
efficiently in this temperature range (see Draine 2011,
τG L⋆ AG /(4πcRS2 )
3τG L⋆
Figure 34.3). Ultimately, it might settle down into a cirβG ≈
≈
GN M⋆ mG /RS2
16πGN cM⋆ ρG RG
cumstellar disk, and perhaps start recondensing into a


−1 
−1 
−1
thin dust belt and ultimately planetary material. Given
L⋆
M⋆
ρG
RG
≈ 0.19τG
−3
the vast range of possible megaswarm parameters and
L⊙
M⊙
3 g cm
µm
resulting conditions, further study is required to posi(45)
tively identify any distinct signatures.
As a result, we expect the ultimate fate of
14 For spherical elements, replace (3/4)s with R .
E
E
megaswarms is to disappear almost completely. Around

20

Lacki
1010

faint hosts like red dwarfs, white dwarfs, and substellar
objects, the swarm is reduced all the way to a dilute
cloud of metal ions. Those around brighter hosts are
broken into dust grains that are dispersed into the interstellar medium by radiation pressure, too dilute to
detect in absorption or emission.

Min

109

lter
ccu
l O -6
ima 10
=
Δe

Solar J

2

rJ
Sola

t (yr)

Inside Sun

e

K -1

J

g m -4
Wk

ρrK

= 10 -3

Min
. Ya W kg m -4
rkov
-1
sky K

GR
= 10 -1
ρrK

S

s

104

E

-10

V

105

103
10-3

-8

N
U

m

0
by
= 1 Fly
Δe llar

106

M

St

We have seen that even small amounts of randomness ensures collisions happen within the naive collision
time, and that when the collisions are high speed, the
cascade develops extremely quickly. This still leaves the
possibility that elements are placed in completely ordered orbits, or are organized well enough that collisions
are slow enough to be harmless. In this section, I consider gravitational perturbations that occur because the
swarm is not an isolated system. These induce a minimum amount of randomness that can spell doom for a
megaswarm.
In some cases, particularly occulter swarms located
far from their hosts, the perturbation times may actually be much shorter than the collisional time. Depending on how quickly the cascade develops and if there is
sufficient eccentricity pumping, these swarms might essentially always be randomized, at least locally. ETIs
may not bother ensuring the elements are on different
orbits because collisions are so rare and perturbations
will disturb neat belts anyway, although they probably
would still use something like the base configuration to
slow down the resultant cascade.

107

0

MEGASWARMS

=1

4. GRAVITATIONAL PERTURBATIONS AND

Δe

4

108

10-2

10-1

100

101

102

103

a (AU)

Figure 7. Characteristic perturbation times within the Solar
System for an object orbiting at different semimajor axes. Shading indicates mechanisms that can pump eccentricity, in addition
to precession. The quadrupole perturbation times from Venus
(gray), Jupiter (pink), Saturn (gold), Uranus (green), and Neptune (teal) are shown, as well as the octupole perturbation times
from Jupiter (dark pink). Additionally, the timescales for general
relativistic precession and perturbations from solar oblateness are
shown. Worst-case timescales for the Yarkovsky effect are shaded
in blue, according to equation 77, for material properties appropriate for thin plates of solid metal (darker) and rock (lighter).
The time it takes stellar flybys to pump eccentricities in the Solar
neighborhood is shaded in purple, based on equation 69.

4.1. How big of a perturbation can be tolerated?
In an optimal configuration, elements with wildly differing inclinations are well-separated, probably by ∼ rS ,
so as a rough estimate, the relative velocities between
crossing elements can be estimated as that due to the
spread in eccentricity. To order-of-magnitude, the relative velocities are sufficient to result in damaging collisions when
p
v
σB
≳ υB eB ≈ QE ,
(48)
implying a critical eccentricity of around
s
r

−1
QE aE
QE
aE M⋆
eB ≈
≈ 0.011
GN M⋆
109 erg g−1 AU M⊙
(49)
For elements orbiting near a solar analog’s surface, this
threshold shrinks to less than 10−3 .
Thermalization may also trigger a cascade when belts
begin to overlap (section 3.8). For that to happen, sufficient eccentricities are as small as
eB ∼ 1/NSB .

(50)

4.2. Quadrupole and octupole-order secular
perturbations from companion bodies
The discussion in Section 2 assumed that the gravitational potential in which the swarm elements orbited
was determined by a single host like a star, a monopole
potential. But most stars have companions, be they
stellar or planetary. On long time-scales, one can take a
phase average of these bodies over the orbit, effectively
replacing each body with a thin elliptical ring of varying
density. This is the secular approximation (Naoz 2016).
The presence of such a ring adds more terms to the gravitational potential, the lowest order nonzero terms being
the quadrupole and octupole terms.
4.2.1. Perturbation timescales
In general, the quadrupole and octupole-order terms
may induce deviations in the inclination, eccentricity,
longitude of ascending node, and argument of periastron. The semimajor axis aE is conserved, however.
Naoz et al. (2013a) give equations for how these quan-

21

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades
tities evolve. For each perturber, I define a characteristic minimum perturbation timescale, the limit of the
approximations as aE approaches the perturber’s semimajor axis aP :
ptb
tP ≈ torb
P



M⋆
MP



= torb
E



aP
aE

3/2 

M⋆
MP

MP significantly less than the host as it orbits with a
semimajor axis aP and eccentricity eP .15


.

4.2.2. Perturbation evolution

(51)

Perturbations evolve more slowly far from the perturber,
when aE ≪ aP or aE ≫ aP . The timescale of quadrupole
−3/2
7/2
effects grows like tP;q
∝ aE
as aE → 0 and aE as
E
aE → ∞:

 3
aP

2 3/2


(1
−
e
)
P


aE






if aP > aE
M⋆
orb
 2
tP;q
(1 − e2E )1/2 ·
E ≈ tE

MP
aE

2 3/2

(1
−
e
)

E

aP




if aP < aE
(52)
(Naoz et al. 2013a). To octupole order, these terms’
dependencies steepen by another power:


  4
M⋆
aP

2 5/2

(1 − eP )


M
a
P
E




if
a
>
aE
P
orb
2 1/2

  3
tP;o
·
E ≈ tE (1 − eE )

M⋆
aE


(1 − e2E )5/2


M
a

P
P



if aP < aE
(53)
(Naoz et al. 2013a). Here, the element is a test particle
with negligible mass, and the perturber P has a mass

The Lidov-Kozai effect is the most well-known example of quadrupole secular evolution, being implicated in
all sorts of binary evolution phenomena (Lidov 1962;
Kozai 1962; Naoz 2016). Suppose we have a perturbing
object in a circular orbit outside a much smaller test particle, as is the case for a giant planet orbiting exterior to
a swarm element. The out-of-plane angular momentum
of the element is conserved, but inclination and eccentricity can be traded against each other. When the element’s relative inclination is below a critical value, 39◦ ,
then a circular orbit remains circular.16 An elliptical orbit precesses on the quadrupole timescale; additionally,
the eccentricity may fluctuate slightly (as illustrated in
Figure 4 of Beaugé et al. 2006). Beyond the critical
value, however, an initially circular orbit at high inclination cycles into a highly eccentric orbit at low inclination
and back, as the argument of periapse librates around
π/2. This is highly relevant for megaswarm survival,
because, unless elements at different inclinations start
with extremely well separated semimajor axes, elements
originally at high inclinations end up in the equatorial
plane, colliding with the elements orbiting there at high
speed. This both ensures the rapid destruction of the
megaswarm if a large enough perturbing body exists and
also inhibits occultations and energy collection from the
host’s poles.

The precession induced by the quadrupole perturbations is (Naoz et al. 2013a, equations A29 and A30)

4 cos2 i + (5 cos(2ω ) − 1)(1 − e2 − cos2 i )
if aP > aE
3π
E
E
E
q
E
ω̇E
= P;q ·
.
1

4tE
2 + 3e2 + (5 cos2 i − 3)[1 + e2 (3 − 5 cos(2ω ))] if a < a
P

E

2 P

P

P

(54)

E

There are also octupole terms, though they are of limited importance. This in itself can cause spaced-out eccentric
orbits to cross.
To quadrupole order, orbits exterior to the perturber experience no eccentricity or inclination evolution. Nor are
circular orbits at low inclination affected by the Lidov-Kozai effect, which suggests that megaswarms can survive if
the inclination range is within ∼ ±39◦ .17 Octupole order perturbations provide a route for these quantities to change
15 In the notation of Naoz et al. (2013a), tP;q ≡ (π/8)|C /G |−1 if
2
1
E
the perturber is exterior to the element and (15π/32)|C2 /G2 |−1
P;o
if the perturber is interior; likewise tE ≡ (π/8)|C3 /G1 |−1 if the
perturber is exterior and (15π/32)|C3 /G2 |−1 if interior.
16 Inclination is defined here with respect to the perturbing body,

whose orbit defines the invariable plane when the element is a
test particle. Note that precession of the ascending nodes can
result in inclination changing when defined relative to another
plane, like the midplane of the swarm.
17 This type of partial Dyson sphere may be completely opaque
near the equator and transparent near the poles. As space motions carried Earth in and out of the obscured inclination range,
the star would appear to wink out and eventually back in when
observed in the optical. Thus, if artificially “disappearing” stars
are found, they may not represent a Dyson swarm being constructed, but the anisotropy of the swarm.

22

Lacki

whenever the perturber itself has an eccentric orbit. Assuming the eccentricity is small, its rate of evolution is
ėoE ≈

15π

15π
e sin2 iE sin(2ωE )·I[aE < aP ]+
e [(5 cos2 iE −1) sin ωE cos ωP +(11−15 cos2 iE ) cos iE cos ωE sin ωP ]
P;q E
P;o P
4tE
32tE
+ O(e2E ), (55)

where I[X] is 1 if X is true and 0 if X is false (Naoz et al. 2013a, equations B10 and B11). The inclination evolution
is closely related:
d cos iE
eE
=−
(1 − cos iE )ėE
(56)
dt
1 − e2E
(Naoz et al. 2013a). The tempo of this higher-order eccentricity evolution is set by the rate of precession of the argument
q
2
of periapse for both the element, from equation 54, and the perturber, ω̇P
= 3π/(4tP;q
E ) · cos iE [2 + e1 (3 − 5 cos(2ω1 ))],
where e1 and ω1 are the eccentricity and argument of periastron of the element or the perturber, whichever is closer
to the host star (Naoz et al. 2013a).18

The exact solution is complicated and depends on several independent parameters. For our purposes, it suffices to note that eE oscillates, driven by the oscillations
in the ωE terms over tP;q
E , because the cosines and sines
of ωE and ωP are forced to remain between −1 and 1
and fluctuate over tP;q
E . When we start with a circular orbit, or if the element orbits exterior to the perturber, only the octupole terms are nonzero. To orderof-magnitude, the amplitude of the eccentricity from the
octupole terms is
 
aP


if aP > aE
P;q

t
E
 aE 
∆eE ∼ ėE tP;q
∼
e
∼
e
·
P
P
E
aE

tP;o

E
if aP < aE

aP
(57)
(cf., Ford et al. 2000).19 Note that this amplitude does
not depend on the mass of the perturber; only the
timescale does.
Now, when the eccentricity is no longer non-zero, the
quadrupole term in equation 55 can amplify these oscillations. We can evaluate the magnitude of that term at
∆eE and compare to the octupole term, revealing that
the key quantity is the inclination of the element. If the
18 Since the element is a test particle, of course it cannot actually

affect the perturbing body’s orbit. The longitude of periapse is
the sum of ωP and ΩP , with precisely cancelling precession rates.
Inclination here is measured relative to the invariable plane; for
a test element, the perturber necessarily has inclination 0, so its
longitude of ascending node is arbitrary, with a non-zero precession rate that is still inconsequential.
19 The implied octupolar-driven eccentricity oscillation in Earth’s
orbit from Jupiter is ∼ 0.01 over tP;q
∼ 105 yr. Earth’s eccenE
tricity actually varies over a range of 0.06 on long times, with
large quasiperiodic variations over ∼ 100 kyr. In fact, it is a
complicated sum of many oscillations resulting from the influence of all the planets, though Jupiter is a governing contributor
(Laskar et al. 2004; Spiegel et al. 2010).

inclination is high, the quadrupole term is larger, allowing for the possibility of runaway eccentricity growth; if
it is small, the quadrupole term is a minor correction.
This is borne out by previous theoretical and numerical analyses (Katz et al. 2011; Lithwick & Naoz 2011).
In fact, high-inclination orbits can “flip” between prograde and retrograde with maximum eccentricities near
1, with the critical threshold dropping to about ∼ 60◦
P;o
when ϵ ∼ tP;q
E /tE is greater than a few percent (Lithwick & Naoz 2011). The timescale for this is roughly the
P;o
geometric mean of tP;q
E and tE (Antognini 2015). This
effect is not relevant for our purposes, however; the minor eccentricity fluctuations at low inclinations are sufficient to trigger the cascade, destroying the swarm long
before then.
4.2.3. How common are fatal perturbers?
Table 2, listing perturbation timescales for some example systems, demonstrates the power of stellar companions to throw a megaswarm into chaos. Planets like
Jupiter and Saturn would destabilize the swarm in a few
million years or less. The problem gets much worse for
close binary stars – which is to say, a large fraction of
stars with solar mass – in which case destabilization can
occur in millennia.
In terms of the Solar System, the dominant source
of quadrupole perturbations for most relevant semimajor axes is Jupiter (Figure 7). Venus is very nearly as
powerful interior to its orbit, as is Saturn exterior to its
orbit, and Neptune dominates in trans-Neptunian space.
For some perspective, I calculated quadrupole and
octupole perturbation times for companions around
nearby stars (Figure 8). Stellar companions are plotted according to the Tokovinin (2014) catalog, for stellar systems where the primary mass, secondary mass,
and semimajor axis are listed (57% of the full catalog,

23

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades
Table 2. Some representative quadrupole and octupole perturbation times
Host

Perturber

Sun
Sun
Sun
Sun
Sun
Sun
Earth
Jupiter
Proxima Cen
51 Peg
α Cen A
Capella Aa
61 Cyg A
Sgr A⋆

torb
P

MP /M⋆

Venus
Earth
Jupiter
Saturn
Uranus
Neptune
Moon
Callisto
Proxima b
51 Peg b
α Cen B
Capella Ab
61 Cyg B
S2

2.45 × 10−6
3.00 × 10−6
9.55 × 10−4
2.86 × 10−4
4.37 × 10−5
5.15 × 10−5
0.0123
5.67 × 10−5
2.89 × 10−5
4.13 × 10−4
0.843
0.967
0.877
3.5 × 10−6

aP

ptb

eP

(yr)

(AU)

0.62
1.00
11.9
29.7
84.1
165
0.075
0.046
0.031
0.012
79.8
0.285
700
16.1

0.72
1.00
5.20
9.58
19.2
30.1
0.00257
0.0126
0.0486
0.053
23.3
0.743
85.9
1030

0.0067
0.0167
0.0489
0.0565
0.0472
0.0087
0.0549
0.0074
0
0
0.519
0.0009
0.435
0.885

tP

aE = 1 AU, eE = 0
tP;q
E

tP;o
E

(kyr)

(kyr)

(kyr)

251
333
12.4
104
1930
3200
0.00608
0.806
1.062
0.028
0.0947
0.000295
0.798
4560

780
330
150
3100
160000
530000
7.1 × 106
3.6 × 106
42000
830
9.0
0.0012
630
1.5 × 107

1100
330
760
29000
3.1 × 106
1.6 × 107
2.8 × 109
2.9 × 108
870000
16000
150
0.0016
44000
3.4 × 109

References—Proxima system: Suárez Mascareño et al. (2020) and references therein, with sin iP = 1
assumed as the most conservative value; 51 Pegasi: Birkby et al. (2017); α Cen AB: Akeson et al. (2021);
Capella A: Torres et al. (2015); 61 Cygni AB: stellar masses from Kervella et al. (2008), semimajor axis
and eccentricity from Izmailov et al. (2021), with period derived; Sgr A⋆ –S2: GRAVITY Collaboration
et al. (2020), using notional S2 mass of 15 M⊙ (cf., Chu et al. 2018)

1.0

100

0.5
0.0
1.0

10-1

0.5
0.0
1.0

10-2
mP / m★

0.5
0.0

10-3

1.0

J

0.5

S

0.0

10-4

1.0
U

N

0.5
0.0

10-5

1.0
V

10-6
10-3

0.5

E

0.0

10-2

10-1

100
M
m

101

102

103

104

105

100

101

102

103

104

105

106

107

108

109

1010

aP (AU)

Figure 8. Illustrative figures for perturbing bodies orbiting stars, and their quadrupole and octupole effects. On left, a plot of semimajor
axes and mass ratios for these companions. Black dots are stellar companions from Tokovinin (2014); blue dots are exoplanets listed in
exoplanet.eu; also shown are the six largest Solar System planets. For comparison, pink-shaded regions indicate regions where a companion
induces quadrupole perturbations within a given time on a test body in a circular orbit around a 1 M⊙ star at 1 AU (from darker to lighter,
103 , 106 , and 109 yr). On right, the cumulative perturbation time distribution at various host distances from bodies in Tokovinin (2014)
ptb
and exoplanet.eu; tP is solid, while quadrupole times are dashed and octupole perturbation times are dotted.

24

Lacki

which may include several entries per system for hierarchical multiples). This selection does bias the sample by
excluding close-in spectroscopic binaries and far-apart
astrometric binaries without the required data. Among
ptb
the selected systems, the median tP is 890 years. The
median quadrupole time for a body orbiting at 1 AU is
2.9 Myr, although the median octupole time is around
330 Myr. About three-eights have t⋆;q
E (1 AU) ≤ 100 kyr.
I also considered the exoplanets listed in the
exoplanet.eu archive (Schneider et al. 2011). This is, of
course, a highly biased sample because of the limitation
of exoplanet detection methods: smaller and more distant planets are difficult to find. Nonetheless, a few basic conclusions are evident in Figure 8. A population of
temperate Jupiters and super-Jupiters exists that would
rapidly destabilize swarms at 1 AU. Quadrupole 1 AU
perturbation times of around 103 –105 yr are typical for
these. Hot Jupiters induce quadrupole perturbations in
a few million years, although these would not include
eccentricity variations at 1 AU. Most of the remaining
planets are hot Neptunes and super-Earths, with sloweracting perturbations.
Unless they are being actively stabilized or repaired,
megaswarms in a large fraction of stellar systems will be
destroyed quickly compared to geological timescales.
4.3. Perturbations close to the host
4.3.1. General relativistic precession
General relativity ensures that the argument of periastron of an eccentric orbiting body evolves even if the
central body is perfectly spherical. The Schwarzschild
precession timescale is
5/2

2π
2π c2 aE (1 − e2E )
≈
∆ΩE
3 (GN M⋆ )3/2

−3/2 
M⋆
aE 5/2
≈ 34 Myr
(1 − e2E )
M⊙
AU

orb
tGR
E = tE

(58)

(Naoz 2016, equation 58). In a Schwarzchild metric, this
precession is the only effect on the orbit from general relativity; there is no eccentricity evolution. The general
relativistic precession can however suppress the LidovP;q
Kozai instability entirely if tGR
E ≪ tE , although there is
P;q
a window where tGR
E ∼ tE where it excites eccentricity
instead (Naoz et al. 2013b). The rapid Schwarzchild precession reduces the amplitude of the low-inclination octupole eccentricity variations proportionally to ∼ ėE tGR
E
(Section 4.2.2; cf., Holman et al. 1997; Ford et al. 2000).
4.3.2. Stellar oblateness
Stars are not perfect spheres. Because they rotate,
they are oblate. The nonsphericity introduces higher

order multipole terms to the potential,
 n
R⋆
GN M⋆
·
Jn;⋆ Pn (cos θ)
∆Φn;⋆ (r, ϕ) ∼
r
r

(59)

for stellar latitude θ, where Pn is the n-th Legendre
polynomial (e.g., Mecheri & Meftah 2021). Oblateness
is symmetric for the north and south hemispheres of
the star, so only the even-order multipoles are included,
starting with the quadrupole (n = 2) and hexadecapole
(n = 4). The precession resultant from these terms inhibits Lidov-Kozai cycles, stabilizing eccentricity at high
inclination.
Each multipole moment caused by the oblateness introduces a characteristic perturbation timescale, which
is roughly
t⋆;n
E ≈

torb
E
|Jn;⋆ |



aE
R⋆

3/2+n

n
≈

2πaE
√
|Jn;⋆ | GN M⋆ R⋆n

(60)

(cf., Iorio 2003). Quadrupole order perturbations result
in the precession of both the longitude of the ascending nodes and periastron, as well as advancement of the
mean anomaly. The semimajor axis, eccentricity, and inclination remain constant, much like for an interior perturbing body (Iorio 2011). Hexadecapole order terms
result in eccentricity and inclination changing as well.
However, the hexadecapole eccentricity rate is itself dependent on the element’s eccentricity, while limited by
the quadrupolar precession of the pericenter over t⋆;q
E :
ėhE ≈

15π

eE
sin(2ωE ) sin2 iE (7 sin2 iE − 6),
⋆;h (1 − e2 )3
16tE
E

(61)
and the inclination depends on eccentricity squared
(Renzetti 2013, equation 3). This is in contrast to the
eccentricity forcing by a perturbing body (equation 55),
which has terms that depend on the perturber’s eccentricity only. Even assuming some small deviation from
⋆;h
eE = 0, ∆ ln eE ∼ t⋆;q
E /tE ≲ 1 (and ≪ 1 for the Sun).
Thus, the main effect of oblateness, like general relativity, is precession.
Late-type stars with convective envelopes spin slower
as they age, as their stellar winds carry away angular
momentum (Kraft 1967). Generally, the smaller and
older the star, the slower its rotation, but stars more
massive than the Sun spin quicker (e.g., Barnes 2007;
McQuillan et al. 2014). The Sun itself rotates slowly
and has negligible oblateness. Measuring its multipole
moments has been very difficult – the differential rotation of the sun and its internal structure contribute
to their values. But theory and observations suggest
J2;⋆ ≈ 2 × 10−7 and J4;⋆ ≈ −4 × 10−9 (Pitjeva 2005;
Mecheri & Meftah 2021). So the associated timescales

25

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades
are


7/2 

−1 

−1/2

aE
ρ⋆
|J2;⋆ |
R⋆
2 × 10−7
ρ⊙
−1  −1/2
 11/2 
ρ⋆
|J4;⋆ |
aE
.
t⋆;h
≈
79
kyr
E
R⋆
4 × 10−9
ρ⊙
(62)
⋆;q
tE
≈ 1.6 kyr

As seen in Figure 7, the quadrupole contribution from
oblateness is expected to be greater than that of Jupiter
and Venus out to ∼ 0.05 AU, where the timescale is
about ten million years, while the hexadecapole contribution operates much slower.
Basically, solar oblateness should matter only in the
zone of the Vulcanoids, hypothetical minor bodies orbiting the sun between 9 and 45 R⊙ out. In this region, collisional cascades are expected to be especially
destructive because of the high orbital velocities (Stern
& Durda 2000). Much smaller deviations in eccentricities are sufficient to ensure collisions damage the swarm
elements.
Stars earlier than mid-F type do not have convective
envelopes and so retain their primordial spins, approaching the critical velocity for breakup (Kawaler 1987).
And in fact, many early-type stars are known to be
oblate: A-type dwarfs like Vega and Altair and B-type
dwarfs like Regulus have oblateness of order ∼ 10%
(van Belle et al. 2001; Aufdenberg et al. 2006; van Belle
2012). Although the multipole moments depend on internal structure, they should scale roughly with the ratio of the rotation speed to the orbital velocity squared
(e.g., Mecheri & Meftah 2021), and models indicate
J2;⋆ ∼ 0.005–0.02 (Zahn et al. 2010).
Scaling to values appropriate for Vega (R⋆eq = 2.8 R⊙ ,
M⋆ = 2.1 M⊙ ):

−1
7/2 
aE
|J2;⋆ |
t⋆;q
≈
0.32
kyr
E
10 R⋆eq
0.01

11/2 
−1
aE
|J4;⋆ |
⋆;h
tE ≈ 3200 kyr
,
(63)
10 R⋆eq
10−4
for a distance where the temperature is ∼ 2,000–3,000 K.
Because the quadrupole timescale is much shorter than
the general relativistic precession (cf., Iorio 2008),
oblateness is the main suppresant of the Lidov-Kozai
effect.
Post-Newtonian effects resulting from stellar oblateness also result in evolution in the orbital eccentricity,
but these are very slow for stars and, like the hexadecapolar term, ėE ∝ eE , greatly limiting its ability to pump
eccentricity (Iorio 2019, 2024).
4.4. Internal secular perturbations

The base configuration for a megaswarm – a collection
of rings in orbit around the star – is also an instantiation of the ring model used to calculate the secular perturbations of a companion planet or star. Although the
geometry is somewhat more complicated, since there are
a large number of rings of differing inclinations, qualitatively we might model it as just a few rings, an inner and
outer at zero inclination and a middle with iB ∼ π/2,
similar to a system with a few mutually inclined planets.
As a result, we expect the swarm mass to induce secular
perturbations on itself, including the Lidov-Kozai effect.
The timescale for these effects is roughly
3/2

ptb

tS

1/2

2πRS M⋆
M⋆
≈
1/2
MS
GN M⋆

3/2 
1/2 
−1
RS
M⋆
MS
≈ 330 kyr
AU
M⊙
M⊕

∼ torb
E

(64)

from equations 51 and 52. The quadrupole Lidov-Kozai
effect is likely to be most important in exciting eccentricity, as long as the inclination range of the swarm is
sufficiently high. In contrast, since the belts are initially
circular, they do not induce octupole-level pumping of
the eccentricity until bent out of shape. Because the
innermost and outermost belts in the swarm are not
very widely separated in radius, however, even highorder terms in the multipole expansion may be important. Thus, an accurate treatment may need to include
hexadecapole and even higher order contributions.
Full Dyson swarms are usually posited to have planetscaled masses (Dyson 1960), so the rates should be similar to the effect of a perturbing planet:
MS ≈ 4πFS ΣE RS2

≈ 47 M⊕ FS

ΣE
100 g cm−2



RS
AU

2
,

(65)

for a swarm with a covering factor FS and surface density ΣE , which has a chosen value equivalent to a meter of water. Now, it is possible that the elements
of megaswarms are more like dust, a distributed system of particles that extract power instead of consisting of macroscopic collectors or habitats. Wright (2020)
pointed out there is a minimum surface density before
radiation pressure blows out an element, assuming no
countering thrust: Σmin
≈ L⋆ /(4πGN cM⋆ ). Scaling to
E
this value,
s
2πc GN M⋆3 Σmin
ptb
E
tS ≈
L⋆
RS FS ΣE


−1 
3/2 
−1/2
F S ΣE
L⋆
M⋆
RS
≈ 9.2 Gyr
.
L⊙
M⊙
AU
Σmin
E

26

Lacki
any reasonably sized megaswarm. Even over geological timescales, the nearest expected flyby is extremely
hyperbolic, with a pericenter speed much greater than
the local escape velocity, and adiabatic, lasting much
longer than the element orbital period (cf., Spurzem
et al. 2009). Stellar flybys have different effects on circular orbits and elliptical orbits, with the possibility of decreasing the eccentricity for the latter, but as I approximate things, only the nearest encounter matters, its only
considered effect to be to kick an initially circular orbit
to a slightly elliptical one. The nearest encounter is described by the “power-law” regime of Heggie & Rasio
(1996), with their equation 9 describing effects on circular orbits. In the limit of a distant encounter (with
intruder eccentricity eP → ∞) and a test particle element, the eccentricity kick is20

So although swarms with macroscopic elements are selfdestructing, these “dust” megaswarms are not much limited by self-driven Lidov-Kozai instabilities unless they
are placed around very bright stars and thus require
heavy ballast. Occulter swarms have so low a mass that
the self-driven Lidov-Kozai effect is too slow to matter,
unless the elements are kilometers thick.
As just another form of the Lidov-Kozai instability,
general relativity and stellar oblateness can suppress
ptb
these effects when those timescales are smaller than tS .
4.5. Stellar encounters
Another source of perturbations is the collection of
random tugs from passing stars as the system makes
its way through its galaxy. This process is limited for
megaswarms because they are compact compared to typical encounter distances. Almost all such encounters will
be very distant, and thus gravitational focusing will be
minimal. Over a time t, the closest impact parameter
of a star to the host is given by

5 MP
∆eE ≈
4 M⋆

aE
bP

3 s

GN M⋆
2
aE vP

· [cos2 iE sin2 ωP (1 − sin2 iE (3 + sin2 ωP ))2

1

bP ≈ p
π⟨vP ⟩nP t

≈ 2100 AU



+ cos2 ωP (1 − sin2 iE (1 + sin2 ωP ))2 ]1/2 . (67)
⟨vP ⟩
30 km s−1

 

nP
0.1 pc−3

 

t
Gyr

−1/2
,
(66)

where nP is the number density of perturbing stars in
the local neighborhood.
Outside of star clusters, most stellar encounters are
weak and distant – much further from the host than

Although the kick depends on the geometry of the encounter, an approximate cross section ςP is found by
taking an average over ωP and iE to find a rough bP
value for each ∆eE :
"
ςP (∆eE > e) ≈ πbP (e)

2

≈ πa2E

0.614 MP
e M⋆

p

#2/3
GN M⋆ /aE
.
vP
(68)

After time t, the element eccentricity will be around ςP (eE )nP vP t ∼ 1:
s

3 

q
M⋆
nP
aE 5
M
M
/M
vP
t
P
P
⋆
−6
5
P
3
eE (t) ≈ 3.4 GN M⋆ vP (n t) aE
≈ 2 × 10
.
−1
M⋆
0.2
M⊙ 50 km s
0.1 pc−3 Gyr
100 AU

Stellar encounters are clearly very poor at raising eccentricity, although they may nonetheless be the only
relevant mechanism for very wide megaswarms or in
dense stellar clusters. A minimal occulter swarm in our
Solar System, placed 100 AU out with about thirty thousand belts, would be safe for billions of years (Figure 7).
Dense swarms, designed for energy collection, however,
may have many millions of belts; eccentricities ≪ 10−6
could be sufficient to result in orbit crossings, leading to
20 This is an octupole-level effect (Heggie & Rasio 1996), evident

from the cubic dependence on impact parameter.

(69)

swarm thermalization and eventual destruction in millions of years.21
Although this process is only conceivably important
for dense or far out swarms, even with thermalization,
its strength is its inevitability. Even if ETIs eliminate
all other bodies in the stellar system (Section 6.2), short
21 The assumptions used here eventually break down when (1) the

time to reach an eccentricity threshold is shorter than than the
time between individual stellar encounters (∼ (nP )−1/3 vP ); or
(2), the “power law” regime of Heggie & Rasio (1996) fails when
bP ∼ aE .

27

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades
of ejecting the star out of the galaxy entirely, the kicks
from stellar flybys are an intrinsic feature of the environment. Perhaps an extremely advanced Kardashev III
metasociety could use stellar engines to manage the trajectory of every star in the region of interest, but this
requires active maintenance – it is not a way of preserving a passive technosignature without any effort.

5. RADIATION PRESSURE: OPPORTUNITY AND

MENACE
5.1. The radiative thrust timescale
Radiation pressure from the host star influences the
dynamics of subplanetary masses around a star. As discussed in Section 3.10, it can blow small grains out of the
system entirely, terminating collisional cascades; but it
also has measurable effects on kilometer-scale asteroids
in the Solar System (Chesley et al. 2003). Radiative perturbations may have depleted minor body populations
in the Solar System over its history (Vokrouhlický et al.
2000; Bottke et al. 2006).
Unlike gravitational perturbations, radiative accelerations are highly dependent on the geometry and composition of the objects they act upon. Additionally, radiative torques themselves can change the rotation rates
of bodies. Rotation rate, density, shape, surface roughness, and thermal inertia all affect these forces (Statler
2009). Thus, radiative perturbations are characterized
by dispersion – objects on the same orbit get different
kicks, randomizing their velocities, and leading to potential collisions (similar spreading is thought to occur
in asteroid families; Bottke et al. 2006). The problem
may be particularly acute in Dyson swarms, where dispersion can lead to rapid thermalization and destruction
of the swarm unless there are “firebreaks” (Section 3.8).
Only a limited amount of momentum is available from
the host star, as parameterized by the ratio of radiative
and gravitational forces,
2
L⋆ ArE
DE
L⋆
=
2
4πDE c GN M⋆ mE
4πGN cM⋆ ΣrE


−1
L⋆ /M⋆
ΣrE
= 7.65 × 10−5
,
L⊙ /M⊙
g cm−2

βE =

(70)

radiative perturbations:
torb
2GN cM⋆ ΣrE orb
E
=
tE
2πβE
L⋆


−1 
L⋆ /M⋆
ΣrE
≳ 2080
torb .
L⊙ /M⊙
g cm−2 E

trE ≳

(71)

How close the two timescales are depends on how the radiative forces are applied; anisotropy is needed for perturbations.
The relative strength of radiative perturbations has
a clear dependence on type of star. Red giants and
OB stars can have luminosity-to-mass ratios many hundreds times greater than the Sun, while the situation
is reversed around red dwarfs and older white dwarfs
(Table 1).
5.2. Radial forces: radiation as support and its
precarity
5.2.1. The quasite option
Radiative forces exerted in the radial direction on a
swarm element can counter weight partially or entirely.
Elements that use less material, perhaps for economical
reasons, have a greater βE and thus this effect can be
more important. In the limit that βE = 1, an element
becomes a statite, levitating in place without any transverse motion at all. This limit represents a minimum
column density to a megaswarm (Wright 2020). For the
βE < 1 case, Kipping (2019) has proposed that “quasites” could use radiation pressure to partly levitate,
reducing their orbital speed and prolonging their transits across stars. Effectively, the radiation pressure acts
as if the mass of the host star has been reduced.
Radiation pressure support has an obvious advantage
in inhibiting collisional cascades, in addition to being a
necessary effect of reducing material usage. Because everything is moving more slowly, larger perturbations are
required before collisions of elements become damaging.
The radiation pressure support would have to be very
strong for this to matter,
√ though – the resultant circular
r
velocity is υB
= υB 1 − βE . If the radiation pressure
is half as strong as gravitational attraction
√ (βE = 1/2),
r
for example, υB
is decreased only by 1/ 2, and the
√ eccentricity required for damage increased only by 2.
5.2.2. The unsteadiness of radiation support

where ArE is the effective area of the element to incoming radiation from the host star, and the effective density column density ΣrE = mE /ArE (see equation 45 and
Burns et al. (1979)). The effective area includes corrections for translucence. Now, since βE sets the ratio of
accelerations, it also puts a bound on the timescale for

Yet, significant radiation pressure has disadvantages
too, namely its unsteadiness. At the barest level, a nonspherical “sail” supporting the element can become titlted from normal orientation. This would reduce its lift
and cause its orbit to shrink. Moreover, different sails
could have different misalignments, inducing a velocity

28
spread. There can be passive ways to stabilize the orientation (see Lacki 2020 for a hypothetical example), but
there are other routes to degradation, including chipping
of the reflective surfaces (e.g., from meteor impacts) or
albedo evolution.
Nor are stars actually constant in luminosity. Latetype stars display magnetic activity, the visible manifestation being starspots and faculae. As the quasites pass
over these features, they receive a small kick from the
brightness fluctuation. Moreover, starspots and faculae
are dynamic – the kick received will depend on when
in the feature’s lifecycle the transit occurs. Kicks also
arise from solar flares, although on the whole, these will
be smaller because of their brevity. Over time, the randomness kicks will add up to a stochastic velocity spread
even for elements in the same belt.
Stellar activity also has longer term effects. With the
Sun, there is a well-known 0.1% luminosity variability
associated with the eleven year solar activity cycle, with
times of high activity brightening the star (e.g., Lean
1991). Although it may seem like this would affect all
elements equally, sunspots are concentrated on certain
low- to mid-latitude ranges, while faculae may be found
at the poles (see Makarov & Sivaraman 1989; Solanki
2003). During periods of high activity, elements at different inclinations can experience different radiative lifts
on average, although admittedly the effect is small.
Other types of stars have more pronounced variability, like long-period variables and accretion-powered interacting binaries. Many of these are very luminous.
Scrounging enough material to build a megaswarm at a
distance where it would not sublimate could be difficult,
suggesting that the elements would be lightweight and
thus easily affected by radiation pressure variability (as
noted in Lacki 2020).

Lacki
For a quasite initially on a circular orbit, or an initially
stationary statite, the distance evolves as22
d2 DE
GN M⋆ DE (0)
GN M⋆
=
(1 − βE (0)) −
(1 − βE (t)).
dt2
DE (t)3
DE (t)2
(72)
The evolution of orbital distance for a quasite is slow:


1 − βE (0)
∆βE (t)
DE (t) ≈ DE (0)
≈ DE (0) 1 +
.
1 − βE (t)
1 − βE (0)
(73)
In most cases, the main threat would be the dispersion
in elements of different ΣrE in closely packed swarms colliding and potentially thermalizing the swarm, because
stellar luminosity evolution is so slow. Quasites orbiting
a star near the tip of the red giant branch are in a precarious position once it begins its rapid descent as core
helium burning begins; the swarm could partly collapse
in mere millennia.
True statites can be blown out quite rapidly. Equation 72 is a nonlinear equation with no obvious analytic solution even when βE (0) = 1, but a very rough
sense of the evolution can be had by ignoring the effects of the inverse square law on the acceleration until
DE (t) = (1 + ζ)DE (0) with ζ ∼ 1, beyond which there
is no further acceleration. If the luminosity increases
linearly, βE (t) = 1 + t/t⋆ , then the acceleration phase
lasts
2/3
tacc ∼ [2π 2 ζ]−1/3 t⋆ 1/3 torb
E (0)

1/3  orb 2/3
t⋆
tE
∼ 1100 yr ζ −1/3
,
10 Gyr
1 yr

(74)

at which point the erstwhile statite has reached a ballistic radial velocity of
1/3
9 GN M⋆
2ζ 2 t⋆

1/3 
−1/3
t⋆
M⋆
−1 −2/3
.
∼ 0.003 AU yr ζ
M⊙
10 Gyr
(75)

D˙E (∞) ∼ D˙E (tacc ) ∼

5.2.3. Secular luminosity increases and radiative blowout

Even ignoring these effects, stars display secular evolution. Main sequence stars brighten as they age. Unless
the elements adjust their properties to match, it will
lead to the elements slowly being pushed further from
the star. This reduces the megaswarm’s optical depth,
although the effects are important mainly for statites,
which require a near-perfect balance of forces. They are
eventually pushed out of the system entirely.



This would lead to a statite swarm in the Solar System
being cleared within about 105 yr, if the Sun’s secular
evolution is steady.
Significant radiation pressure support may alter the
effects of gravitational perturbations. In terms of Newtonian gravitational attraction, the host star’s mass is
effectively reduced. A luminous perturbing companion’s
22 This can be derived using the effective (mass-normalized) La2
2 θ̇ 2 ) + G M (1 − β (t))/D .
grangian LE = (1/2)(D˙E + DE
⋆
N
E
E
E

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades
attractive pull on the element is also reduced, but the
amount of the mass reduction depends on the luminosity of the companion and likely varies as the geometry
changes during the orbit. But the attraction between
the host and the perturber is unchanged. These effects
may conspire to give rise to novel dynamical effects.
5.3. Transverse forces: Yarkovsky effects as
perturbations
In order for the thermal emission of a body to cause
net thrust, the temperature of the body must be uneven.23 The Yarkovsky effect is likely to be the most
important source of perturbations. It is the result of
the combination of thermal lag and the rotation of a
body, which causes the hottest point of a body to be
off from the subsolar point. Thus, the radiative thrust
from the temperature anisotropy is not perfectly radial;
the transverse thrust perturbs the orbit. There are several different manifestations of the Yarkovsky effect, including diurnal and annual variants (Bottke et al. 2006).
There is an optimal rotation rate that maximizes the diurnal Yarkovsky effect: if it spins too quickly, the body
is heated evenly, but if it spins too slowly, the transverse
component of the radiative anisotropy is small. A big
body is hard to accelerate, but in a small body, thermal
conduction redistributes heat efficiently (Bottke et al.
2006).

29

The complicated interplay of geometry and thermal
properties makes an exact calculation impossible. However we can set limits on the Yarkovsky effect for sufficiently small objects. Suppose the elements are thin,
solid plates with no hollows (e.g., a quasite sail) with
a homogeneous thermal conductivity KE and thickness
sE . Now, the maximum possible temperature anisotropy
occurs when the element is in synchronous rotation, so
even though asynchronous rotation is necessary for the
Yarkovsky effect, we can set a limit on how much thrust
is available in this limit. The elements are so thin that
all of the thermal emission comes out of the hot, sunfacing side or the cold, sun-shaded side; each side has a
uniform temperature, and the difference in temperatures
is ∆TE . From energy balance, the thermal emission from
the cold side is equal to the heat flux that can be supported by thermal conduction, ĖE = ArE (∆TE )/sE . It
can then be shown that, for blackbody surfaces,
∆TE = σSB (TEH − ∆TE )4 sE /KE ≈ σSB (TEH )4 sE /KE
 H 4 

−1
TE
sE 
KE
≈ 4.6 K
300 K
1m
100 W m−1 K−1
(76)
when the temperature difference is much smaller
than the temperature of the hot side, TEH ≈
[L⋆ /(4πσSB DE 2 )]1/4 .

Given these assumptions, the maximum net thrust is just ∼ 4∆TE /TEH of the total thrust from all emission. Thus,
for a thin blackbody conducting plate,
q
3 3
r
H
orb
cK
ρ
E
T
tE
E GN M⋆ DE aE
tYE ≳ E
≈ 23/2 π 7/4
1/4 7/4
4∆TE 2πβE
σSB L⋆


1/2 

3/2 
−7/4 

M⋆
ρrE
L⋆
KE
aE 3 DE
≳ 1.5 Myr
,
(77)
M⊙
AU
aE
L⊙
g cm−3
100 W m−1 K−1
where ρrE = ΣrE /sE = mE /(sE ArE ) is the element’s (effective) mass density. The thermal conductivity has been scaled
to a value appropriate for iron. This is about a hundred times the thermal conductivity for bare rock (Bottke et al.
2006), and so a non-porous metallic body is much less susceptible to the effect than an asteroid of the same size.

Whether the Yarkovsky effect is the dominant source
of perturbations over secular gravitational effects depends on how the ETIs would design their elements,
23 If the body has perfectly uniform emissivity, then the amount of

emission in one direction is exactly proportional to its projected
area on the transverse plane. However, the projected area is
the same when looking at the transverse plane from either side
(whether a ray pierces a shape does not depend on whether it
comes in from the front or back), so there is no net difference.

and whether they specifically try to compensate for it.
Perhaps ETIs have reason to use thermally insulating
materials that could sustain much larger thermal inhomogeneities. Heat conduction is hampered if parts of
the element are on booms, or if it is largely hollow. On
the other hand, heat pipes are able to effect conductivities hundreds of times those of metals without any
moving parts, and could be used to even temperature
differences.

30

Lacki

The main takeaway, however, is that radiative perturbations are a threat close to the star unless the elements
are massive, which is also where secular gravitational
perturbations and stellar flybys have the least effect.
6. IMPLICATIONS

6.1. Where and what are the longest living
megaswarms?
Megastructures may come in a wide range of different types, environments, and purposes. It is possible
that in most cases, the builders do not even care about
longevity, needing only a quick burst of vast power, although uses like stellar engineering require long-term
survival. But if megastructures exist, the population
we would observe should be biased towards longer-lived
types. So what are the characteristics of these swarms?
6.1.1. Location of the megaswarm in the system
If swarm elements were placed in random orbits, there
is a clear answer: as far from the host star as possible.
Even for a fixed shell thickness, the local number density
of elements is, at worst, constant as we move further out.
Although the number of elements that is needed grows
linearly (minimal occulter) to quadratically (energy collection), the surface area available to spread out grows
quadratically. Moreover, the further out one goes, the
thicker the shell can be; there is simply more room in
the radial direction, and so the shell-averaged number
density falls inversely with its radius. Finally, the randomized velocities are slower. This both slows down the
rate of collisions, and dampens the cascade by limiting
the severity of impacts.
But megaswarms designed for longevity will not be
randomized, at least not close to the star, and the relevant timescale is the time to perturb orbits until they
cross. There are many trade-offs that make it unclear if
there is one optimal location, but placing a swarm close
to the host star could be a viable strategy. First, in the
base configuration, the fact that there is only one belt
at each semimajor axis value means more of the shell
is empty as RS increases, wasting space. Moreover, the
number of belts increases linearly further out; although
the linear spacing between belts is constant, the eccentricity needed for belt overlap falls inversely with distance. If element collisions lead to thermalization, then
this is the fatal quantity; if thermalization does not occur, however, the eccentricity needed to ensure collisions
are destructive grows as we go further out.
The most likely source of gravitational perturbations
are secular effects induced by a companion. The worst
place for a swarm is then right next to the companion, because of the rapid evolution that results. Exte-

rior to the companion, there are no quadrupole-order
effects that raise eccentricity like the Lidov-Kozai effect, but there are still octupole effects if the companion has a nonzero eccentricity. Additionally, stellar flybys are more detrimental further out. Swarms interior
to companions have less margin for error and may experience the Lidov-Kozai effect if the range of inclinations is too big. However, the Lidov-Kozai timescale
becomes more forgiving closer to the host, and general
relativistic precession inhibits the effect entirely. Stellar
oblateness may also have a stabilizing effect. This suggests long-lived ordered megaswarms in planetary systems like our own can be placed interior to the radius
where tGR
≲ tP;q
E
E . In our own Solar System, there indeed is a stable region interior to Mercury (roughly from
0.04–0.2 AU), the Vulcanoid zone.
Radiative perturbations are a real threat to
megaswarms orbiting close to the star, but is extremely
sensitive to its unknown material properties. The estimates in Section 5.3 imply that, within the Solar System, the Yarkovsky effect would dominate of thin elements within the orbit of Venus (Figure 7), unless they
were specifically designed to redistribute heat (by using heat pipes, for example). Equation 77 however sets
the worst-case limit, however; an asynchronously rotating object redistributes heat and has a smaller radiative
thrust. Additionally, massive objects with βE ≪ 1 are
resistant to radiative perturbations. Overall, the innermost Solar System appears to be a hostile place for a
swarm of small grain-like elements, but might be viable
for massive swarm bodies, perhaps including occulter
swarms. Placing a swarm that close in may also be more
efficient for energy collection (Wright 2023). If there are
any other sources of perturbation, however, the inner
system may be disastrous because of the rapidity of cascades.
For minimal occulter swarms, the outer reaches of the
host system may be preferable. Although stellar encounters and very distant companions may randomize orbits,
the number density becomes so low that it does not even
matter whether the swarm is randomized or not. Even
a swarm at 1 AU is in this regime, and the collisional
5/2
lifespan increases as RS : at 10 AU, it is 160 Myr; beyond 40 AU, it is comparable to the lifespan of the Solar
System.
Interestingly, these considerations suggest the habitable zone of a star system may be one of the least likely
places to find a Dyson swarm, given the large number
of warm and cool giant planets that can induce a KozaiLidov effect. Megaswarms consisting of habitats also
would be so massive that self-driven secular perturbations would destroy them in millennia. If so, searches

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades
for waste heat may have better luck looking for uninhabitable megaswarms in the near- or far-infrared.

6.1.2. Host system properties
It is more clear what sort of architecture the host
system should have to optimize for longevity, namely,
none – there should just be the host star and absolutely
nothing else in the system. Indeed, perhaps ETIs aggressively re-engineer stellar systems to remove anything
that might interfere with their megaswarms. Still, this
would not remove the effect of stellar flybys and internal
instabilities. Additionally, the materials needed to build
the megaswarm may need to be mined by local (solid)
planets, or at least minor bodies.
Binary stars are terrible places for megaswarms, unless
they are very close together (for a distant swarm) or very
far apart (for a close-in swarm). Unbinding stellar companions also takes a long time, even for a Kardashev II
ETI – perhaps longer than a swarm can be maintained.
In general, massive stars are more likely to have stellar
companions, while red dwarfs are more likely than not
to be solo (e.g., Raghavan et al. 2010; Winters et al.
2019). This suggests that long-lived megaswarms are
more likely to be found around low mass stars, particularly cool dwarfs. Note that stars less massive than the
Sun put out only a tiny fraction of a galaxy’s light; a
Kardashev III metasociety would probably at least have
to enclose red giants of about Solar mass to capture most
of the luminosity (Lacki 2019b).
Giant planets are another bane of megaswarms.
Again, greater stellar mass implies a greater frequency
of giant planets (e.g., Ghezzi et al. 2018; Nielsen et al.
2019). Here the situation is slightly more complicated:
the Lidov-Kozai timescale depends on the mass ratio of
the planet to the star and the period. The habitable
zones of red dwarfs are very close in, with short orbital
periods and thus short secular perturbation timescales
(equations 52–53). A more useful discriminant may
be stellar metallicity, which correlates with the presence of giant planets: low metallicity stars are more
likely to lack these destructive neighbors (e.g., Johnson et al. 2010). A minimum metallicity threshold of
is suspected to be necessary for terrestrial planet formation: [Fe/H] ∼ −2 is assumed in Zackrisson et al.
(2016), ∼ −1.5 is proposed in Johnson & Li (2012) (dependent on distance), and up to ∼ −0.6 in Andama et al.
(2024). Going below that can be helpful in prolonging
the swarm’s existence, although probably not for building it in the first place. Minor body impacts may also
still be an issue in these systems, shattering the first
elements and triggering the cascade.

31

The close-in habitable zones of red dwarfs pose additional problems. At a fixed instellation SE⋆ , orbital
1/2
1/4
velocities are higher, as υ ∝ (SE⋆ )1/4 M⋆ /L⋆ . Red
dwarfs, for example, have orbital velocities about twice
as high as those around the Sun at a given instellation
(Table 1). The problem gets even worse for cool white
dwarfs. For these low luminosity stars, cold megaswarms
shining in the far-infrared may be the norm.
High mass stars also have a disadvantage: they just
don’t live very long, at least on cosmological timescales.
Their rapid evolution can especially be an issue for
statites levitated by radiation pressure; as their main sequence luminosity grows, the elements are ejected from
the system.
The collisional destruction of megaswarms also may
have implications for where in a galaxy we might find
them. First, stellar encounters should be minimized, implying low density environments. These are found on the
outskirts of large galaxies and in their halos, as well as
in dwarf galaxies. Second, low metallicity stars are more
likely to be found in these same environments. This suggests that megaswarms are more likely to be found in
regions that are sometimes considered disfavorable for
habitability (compare with Lineweaver et al. 2004 and
subsequent works).
6.2. Self-sabotage and the end of planets?
The more aggressive option is to remove the intruding perturbers, either by ejecting them from the system or destroying them outright. For objects with
a smaller surface escape velocity than orbital velocity,
which mainly includes terrestrial planets, it is energetically favorable to dismantle them entirely; otherwise,
it may be easier just to unbind them from the host,
as for stellar companions and most giant planets. The
amounts of energy needed are astronomical, but for
planetary perturbers, well within reach for a true Kardashev type II ETI, needing a few days of Solar luminosity to unbind an Earth and decades to eject a Jupiter.
Nonetheless, either option is very difficult for stellar
companions; it would take many millennia to eject a
star, and in the meantime, that same star is destabilizing the megaswarm.
Circularizing orbits may be another option if the
builders are content with a swarm that remains within
the range of inclinations that are Lidov-Kozai stable.
In the Solar System, where most of the major planets
already have low eccentricities, this is easier than removing the planets. Nonetheless, the planets may need to
be occasionally recircularized against their mutual influences and the effects of stellar flybys. Other stellar systems have eccentric companions, however; eccentricities

32

Lacki

of ∼ 0.5 are common among binary stars with periods
greater than 100 days (Raghavan et al. 2010), in which
case the needed ∆v is only perhaps a factor ∼ 2 smaller
than ejection.
This raises a disturbing prospect – a Kardashev Type
III metasociety may annihilate planetary systems as it
expands to stabilize their megaswarms, leaving everything within its “bubble” barren of planets. If those
megaswarms then are destroyed anyway, no planets will
remain on which to restart life. Furthermore, in most
early-type galaxies, there will be no star formation to
ever replace them. Thus, the megaswarms portend
doom, and leave behind a permanently sterilized galaxy
in their wake. Also note that the perturbation times are
generally comparable to or shorter than the canonical
1–100 Myr expected to expand across a galaxy. It could
be that at no point there is a galaxy entirely shrouded
by Dyson swarms, only a thin front.
6.3. Another option: maintained swarms
Of course, all of these considerations assume that the
megaswarm is abandoned to its own devices. For all we
know, the builders are necessarily long-lived and can
maintain an active watch over the elements and actively prevent collisions, or at least counter perturbations. Conceivably, they could also launch tender robots
to do the job for them, or the swarm elements have automated guidance. Admittedly, their systems would have
to be kept up for millions of years, vastly outlasting anything we have built, but this might be more plausible if
we imagine that they are self-replicating. In this view,
whenever an element is destroyed, the fragments are consumed and forged into a new element; control systems
are constantly regenerated as new generations of tenders
are born. Even then, self-replication, repair, and waste
collection are probably not perfectly efficient: very small
grains are blown out of the system by radiation pressure, adding a leak to the closed system. These may
be supplemented by mining of solid bodies, although
one might wonder if self-replicating probes that feast on
these might evolve to ignore the megaswarm and let it
be destroyed.
Another issue is that orbital traffic control generally
requires propellant. Wright (2020) noted the issue for
stabilizing a solid shell around a star against the effect of a perturber. According to the Tsiolkovsky rocket
equation, the amount of propellant required grows exponentially for a ∆v beyond the exhaust velocity, and
since the amount of power available is limited by the
star’s luminosity, the swarm’s mass is eventually consumed. Wright (2020) estimated this lifespan to be
of order centuries for a Jupiter-mass solid shell being

perturbed by a Jupiter-mass planet, with less massive
shells surviving longer. For a megaswarm, the conditions are not so stringent. We merely need to suppress
the perturbations, nudging the elements back onto circular orbits. If the swarm is being actively maintained,
these nudges might be more like a continuous thrust.
There is a continuous source of propellant in the host
star’s light, which can be reflected to counter the perturbations. From momentum conservation, the amount
of delta-v that an element can extract from starlight is
limited to
ptb

∆v ≈

L⋆ t
4πcRS2 ΣE
ptb

≈ 0.14 km s

−1

L⋆ t
·
L⊙ kyr

!

RS
AU

−2 

ΣrE
100 g cm−2

−1

(78)
ptb

where t
is the timescale of the perturbations.
For comparison, the correction needed
to circularize an eccentric orbit is ∼ eE υ ≈
0.3 km s−1 (eE /0.01)(υ/30 km s−1 ). This suggests that
starlight alone may be sufficient to counter perturbations in a system like our own, given that these perturbations take tens of thousands of years to develop. If a
Lidov-Kozai instability is allowed to fully develop, the
eccentricity swells to ∼ 1 and sunlight is insufficient, but
note that the idea here is that the element is constantly
correcting the perturbations, squelching any changes
in eccentricity much like general relativistic precession
does.
In fact, propellant may not be needed at all. For every collision, there are bound to be many near-misses.
The elements may take advantage of these near-misses
to grapple onto each other with tethers and fling each
other apart, exchanging momentum to provide propulsion. This is especially easy in a dense swarm, where
the first encounters are likely to be very slow.
It all comes down to the original question from the
introduction: can technological societies (or their equivalents) survive for millions of years? Or can they at least
create autonomous agents that maintain their technosignatures for that long? If they can, then they can presumably maintain any technosignature; the advantage
of megaswarms is simply that they are detectable from
very far away. If they cannot, then megaswarms around
stars are not eternal monuments; they too shall perish
in time, leaving no trace of their makers.
6.4. Galactic-scale megaswarms as the survivors
Stellar megaswarms, without maintenance, are expected to be destroyed in most cases within a few million years – that is, within about the length of time

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades
expected for an ETI to spread across a galaxy. The
archetypal Kardashev III ETI is a galaxy wherein all
the stars have been shrouded in Dyson spheres. But,
supposing that such structures are destroyed so quickly,
is the very idea of a Kardashev III ETI implausible, with
a wave of settlement immediately trailed by a wave of
destruction, leaving only a thin skein of infrared glow
expanding through the galaxy?
Not quite.
The problem with stellar megaswarms is that the most
fundamental dynamical timescale – the orbital period
– is so short. Hence the need for careful structuring
of orbital belts to ensure that they do not cross, and
delaying the cascade until perturbations kick in. But
the dynamical timescale of a galaxy as a whole is vastly
longer, more like a hundred million years.
A megaswarm that covers a galaxy thus could plausibly survive passively for many millions of years. Although the material requirements may seem too vast,
large star-forming galaxies in fact achieve optical thickness of ∼ 0.5–1 to visible light, a result of interstellar dust (Calzetti 2001). Dust in the interstellar
medium gets around several issues that plague stellar
megaswarms. First, the dust-to-gas ratio is ∼ 1%, much
higher than the planet-to-star (to say nothing of the
solid-to-star) ratio of the Solar System. Second, dust
grains are very small and can be spread out to cover a
wider area. Unlike Dyson swarms, however, the dust
grains are weighed down by the interstellar medium,
which prevents the radiation pressure from instantly
blowing away the dust. Of course, a galaxy must have
enough of an interstellar medium in the first place for
this advantage to occur; a majority of early-type galaxies lack detectable cool gas, though it is not a universal condition (Young et al. 2014). The most extreme
example of a galactic megaswarm is a “blackbox”, in
which dipole antennas are used to reprocess the starlight
into microwaves, turning the galaxy into a blackbody.
These are near the mass limits in the interstellar medium
(ISM) of a star-forming galaxy (Lacki 2016).
The presence of the interstellar medium is also likely
to alter the evolution of galactic dust megaswarms. For
one, gas drag will cause the artificial grains to be more or
less locked into the ISM flows, suppressing local velocity
gradients, possibly preventing collisions from destroying
grains. On the other hand, some ISM environments may
destroy grains – large volumes of hot ISM could spallate
away the artificial grains (as with natural grains, see
Draine 2011).
Although there remain many unexplored issues about
the feasibility and evolution of such galactic structures
(Lacki 2016), it remains a possibility that they are the

33

only persistent technosignature of a Kardashev III ETI,
perhaps the only way to simultaneously capture the light
of all stars in a galaxy.
7. CONCLUSIONS

At first glance, megaswarms may seem to be ideal
passive technosignatures, eonic structures that sit invulnerable as the universe around them ages. This paper
deals with the threat posed by collisional cascades for
megaswarms surrounding stars. These swarms, practically by definition, need to have a large number of elements, whether their purpose is communication or exploitation. Moreover, the swarm orbital belts need to
have a wide range of inclinations. This ensures that the
luminosity is being collected or modulated in all directions. But this in turn implies a wide range of velocities, comparable to the circular orbital velocity. Another
problem is that the number of belts that can “fit” into
a swarm without crossing is limited.
The collisional time for a megaswarm is very short.
For a Dyson swarm, it is as small as a single orbital
period divided by the covering factor. Even for a “minimal occulter” swarm, the collision time can be less than
a million years. This is true even if the swarm is structured by imposing circular orbits on all elements and
placing elements of similar inclinations on similar orbits.
To avoid high-velocity collisions, most of the swarm’s
volume must be empty, compensating for the reduced
velocity differences in the collision time. Nonetheless,
this kind of ordering is advantageous: the cascade time
can be much shorter still than the collisional time. My
cascade simulations indicate a tcasc ∝ ⟨vEE ⟩−8/3 dependence. Thus, I argue that any megaswarm built to last
has the “base configuration” of this paper, involving a
series of circular orbital belts with a gradual change in
inclination with semimajor axis.
Unless the megaswarm is actively maintained, gravitational and radiative perturbations cause precession
and, in some cases, eccentricity growth. These cause
the belts to puff out and overlap, allowing for collisions
of elements both within and between belts. Even if the
collisions between elements are too slow to destroy the
elements, the momentum transfer could cause the swarm
to thermalize, a disastrous effect given the wide range
of inclinations in the swarm. There are many sources of
such perturbations, although some are relatively ineffective. Among the most powerful are quadrupole and octupole secular perturbations from companion stars and
planets. The most famous manifestation is the LidovKozai effect, which turns circular orbits at high inclination into eccentric orbits at low inclination. I have
shown that the timescales for many such systems is in

34

Lacki

the tens of millions of years or less, often much less.
Jupiter, for example, would destroy a megaswarm at
Earth’s place in a few hundred thousand years. To prevent this from happening, the builders must actively
maintain the megaswarm – or remove the perturbers by
ejecting them from the system or destroying them outright. This raises the disturbing possibility that ETIs
might sacrifice all planetary systems in a galaxy, leaving
no foothold for life to recover if they do collapse. Stellar oblateness (particularly around early-type stars) and
general relativity are sources of precession, randomizing
already elliptical orbits, but they suppress eccentricity
growth. Massive swarms have their own internal LidovKozai-like perturbations. Encounters with passing stars
raise eccentricity, though it is slow even on geological
timescales except in the outermost regions of planetary
systems.
Radiation pressure from the host sun is another source
of perturbations, and it is fundamentally dispersive because it will affect elements in the same orbit differently
according to their compositions and rotations. Although
it can be used to partially levitate swarm elements and
reduce their collision speeds, stellar variability, including
starspots, will introduce randomness into the swarm element orbits. Transverse radiative forces resulting from
the Yarkovsky effect can be expected to be major source
of perturbations, although to a very uncertain degree.
Small elements might suppress the Yarkovsky effect if
they have a high thermal conductivity, evening out temperature differences; the perturbation time might then
be of order a few hundred thousand years.
The final result of a collisional cascade is to grind a
swarm down into microscopic particles. These artificial
grains are blown out into the general interstellar medium

if the host star is bright enough. Otherwise, the swarm
is ultimately reduced into ionized gas.
There remain significant issues for future work. Is the
configuration of circular orbits with gradually increasing
inclination the best for resisting cascades? Simulations
of cascades that take spatial configuration into account
might provide insight into how long the swarm really
lasts. A more realistic treatment of an evolving velocity
distribution for the swarm fragments, accounting for the
effects of dissipation, is warranted. The perturbations
can also be studied in more detail. How does radiation
pressure support affect the Lidov-Kozai and similar effects, and especially, how quickly does it introduce perturbations into realistic satellites? What if there are
multiple perturbing companions?
The destruction wrought by collisional cascades are a
general property of orbital swarms, no matter the scale.
The process has likely already begun in Earth orbit even
with our sub-Kardashev I efforts. Just as land on Earth
is finite, so too is the phase space of Earth orbit, the Solar System, the Galaxy, and the Universe, orders greater
it may be. If ETIs keep expanding, eventually they reach
these limits. They then must either coordinate and regulate these commons, work without cease to repair what
they have built, or let it all be ground to dust.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank the Breakthrough Listen program for their
support. Funding for Breakthrough Listen research is
sponsored by the Breakthrough Prize Foundation.24 I
am grateful to Jason Wright for reading the manuscript
and providing interesting discussions, especially about
the role of radiation pressure. I also thank the referee
for comments regarding dissipation in the cascade. In
addition, I acknowledge the use of NASA’s Astrophysics
Data System and arXiv for this research.

REFERENCES
Akeson, R., Beichman, C., Kervella, P., Fomalont, E., &
Benedict, G. F. 2021, AJ, 162, 14,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abfaff
Andama, G., Mah, J., & Bitsch, B. 2024, A&A, 683, A118,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202348899
Antognini, J. M. O. 2015, MNRAS, 452, 3610,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv1552
Arnold, L. F. A. 2005, ApJ, 627, 534, doi: 10.1086/430437
Aufdenberg, J. P., Mérand, A., Coudé du Foresto, V., et al.
2006, ApJ, 645, 664, doi: 10.1086/504149

Badhwar, G. D., & Anz-Meador, P. D. 1989, Earth Moon
and Planets, 45, 29, doi: 10.1007/BF00054659
Balbi, A., & Ćirković, M. M. 2021, AJ, 161, 222,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abec48
Barnes, S. A. 2007, ApJ, 669, 1167, doi: 10.1086/519295
Beaugé, C., Nesvorný, D., & Dones, L. 2006, AJ, 131, 2299,
doi: 10.1086/500048
Binney, J., & Tremaine, S. 1987, Galactic dynamics
(Princeton: Princeton University Press)

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades
Birkby, J. L., de Kok, R. J., Brogi, M., Schwarz, H., &
Snellen, I. A. G. 2017, AJ, 153, 138,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa5c87
Boley, A. C., & Byers, M. 2021, Scientific Reports, 11,
10642, doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-89909-7
Bottke, William F., J., Vokrouhlický, D., Rubincam, D. P.,
& Nesvorný, D. 2006, Annual Review of Earth and
Planetary Sciences, 34, 157,
doi: 10.1146/annurev.earth.34.031405.125154

Ginzburg, V. L., & Ptuskin, V. S. 1976, Reviews of Modern
Physics, 48, 161, doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.48.161
GRAVITY Collaboration, Abuter, R., Amorim, A., et al.
2020, A&A, 636, L5, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202037813
Greenberg, R., Wacker, J. F., Hartmann, W. K., &
Chapman, C. R. 1978, Icarus, 35, 1,
doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(78)90057-X
Hainaut, O. R., & Williams, A. P. 2020, A&A, 636, A121,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202037501

Bottke, W. F., Durda, D. D., Nesvorný, D., et al. 2005,
Icarus, 175, 111, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2004.10.026

Heggie, D. C., & Rasio, F. A. 1996, MNRAS, 282, 1064,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/282.3.1064

Bottke, W. F., Nesvorný, D., Vokrouhlický, D., &
Morbidelli, A. 2010, AJ, 139, 994,
doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/139/3/994

Heller, R., & Pudritz, R. E. 2016, Astrobiology, 16, 259,
doi: 10.1089/ast.2015.1358

Bradbury, R. J. 2000, Matrioshka Brains. http://citeseerx.
ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.692.6584
Bradbury, R. J., Cirkovic, M. M., & Dvorsky, G. 2011,
Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, 64, 156
Burns, J. A., Lamy, P. L., & Soter, S. 1979, Icarus, 40, 1,
doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(79)90050-2
Calzetti, D. 2001, PASP, 113, 1449, doi: 10.1086/324269
Carrigan, R. A. 2012, Acta Astronautica, 78, 121,
doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2011.12.002
Chennamangalam, J., Siemion, A. P. V., Lorimer, D. R., &
Werthimer, D. 2015, NewA, 34, 245,
doi: 10.1016/j.newast.2014.07.011
Chesley, S. R., Ostro, S. J., Vokrouhlický, D., et al. 2003,
Science, 302, 1739, doi: 10.1126/science.1091452
Chu, D. S., Do, T., Hees, A., et al. 2018, ApJ, 854, 12,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaa3eb
Criswell, D. R. 1985, in Interstellar migration and the
human experience, ed. B. R. Finney & E. M. Jones, 50
Davis, D. R., Ryan, E. V., & Farinella, P. 1994,
Planet. Space Sci., 42, 599,
doi: 10.1016/0032-0633(94)90035-3
Draine, B. T. 2011, Physics of the Interstellar and
Intergalactic Medium (Princeton: Princeton University
Press)
Dyson, F. J. 1960, Science, 131, 1667,
doi: 10.1126/science.131.3414.1667
Ford, E. B., Kozinsky, B., & Rasio, F. A. 2000, ApJ, 535,
385, doi: 10.1086/308815

35

Holman, M., Touma, J., & Tremaine, S. 1997, Nature, 386,
254, doi: 10.1038/386254a0
Hsiao, T. Y.-Y., Goto, T., Hashimoto, T., et al. 2021,
MNRAS, 506, 1723, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab1832
Hughes, A. M., Duchêne, G., & Matthews, B. C. 2018,
ARA&A, 56, 541,
doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-081817-052035
Huston, M., & Wright, J. 2022, ApJ, 924, 78,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac3421
Inoue, M., & Yokoo, H. 2011, Journal of the British
Interplanetary Society, 64, 59
Iorio, L. 2003, Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical
Astronomy, 86, 277, doi: 10.1023/A:1024223200686
—. 2008, Ap&SS, 318, 51, doi: 10.1007/s10509-008-9889-1
—. 2011, PhRvD, 84, 124001,
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.84.124001
—. 2019, MNRAS, 484, 4811, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz304
—. 2024, AJ, 167, 78, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad1833
Izmailov, I. S., Shakht, N. A., Polyakov, E. V., Gorshanov,
D. L., & Pogodin, M. A. 2021, Astrophysics, 64, 160,
doi: 10.1007/s10511-021-09677-0
Johnson, J. A., Aller, K. M., Howard, A. W., & Crepp,
J. R. 2010, PASP, 122, 905, doi: 10.1086/655775
Johnson, J. L., & Li, H. 2012, ApJ, 751, 81,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/751/2/81
Kardashev, N. S. 1964, Soviet Ast., 8, 217
Kardashev, N. S. 1985, in The Search for Extraterrestrial
Life: Recent Developments, ed. M. D. Papagiannis, Vol.
112, 497–504

Fujiwara, A., Cerroni, P., Davis, D. R., et al. 1989, in
Asteroids II, ed. R. P. Binzel, T. Gehrels, & M. S.
Matthews, 240–265

Katz, B., Dong, S., & Malhotra, R. 2011, PhRvL, 107,
181101, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.107.181101

Fujiwara, A., Kamimoto, G., & Tsukamoto, A. 1977,
Icarus, 31, 277, doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(77)90038-0

Kervella, P., Mérand, A., Pichon, B., et al. 2008, A&A, 488,
667, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:200810080

Ghezzi, L., Montet, B. T., & Johnson, J. A. 2018, ApJ, 860,
109, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aac37c

Kessler, D. J. 1981, Icarus, 48, 39,
doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(81)90151-2

Kawaler, S. D. 1987, PASP, 99, 1322, doi: 10.1086/132120

36
Kessler, D. J., & Cour-Palais, B. G. 1978, J. Geophys. Res.,
83, 2637, doi: 10.1029/JA083iA06p02637
Kipping, D. 2019, Research Notes of the American
Astronomical Society, 3, 91,
doi: 10.3847/2515-5172/ab2fdb
Kipping, D., Frank, A., & Scharf, C. 2020, International
Journal of Astrobiology, 19, 430,
doi: 10.1017/S1473550420000208
Kozai, Y. 1962, AJ, 67, 591, doi: 10.1086/108790
Kraft, R. P. 1967, ApJ, 150, 551, doi: 10.1086/149359
Lacki, B. C. 2016, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1604.07844.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1604.07844
—. 2019a, PASP, 131, 084401,
doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab1304
—. 2019b, PASP, 131, 024102,
doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aaf3df
—. 2020, ApJ, 905, 18, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abc1e3
—. 2024, ApJ, 966, 182, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad11f2
Laskar, J., Robutel, P., Joutel, F., et al. 2004, A&A, 428,
261, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20041335
Le May, S., Gehly, S., Carter, B. A., & Flegel, S. 2018,
Acta Astronautica, 151, 445,
doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2018.06.036
Lean, J. 1991, Reviews of Geophysics, 29, 505,
doi: 10.1029/91RG01895
Lewis, H. G., Swinerd, G. G., Newland, R. J., & Saunders,
A. 2009, Advances in Space Research, 44, 568,
doi: 10.1016/j.asr.2009.05.018
Lidov, M. L. 1962, Planet. Space Sci., 9, 719,
doi: 10.1016/0032-0633(62)90129-0
Lineweaver, C. H., Fenner, Y., & Gibson, B. K. 2004,
Science, 303, 59, doi: 10.1126/science.1092322
Liou, J. C., Hall, D. T., Krisko, P. H., & Opiela, J. N. 2004,
Advances in Space Research, 34, 981,
doi: 10.1016/j.asr.2003.02.027
Lithwick, Y., & Naoz, S. 2011, ApJ, 742, 94,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/742/2/94
Loeb, A. 2023, Research Notes of the American
Astronomical Society, 7, 43,
doi: 10.3847/2515-5172/acc10d
Lovell, A. C. B., Blackwell, M. R., D. E., & Wilson, R.
1962, QJRAS, 3, 100
Makarov, V. I., & Sivaraman, K. R. 1989, SoPh, 123, 367,
doi: 10.1007/BF00149112
McDowell, J. C. 2020, ApJL, 892, L36,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab8016
McKnight, D., Maher, R., & Nagl, L. 1995, International
Journal of Impact Engineering, 17, 547
McQuillan, A., Mazeh, T., & Aigrain, S. 2014, ApJS, 211,
24, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/211/2/24

Lacki
Mecheri, R., & Meftah, M. 2021, MNRAS, 506, 2671,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab1827
Montet, B. T., & Simon, J. D. 2016, ApJL, 830, L39,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8205/830/2/L39
Morrow, W. E., J., & MacLellan, D. C. 1961, AJ, 66, 107,
doi: 10.1086/108384
Naoz, S. 2016, ARA&A, 54, 441,
doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-081915-023315
Naoz, S., Farr, W. M., Lithwick, Y., Rasio, F. A., &
Teyssandier, J. 2013a, MNRAS, 431, 2155,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt302
Naoz, S., Kocsis, B., Loeb, A., & Yunes, N. 2013b, ApJ,
773, 187, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/773/2/187
Nesvorný, D., Alvarellos, J. L. A., Dones, L., & Levison,
H. F. 2003, AJ, 126, 398, doi: 10.1086/375461
Nesvorný, D., Beaugé, C., & Dones, L. 2004, AJ, 127, 1768,
doi: 10.1086/382099
Nesvorný, D., Jenniskens, P., Levison, H. F., et al. 2010,
ApJ, 713, 816, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/713/2/816
Nielsen, E. L., De Rosa, R. J., Macintosh, B., et al. 2019,
AJ, 158, 13, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab16e9
Olivieri, L., Smocovich, P. A., Giacomuzzo, C., &
Francesconi, A. 2022, International Journal of Impact
Engineering, 168, 104313
Osmanov, Z. 2016, International Journal of Astrobiology,
15, 127, doi: 10.1017/S1473550415000257
Pitjeva, E. V. 2005, Astronomy Letters, 31, 340,
doi: 10.1134/1.1922533
Raghavan, D., McAlister, H. A., Henry, T. J., et al. 2010,
ApJS, 190, 1, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/190/1/1
Renzetti, G. 2013, Journal of Astrophysics and Astronomy,
34, 341, doi: 10.1007/s12036-013-9186-4
Rose, C., & Wright, G. 2004, Nature, 431, 47,
doi: 10.1038/nature02884
Rossi, A. 2005, Serbian Astronomical Journal, 170, 1,
doi: 10.2298/SAJ0570001R
Rossi, A., Cordelli, A., Farinella, P., & Anselmo, L. 1994,
J. Geophys. Res., 99, 23195, doi: 10.1029/94JE02320
Sallmen, S., Korpela, E. J., & Crawford-Taylor, K. 2019,
AJ, 158, 258, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab5300
Sandage, A., & Kowal, C. 1963, Science, 141, 797,
doi: 10.1126/science.141.3583.797
Schimmerohn, M., Matura, P., Watson, E., et al. 2021,
Acta Astronautica, 178, 265,
doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2020.09.014
Schneider, J., Dedieu, C., Le Sidaner, P., Savalle, R., &
Zolotukhin, I. 2011, A&A, 532, A79,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201116713
Scoggins, M. T., & Kipping, D. 2023, MNRAS, 523, 3251,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad1617

Megastructures and Collisional Cascades
Semiz, İ., & Oğur, S. 2015, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1503.04376, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1503.04376
Shapiro, I. I. 1966, Science, 154, 1445,
doi: 10.1126/science.154.3755.1445
Sheikh, S. Z. 2020, International Journal of Astrobiology,
19, 237, doi: 10.1017/S1473550419000284
Socas-Navarro, H. 2018, ApJ, 855, 110,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaae66
Solanki, S. K. 2003, A&A Rv, 11, 153,
doi: 10.1007/s00159-003-0018-4
Spiegel, D. S., Raymond, S. N., Dressing, C. D., Scharf,
C. A., & Mitchell, J. L. 2010, ApJ, 721, 1308,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/721/2/1308
Spurzem, R., Giersz, M., Heggie, D. C., & Lin, D. N. C.
2009, ApJ, 697, 458, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/697/1/458
Statler, T. S. 2009, Icarus, 202, 502,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2009.03.003
Stern, S. A., & Durda, D. D. 2000, Icarus, 143, 360,
doi: 10.1006/icar.1999.6263
Suárez Mascareño, A., Faria, J. P., Figueira, P., et al. 2020,
A&A, 639, A77, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202037745
Suazo, M., Zackrisson, E., Mahto, P. K., et al. 2024,
MNRAS, 531, 695, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae1186
Suazo, M., Zackrisson, E., Wright, J. T., Korn, A. J., &
Huston, M. 2022, MNRAS, 512, 2988,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac280
Talent, D. L. 1992, Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, 29,
508, doi: 10.2514/3.25493
Tokovinin, A. 2014, AJ, 147, 86,
doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/147/4/86
Torres, G., Claret, A., Pavlovski, K., & Dotter, A. 2015,
ApJ, 807, 26, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/807/1/26
van Belle, G. T. 2012, A&A Rv, 20, 51,
doi: 10.1007/s00159-012-0051-2

37

van Belle, G. T., Ciardi, D. R., Thompson, R. R., Akeson,
R. L., & Lada, E. A. 2001, ApJ, 559, 1155,
doi: 10.1086/322340
Vokrouhlický, D., Farinella, P., & Bottke, W. F. 2000,
Icarus, 148, 147, doi: 10.1006/icar.2000.6468
Wang, L., & Stark, J. P. W. 1999, Journal of Spacecraft
and Rockets, 36, 114, doi: 10.2514/2.3423
Wells, R., Poppenhaeger, K., Watson, C. A., & Heller, R.
2018, MNRAS, 473, 345, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx2077
Winters, J. G., Henry, T. J., Jao, W.-C., et al. 2019, AJ,
157, 216, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab05dc
Wright, J. T. 2020, Serbian Astronomical Journal, 200, 1,
doi: 10.2298/SAJ2000001W
—. 2023, ApJ, 956, 34, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acf44f
Wright, J. T., Cartier, K. M. S., Zhao, M., Jontof-Hutter,
D., & Ford, E. B. 2016, ApJ, 816, 17,
doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/816/1/17
Wright, J. T., Mullan, B., Sigurdsson, S., & Povich, M. S.
2014, ApJ, 792, 26, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/792/1/26
Wyatt, M. C. 2008, ARA&A, 46, 339,
doi: 10.1146/annurev.astro.45.051806.110525
Wyatt, M. C., & Dent, W. R. F. 2002, MNRAS, 334, 589,
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2002.05533.x
Wyatt, M. C., Dermott, S. F., Telesco, C. M., et al. 1999,
ApJ, 527, 918, doi: 10.1086/308093
Young, L. M., Scott, N., Serra, P., et al. 2014, MNRAS,
444, 3408, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt2474
Zackrisson, E., Calissendorff, P., González, J., et al. 2016,
ApJ, 833, 214, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/833/2/214
Zackrisson, E., Korn, A. J., Wehrhahn, A., & Reiter, J.
2018, ApJ, 862, 21, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aac386
Zahn, J. P., Ranc, C., & Morel, P. 2010, A&A, 517, A7,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200913817

