Draft version October 8, 2020
Typeset using LATEX default style in AASTeX62

Dyson Spheres
Jason T. Wright1

arXiv:2006.16734v3 [astro-ph.EP] 7 Oct 2020

1 Department of Astronomy & Astrophysics and

Center for Exoplanets and Habitable Worlds
and Penn State Extraterrestrial Intelligence Center
525 Davey Laboratory
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, 16802, USA

Submitted to and accepted by the Serbian Astronomical Journal
ABSTRACT
I review the origins and development of the idea of Dyson spheres, their purpose, their engineering,
and their detectability. I explicate the ways in which the popular imagining of them as monolithic
objects would make them dynamically unstable under gravity and radiation pressure, and mechanically
unstable to buckling. I develop a model for the radiative coupling between a star and large amounts
of material orbiting it, and connect the observational features of a star plus Dyson sphere system to
the gross radiative properties of the sphere itself. I discuss the still-unexplored problem of the effects
of radiative feedback on the central star’s structure and luminosity. Finally, I discuss the optimal sizes
of Dyson spheres under various assumptions about their purpose as sources of low-entropy emission,
dissipative work, or computation.
1. INTRODUCTION

1.1. Dyson Spheres
The physics and observational consequences of Dyson spheres were first described by their eponym Dyson (1960a) at
the dawn of modern SETI. Dyson’s original suggestion was quite general, pointing out that the exponential growth of
an extraterrestrial species’ energy supply could lead it to occupy “an artificial biosphere which completely surrounds
its parent star.” He argued that the waste heat of the “energy metabolism” of this extraterrestrial technology would
likely be detectable at 10µ, and that a search of the sky at mid-infrared wavelengths for point sources of such emission
would be worthwhile.
In response to letters to the editor reacting to his work, Dyson (1960b) clarified that 1) he had not envisioned
a monolithic shell or ring—which he wrote would be “mechanically impossible”—but rather a “loose collection or
swarm of objects traveling on independent orbits around the star;” 2) that his description of infrared emission was
independent of the specifics of how or why such a swarm might be constructed; and that 3) detection of infrared excess
around nearby stars “would not by itself imply that extraterrestrial intelligence had been found,” but would be an
important discovery regardless of its cause.
Dyson (1966) later elaborated on the engineering behind the idea, showing there is no physical barrier to building
large rigid structures in space (where “large” was up to 106 km), that such structures can be very light, and that
planets can (in principle) be deconstructed for their material in sufficient qunatities to build a sphere of useful thickness
(of order meters). He also outlined how such structures would be discovered: first by their 3-10µ excess consistent with
being a protostar,1 then diagnosed as artificial via “irregular light variations due to starlight shining through chinks
in the curtain, and for stray electromagnetic fields and radio noise produced by large-scale electrical operations.”
Corresponding author: Jason Wright
astrowright@gmail.com
1 “When such objects are found, I hope nobody will rush to the newspapers with claims that we have found something artificial. I say
only that if highly expanded technologies exist, they are to be found among such objects. . . Certainly one will not claim any object to be
artificial unless it appears pathological in at least two independent modes of observation.” (Dyson 1966)

2

Jason T. Wright

But unlike the radio program envisioned by Cocconi & Morrison (1959) and executed by Drake (1961) in 1960,
searches for technology along the lines of Dyson’s suggestion are still in their infancy, and indeed the observational
consequences of such technology are still only roughly understood. Bradbury (2001) presents a good analysis of the
history of the idea, the confusion in the literature regarding the shape and purpose of the technology in Dyson’s original
suggestion, and an extensive catalog of the literature on the subject. In particular, he examines the assumptions that
the sphere would necessarily constitute a habitat and be a true sphere, and concludes that energy harvesting alone
would be a sufficient function to justify searches for such technology, a philosophy endorsed and amplified by Wright
et al. (2014b).
Wright et al. (2014b) and Teodorani (2014) also endorsed Dyson’s perspective that searches for Dyson spheres would
be unlikely by themselves to discover conclusive proof of extraterrestrial technology, but emphasized that the anomalies
discovered would be good targets for more dispositive forms of SETI (such as searches for radio or laser communication),
allowing those searches to be more focused. Indeed, Dyson’s approach to SETI has been generalized to include searches
for most other kinds of extraterrestrial technology exclusive of deliberate communicative transmissions, in what has
been called “Dysonian SETI” by Bradbury et al. (2011) (and “artifact SETI” by others, see also Wright 2018; Wright
et al. 2018).
The first use of the term “Dyson sphere” in the literature is apparently due to Kardashev (1964), but since then
the term has been occasionally reserved for the idea of a complete or nearly complete monolithic shell, with other
configurations getting other names (such as a “Dyson swarm”). Rather than fuss over correct and precise terms
for what are, after all, entirely hypothetical objects, in this article we will use the well-known term “Dyson sphere”
generically, to refer to any collection of artificial material around a star that produces significant amounts of waste
heat, regardless of its specific geometry or purpose. This preserves the best known term for such material in a manner
more or less consistent with Dyson’s original suggestion. That said, in what follows we will often implicitly invoke
spherical symmetry, a common orbital radius, and common physical properties of the swarm components (at least
roughly). Nonetheless, much of the analysis will extend to other configurations, as well, and so should still be useful
as a way to guide observational searches for them.
1.2. Prior Literature: Theory
The concept of a Dyson sphere in popular culture actually predates Dyson (1960a): Dyson credits the novel Star
Maker (Stapledon 1937) with the original idea. Indeed, in science fiction the idea usually manifests not as a swarm of
small objects but as a single object of planet size or larger (a “megastructure”). Perhaps the most famous appearance
of a Dyson sphere in popular culture is in the Star Trek: The Next Generation television episode “Relics,” which depicts
a monolithic sphere with an entire biosphere on its inside surface (which makes sense only because artificial gravity is
ubiquitous technology in the Star Trek universe). Megastructures of other configurations are also common in popular
culture, for instance in House of Suns (Reynolds 2008) and perhaps most famously in the Ringworld series of novels
(Niven 1970), where the megastructure is a single, gigantic, spinning ring of impossibly strong material centered on a
star, with the biosphere held on the interior surface by centrifugal forces.
A general theory of categorizing spacefaring species by their energy use was presented by Kardashev (1964), who
described2 “Type ii” “civilizations” as those capable of commanding the entire energy output of their star. His approach
was general, but many other analyses of the gravitational, radiative, and thermodynamic properties of Dyson spheres
invoke specific geometries, purposes, energy generation schemes, or other activities for the Dyson spheres. Some
examples are studies of the gravitational dynamics of monolithic rings around stars (McInnes 2003; Rippert 2014,
and references therein), the Harrop-Dyson satellite that exploits solar wind particles instead of photons (Harrop &
Schulze-Makuch 2010), spheres with an inside surface temperature near 300K (Badescu 1995), much hotter and smaller
Dyson spheres that radiate in the optical (Osmanov & Berezhiani 2018), analyses of very cold Dyson spheres (Lacki
2016), and partial shells used for stellar propulsion or energy extraction (Badescu & Cathcart 2000, 2006). Studies
have also examined Dyson spheres around white dwarfs (Semiz & Oğur 2015), neutron stars (Osmanov 2016), black
holes (Inoue & Yokoo 2011; Opatrný et al. 2017), and X-ray binaries (Imara & Di Stefano 2018).
2 The scale has been extended beyond Kardashev’s three types by many authors (e.g. Gray (2020)), with extensions to noninteger
types usually referencing Sagan (1973a) who suggested that the types be separated by factors of 1010 and normalized such that a Type 1
civilization consumes 1016 W. Such an extension necessitates the use of Arabic numerals instead of Kardashev’s Roman numerals, which
is appropriate. See Wright et al. (2014a) and references therein, but note two inconsistencies in that work: in their Equation (1) the power
is normalized by 10 MW, but most or all other authors (including Sagan) normalize to 1 MW, and the proper citation is Sagan (1973a),
not Sagan (1973b).

Dyson Spheres

3

There are many extensions of Dyson’s idea that are difficult to cite, either because they appear as variations on a
theme in science fiction or because their most formal description is in the gray literature. Two particularly notable
examples of the latter are the discussions in Anders Sandberg’s “Dyson Sphere FAQ”3 and Robert J. Bradbury’s
description of “Matrioshka Brains.”4 The former is a nice overview of the idea of Dyson spheres, and includes many of
the topics discussed in this paper. It also includes, for instance, a discussion of how the outside of a monolithic Dyson
sphere could be constructed to have Earth-like temperature and surface gravity, so provide a literal living surface (a
possibility also discussed in Wright et al. 2014b, footnote 7). “Matrioshka brains” are a specific suggestion of how a
set of nested Dyson spheres would be used to maximize the use of a star’s luminosity to perform calculations.
A technological species that could build a Dyson sphere could also presumably spread to nearby star systems. If
Dyson spheres are a generic phenomenon of such spacefaring life, then one might expect a galaxy with one Dyson
sphere to have many more. Such a species that enshrouded all of its galaxy’s stars would be “Type iii” on Kardashev’s
scale, although that term today is often used to refer to galaxy-wide species that fall somewhat short of that limit.
Wright et al. (2014b) and Wright et al. (2014a) provide a discussion of the possibility of galaxies filled with Dyson
spheres and their observable consequences in broad terms. Lacki (2019) explored these consequences under a variety of more specific scenarios, and described the optical properties of galaxies in which specific masses of stars are
preferentially “cloaked.”
Interestingly, there is little or no discussion in the literature of the possibility of directly imaging a Dyson sphere. If
such a sphere were sufficiently close to earth, it might be easily resolved at microwave, infrared, or optical wavelengths:
a 1 au sphere around the closest stars to the Sun would subtend nearly an arcsecond on the sky. Indeed, we now have
many images of protoplanetary and debris disks in reflected and emitted light, and such methods should be sensitive
to Dyson spheres, as well.
1.3. Prior Literature: Observations
Though the technical feasibility of searches for Dyson spheres was noted early on (Dyson 1960a; Sagan & Walker
1966), thorough surveys could not begin in earnest until the launch of IRAS, which provided the first mid-infrared
survey of the sky with the aereal coverage and sensitivity necessary for such work. Slysh (1985) describes the first
interpretations of the dataset, which confirmed Dyson’s prediction: there would be many bright infrared Galactic
sources, and that the primary difficulty would not be detecting such sources but distinguishing them from natural
sources.
Analysis of this data set proceeded slowly over the next 25 years. Timofeev et al. (2000) conducted a cursory search
identifying a few objects with blackbody-like SEDs among the IRAS point sources. Jugaku & Nishimura (2004) used
the results of IRAS and near-infrared measurements to search for Dyson spheres, finding no good candidates among
384 nearby solar-type stars. Carrigan (2009) used the spectroscopic information from IRAS to examine sources across
the sky for potential Dyson spheres, concluding that all four good candidates were likely distant red giants.
Teodorani (2014) outlined a more modern approach to the problem, using Spitzer as a more sensitive probe for
infrared excesses and, following the suggestion of Arnold (2005), Kepler to look for transiting megastructures. Wright
et al. (2014a) describe a program using the WISE all sky survey to search for Dyson spheres (and also other galaxies
endemic with them), including a parameterization of their properties in terms of observables (the “AGENT” formalism
after its five parameters, see Section 3.2). Wright et al. (2016) outlined a general set of photometric anomalies in the
light curves of stars that would be indicative of transiting megastructures, and identified one particular case study
illustrative of the concept (“Boyajian’s Star”, Boyajian et al. 2016; Wright & Sigurdsson 2016, and references therein).
Wright et al. (2014a) pointed out that unless virtually no starlight escapes a Dyson sphere, the flux decrement from
blocked starlight is many times smaller than the infrared excess from the Dyson sphere’s waste heat. Nonetheless,
Zackrisson et al. (2015) recommended searching first not for infrared excesses, but for optically underluminous stars
(i.e. stars with disparate trigonometric and spectroscopic parallaxes), and then following up with sensitive infrared
measurements to search for the “missing” luminosity. Both Wright et al. and Zackrisson et al. emphasized the value
of Gaia as a way to greatly improve search capabilities for Dyson spheres, since they would help distinguish Galactic
sources (i.e. stars) from the far more ubiquitous extragalactic infrared sources (such as AGN); and since they would
allow for underluminous stars to be more precisely identified.
3 https://web.archive.org/web/20190616230802/https://www.aleph.se/Nada/dysonFAQ.html
4 https://web.archive.org/web/20090223093348/http://aeiveos.com:8080/∼bradbury/MatrioshkaBrains/index.html and

https://web.archive.org/web/20080820083427/http://www.aeiveos.com:8080/∼bradbury/JupiterBrains/index.html

4

Jason T. Wright

The first observational search for galaxy-wide populations of Dyson spheres was that of Annis (1999a), who examined
a sample of over 100 galaxies of similar distance to search for any that were optically underluminous, consistent with a
significant amount of starlight blocked by Dyson spheres. Griffith et al. (2015) used the WISE all-sky survey to search
for resolved sources of extended infrared emission to search for populations of Dyson spheres by their waste heat, and
Lacki (2016) used Planck data to put upper limits on galaxies with all of their starlight being reprocessed to very low
temperatures. Zackrisson et al. (2015) combined these strategies, searching for optically underluminous galaxies and
following up with infrared measurements to identify the whether “missing” luminosity was being emitted there. None
of these searches resulted in particularly good candidates for Type iii species.
1.4. Purpose and Plan
This article serves many functions. Much of the literature on Dyson spheres is scattered across journals spanning
many disciplines. Sections 1.2 and 1.3 thus serve as a brief overview of some of that literature, including most of the
observational work done to date.
Section 2 examines the (non-)stability of a monolithic sphere around a star. Section 3 develops a general framework
for analyzing the radiative interactions between the star and Dyson sphere, and Section 3.1 derives expressions for the
special but illustrative case of a spherical shell of material. Section 3.2 connects these parameters to the observable
properties of the star plus Dyson sphere, including a particular example that illustrates the effects of stellar feedback
on the star. Section 3.4 discusses the still unaddressed problem of the effects of a Dyson sphere on a star’s internal
structure, and Section 4 discusses the maximum efficiency of a Dyson sphere and its optimum size and exterior
temperature.
2. STABILITY OF A MONOLITHIC DYSON SPHERE

It is often asserted, as by Dyson (1960b), for instance, that monolithic Dyson spheres are “impossible” or “unstable,”
but rarely is this carefully explained. Here we illustrate three ways in which they would not be stable.
2.1. Gravitational non-stability
The first illustration of the non-stability of a monolithic Dyson sphere can be deduced from Gauss’s Law (as described,
for instance, by Harrop & Schulze-Makuch 2010). Consider first the potential inside of a uniform, empty sphere whose
material exerts a force following a radial inverse square law:
kr̂
F~ = 2
r

(1)

for instance because it is a charged insulator (in which case the electric field generated by a bit of surface with
~ = qr̂/r2 ) or massive (in which case the gravitational field generated by a bit of surface with mass m is
charge q is E
~g = −Gmr̂/r2 ).
It is an elementary exercise to show that Gauss’s Law implies that inside the sphere there is zero field, and outside
the sphere can be treated as a point source. Since it does not exert any force on particles inside itself, by Newton’s
First Law particles inside the sphere exert no force on it.
This line of reasoning can appear somewhat abstract, and indeed it is not immediately obvious how well the result
should generalize, for instance to a conducting sphere with induced charge generated by in interior point charge,
to other closed shapes, or to surfaces intercepting interior sources of radiation. Indeed, examining the geometry of
Osmanov & Berezhiani (2018) shown in Figure 1, for 0 > x > R it is not at all obvious that the combined force of the
portion of the sphere to the right of point S exactly cancels the force on that point from the other parts of the sphere.
And so as a didactic exercise, below I derive this result without invoking general theorems about vector fields.
The distance r of arbitrary point on the sphere B from the particle at point S is
p
r = R2 + x2 − 2xR cos ϕ
(2)
so, anticipating a change of variables we will perform later
rdr = xR sin ϕdϕ

(3)

The area of an infintessimal circular strip of the surface containing B and centered on the x-axis can be written in
terms of either dϕ or dr as
2πRrdr
dA = 2πR2 sin ϕdϕ =
(4)
x

Dyson Spheres

5

Figure 1. Figure after Osmanov & Berezhiani (2018) illustrating the geometry of a particle within a spherical shell. The radius
R sphere is centered on O, with the particle at S a distance x from O along the x axis, and a distance r from arbitrary point
B on the sphere. The circular strip having constant distance r from the particle and area dA is indicated by dashed lines.

and it feels a force from particle S in the x direction equal to
CdA
(5)
dFx = − 2 cos θ
r
where C depends on the nature of the force. By symmetry, the force in the y and z directions must be zero. Dropping
a perpendicular onto the radius containing OS from B and using Equation (2) gives
R 2 − r 2 − x2
(6)
2x
Then, we have for gravity or similar forces where C is independent of the other variables, for all |x| < R (and expressing
things both in dϕ and dr to illustrate the change of variable):
Z π
Z
πCR R+x R2 − x2 − r2
R cos ϕ − x
sin
ϕdϕ
=
−
Fx = −2πCR2
dr = 0
(7)
3
2
2
x2 R−x
r2
0 (R + x − 2xR cos ϕ) 2
r cos θ = R cos ϕ − x =

Thus, in the case of gravity a perfectly spherical and rigid sphere experiences no net force from a star interior to it,
regardless of whether it is centered (but, as we will see, it will experience utterly destructive differential forces).
This means that the centers of mass of the sphere and star are gravitationally uncoupled, and so there is no reason
for the sphere to stay centered on the star—we can say it is neutrally stable in that it is in an equilibrium configuration
that is neither stable nor unstable.
Practically, the non-stability of a monolithic Dyson sphere means that it would require active station keeping to
prevent any perturbative forces from causing it to drift into the star. The fact that it was only the symmetry of the
sphere that led to this result also means that deviations from sphericity would result in an unstable configuration.5
2.2. Radiation pressure non-stability
If a sphere absorbs light from the central star, then radiation pressure acts as a force on any area element dA with
a different force law, falling as r−2 as with gravity or electromagnetism, but with an additional cos γ term to account
for the projected area of the area element intercepting the photons. We then have the force on the sphere in the x-axis
from radiation pressure as:6
Z π 2
R
Fx = −2πC 0
cos γ cos θ sin ϕdϕ
(8)
2
0 r
5 For instance, if one corrugates part of the sphere, that patch will effectively have higher surface mass density than the other parts, and
so feel a stronger force towards the star and thus break the symmetry that leads to zero force. Since the force will increase as the patch
approaches the star, the configuration is locally unstable.
6 Osmanov & Berezhiani (2018) claim that this integral evaluates to a negative value, and that radiation pressure from the star will thus
stabilize the sphere, but this is incorrect (Z. Osmanov, private communication and Osmanov & Berezhiani 2019).

6

Jason T. Wright

where C 0 is independent of the other variables.
From Equations (3) and (6) we can change the variable of integration to θ
sin θdθ
R
sin ϕdϕ =
2
r
x cos θ + r

(9)

and dropping a perpendicular from O onto the line containing SB gives
x cos θ + r = R cos γ
so we have
Fx = −2πC 0

(10)

Z π
cos θ sin θdθ = 0

(11)

0

and so even with the cos γ term, the sphere still feels no net force.
Remarkably, this result extends to any shape completely surrounding the star. To see this result another way,
consider that by symmetry the ensemble of emitted stellar photons has zero momentum, and so any shape that
absorbs all of them will not gain any momentum from them. Internal reflections or re-emission of these photons also
will have no effect: because the photons are contained within the Dyson sphere they will inevitably strike another part
of the Dyson sphere and deposit their momentum there. Indeed, the reflected photons as an ensemble can be thought
of as purely internal thrust by the Dyson sphere against itself, and since such purely internal forces cannot change the
center of mass of an object, the Dyson sphere cannot gain any net motion from this action and it remains neutrally
stable to radiation pressure, no matter its shape.7
This exercise does reveal an interesting caveat, however: allowing stellar photons to escape from the Dyson sphere
(or be preferentially re-emitted from the outside surface farther from the star) could provide thrust that would recenter
the Dyson sphere on the star. Indeed, Shkadov (1987) and Badescu & Cathcart (2006) describe “stellar engines” where
exactly this action allows a partial sphere to not only keep itself centered, but to act as a gravitational tug and alter
the trajectory of a star through the Galaxy.
2.3. Lifetime of Thrust Stabilization
Active station keeping via thrust requires energy and propellant mass. Osmanov (2016) considered the energy
requirements to stabilize a ring around a pulsar but here we consider the general case.
Because it is not dynamically stable, a monolithic Dyson sphere at equilibrium must be held there against the
perturbative forces that would displace it. For scale, we will consider a monolithic Dyson sphere of arbitrary shape
(so, perhaps a ring), mass M , of characteristic radius R from the star. The Dyson sphere suffers perturbative forces
due to other masses mp at closest approach distance r from the Dyson sphere (for instance, a distant ice giant planet
in the system).
These accelerations will cause the Dyson sphere to distort and suffer differential acceleration with respect to the star
in complex ways that depend on the geometry of the problem. To a rough order of magnitude, we can calculate the
force to be balanced simply as
GM mp
(12)
r2
with the caveat that the true force may be much smaller for many geometries, and r may vary greatly across the
different parts of the Dyson sphere. The Dyson sphere can cancel these accelerations by using some of its mass as
thrust, expelled at velocity v, producing a force on the Dyson sphere
Fpert =

F = Ṁ v

(13)

1
Ṁ v 2
2

(14)

The power P used to generate this thrust is
P =

7 Indeed, to the degree that this radiation is anisotropic (for instance from stellar flares or hot spots) the effect of this radiation is to
destabilize the sphere.

Dyson Spheres
and so the mass loss rate of the Dyson sphere is

7

F2
2P

(15)

M
2P M
=
F2
Ṁ

(16)

Ṁ =
meaning that the Dyson sphere will have a lifetime of order
τlife =

Equating this to the perturbative forces of other masses in the system via F = Fpert yields



−1 
−2
2P r4
P  r 4 M
mp
τlife =
=
200 yr
M G2 m2p
L
au
MX
MX

(17)

where MX is the mass of Jupiter and where we expect that P will be some (potentially very small) fraction of the
total output of the star. Thus, for a monolithic sphere of mass MX to be stable for timescales long enough for it to be
discovered (say, τlife > 107 yr) there can be no perturbers of more than roughly 10−2 MX within 1 au, and no gas giant
planets within 10 au. It is worth reiterating that this estimate (and its scalings with r and R) is extremely sensitive
to the assumed geometry of the problem.
If there are no planets in the system because they were used to construct the Dyson sphere, then it seems stability
via starlight-powered thrust could be maintained with sufficient active control for cosmic timescales. Alternatively,
the Dyson sphere might use mass from the star as fuel to stabilize itself.
2.4. Mechanical Instability
As asserted by Dyson (1960b) and shown quantitatively by Papagiannis (1985), the gravitational forces acting on a
Dyson sphere are so extreme as to render the possibility of a real, rigid Dyson sphere supported by its own material
strength dubious.
To see the difficulty, consider why an area element dA does not accelerate towards the star under the force of
gravity. In the case of a free-floating object, one can invoke centrifugal force from an orbit, but this is not possible
for a monolithic sphere containing the star (even for a rotating sphere, the poles will have zero centrifugal force, see
Covington 1991).
Instead, all of the area elements feel the same radial force, which would naturally cause the sphere to shrink and
therefore generate lateral, compressive forces between the area elements. Because of the curvature of the sphere, there
is a small outward component of this compression force, which increases as the sphere shrinks until it is sufficiently
large to counteract the star’s gravity, and the sphere achieves equilibrium. In this formal sense, monolithic spheres
thus appear mechanically stable.
Real structures are not infinitely rigid, however, and will deform if the forces on them exceed their elastic strength.
For perfect spheres subject to uniform external pressure, collapse can occur for two reasons: when the material’s yield
strength σy is exceeded because the external pressure exceeds
Pcrit,y = 2σy

∆R
R

(18)

where ∆R is the thickness of the sphere, or when buckling occurs above a critical pressure, given to within a cofactor
of order unity by

2
∆R
Pcrit,b ≈ E
(19)
R
where E is the elastic (Young) modulus (Papagiannis 1985; Pan & Cui 2010). For monolithic Dyson spheres, we
(presumably) are in the thin regime so Equation (19) (the elastic buckling condition) controls. The force on a Dyson
sphere per unit area from the star’s gravity is given by
Pgrav =

GM∗ ρ∆R
R2

(20)

where ρ is the density of the sphere material. This means that to avoid catastrophic buckling the sphere material must
have an elastic modulus
GM∗ ρ
E&
(21)
∆R

8

Jason T. Wright

independent of the radius of the sphere. Plugging in some characteristic values yields
3

GM (1g/cm )
≈ 1013 GPa
(22)
10m
which exceeds the elastic modulus of the strongest known material, carbyne, by nine orders of magnitude. Indeed,
since E is proportional to the strength of the atomic bonds of the material, and since the carbon-carbon bond is the
strongest in nature8 it appears impossible for a Dyson sphere of any size to support itself via elastic forces against
gravity.
One tempting solution that fails is to thicken the sphere and lower its density, perhaps to 100 km and 0.1 g/cc,
bringing the necessary strength of the material within a mere four orders of magnitude of the carbon-carbon bond.
But for R = 1 au this would give the sphere a total mass of ∼ 1.4M , and so the sphere’s self-gravity would then
become the dominant source of buckling and no further thickening would help. Adding struts or other internal bolsters
is also no help, because the struts will suffer the same difficulties as the sphere itself.
These problems are exacerbated by the requirement that the sphere be perfectly uniform and spherical—any defects
or deviations from sphericity will create additional differential forces on the sphere. Such deviations could be large
because there is a significant travel time for pressure waves around the sphere—even light takes almost an hour to
travel around a circle with radius 1 au. The means that perturbations to the sphere will persist for times of order
hours before they can be corrected via elastic forces.
One could imagine buttressing the sphere in some manner other than using high-strength material, perhaps with
extremely strong magnetic fields that prevent the sphere from deforming, or by relieving the gravitational forces with
electrostatic forces by charging the central star and sphere. While such a monolithic sphere might not be literally
impossible to build, such a complex and fragile feat of engineering offers no obvious mechanical advantages over
Dyson’s original suggestion of a swarm of material.
A better solution is to make the sphere thinner, and so lessen the forces on the sphere via radiation pressure. For
instance, the ratio of radiation forces to gravitational forces β ∼ 1 when the surface mass density of a patch of material
normal to the Sun is
L
2
σ≈
≈ 0.8 g/m
(23)
4πGcM
which is comparable to the thinnest gold leaf. A monolithic Dyson sphere of this surface density is thus not mechanically
unstable, although it is still dynamically neutral and it is not obvious what the utility of such a thin sphere would be
(but see Sections 4.6 & 4.7). This surface density also serves as a lower limit on material bound by gravity to a star.
Alternatively, one might imagine concentric spinning rings which use centrifugal forces to balance the otherwise
destructive mechanical forces, but these rings would then essentially be a connected swarm of material orbiting the
star in common orbits, and so need not be a monolith at all.
E&

3. RADIATIVE FEEDBACK AND OBSERVABLE CONSEQUENCES OF A DYSON SPHERE

Having dispensed with the canard of a monolithic sphere, we now turn to the radiative interactions between a Dyson
sphere and the central star, with a rough mental model along the lines of Dyson’s original conception (i.e. a swarm of
orbiting material).
Badescu (1995) presents the thermodynamics of Dyson spheres, including the feedback on the star, under certain
restrictions on the useful work performed by the Dyson sphere, the amount of starlight allowed to escape, and the
temperature of the Dyson sphere. Here, we perform a more general analysis for more arbitrary kinds of Dyson spheres,
although we will not consider Dyson spheres with strong angular asymmetries (e.g. Shkadov thrusters, Shkadov 1987).
We are interested in the ultimate fate of stellar photons emitted from the star (∗) and thermal photons emitted by
the Dyson sphere (s). We will denote the fraction of stellar photons that are ultimately absorbed by the star f∗,∗
and those absorbed by the Dyson sphere f∗,s . Similarly, we will denote the fraction of thermal photons emitted by
the Dyson sphere and absorbed by the star fs,∗ and those absorbed by the Dyson sphere fs,s . Those photons that
ultimately escape the system we denote f∗,e and fs,e .
These and the quantities below represent appropriate averages over wavelength. We will distinguish between “thermal” photons emitted by the Dyson sphere and “stellar” photons or “starlight” by using a subscript t for the former.
8 Invoking nuclear material as a building block only makes things worse: the density of such material is 1014 times higher, but its Young
modulus is “only” of order 108 GPa (Scheuer 1981), and so it is nineteen orders of magnitude too weak.

Dyson Spheres
Symbol
A
a
at
α
Bλ
γ
d
e
eext
et

ζ
η
fs,∗ , fs,s , fs,e
f∗,∗ , f∗,s , f∗,e
fint,e
L
Lint
Ls
L̃
n
ν
r
R
R∗
S
s
σ
t
tt
Teff
T∗
Te
Tmin
Φλ

9

Definition (quantity is dimensionless unless otherwise specified in italics)
Area of the outer surface of the Dyson sphere
Bond Albedo of inner surface of the Dyson sphere to starlight
Bond Albedo of inner surface of the Dyson sphere to thermal emission from the Dyson sphere
Fraction of L̃ that does not escape the system as starlight, due to the Dyson sphere
The Planck function, expressed as a specific intensity or spectral radiance
Fraction of L̃ ultimately emitted and lost to space as thermal luminosity by the Dyson sphere
Distance to the Dyson sphere from Earth
Absorptivity of inner surface of the Dyson sphere to starlight
Emissivity of the outer surface to thermal emission
Absorptivity of inner surface of the Dyson sphere to thermal emission from the Dyson sphere
Energy generated by the Dyson sphere by means other than starlight collection, expressed as a fraction of L̃
Fraction of thermal luminosity of the Dyson sphere emitted by the interior surface
Thermodynamic efficiency
Fraction of thermal emission from the Dyson sphere absorbed by the star, absorbed by the Dyson sphere,
and lost to space
Fraction of starlight absorbed by the star, absorbed by the Dyson sphere, and lost to space
Fraction of thermal emission from the interior surface of the Dyson sphere lost to space
Total emergent power from the stellar surface
Total emergent power from the interior (star-facing) surface of the Dyson sphere.
Total luminosity of the Dyson sphere. The sum of the thermal emission from the interior and exterior
surfaces. Power
Luminosity of the star due to power generated in the stellar core. Power
Mean number of times a photon emitted from the interior of the Dyson sphere travels a chord across the
Dyson sphere
Fraction of L̃ used by the Dyson sphere to do useful, non-dissipative work, such as emission of low entropy
emission
Rate of computation of the Dyson sphere Calculations per second.
Radius of the Dyson sphere. Distance
Radius of the star. Distance
Entropy (has units of Boltzmann’s constant)
Probability a photon emitted by inner surface of the Dyson sphere does not immediately strike the star
Stefan-Boltzmann constant
Transmittance of the Dyson sphere to starlight
Transmittance of the Dyson sphere to thermal emission from the Dyson sphere
Effective temperature, defined as the temperature of the blackbody generating a given luminosity with a given
radiating area
Effective temperature of the star (used for brevity in Section 4)
Effective temperature of the exterior of the shell (used for brevity in Section 4)
Minimum temperature of the Dyson sphere, set by the interstellar radiation field
Specific flux or spectral irradiance of light received at Earth

Table 1. Definitions of some symbols used in this document in sections 3 and 4. Symbols in other sections may have different
definitions.

We will refer to the “luminosity” of an object in the usual astrophysical sense of total power, where the luminosity of
the Dyson sphere includes emission from both the interior and exterior surfaces.
Table 1 lists the symbols we will use for this section.
3.1. Special case of a spherical shell
3.1.1. The fate of a photon leaving the interior of the Dyson sphere

10

Jason T. Wright

Here, we consider the special case of the fate of photons emerging from a star of radius R∗ centered in a sphere with
radius R and Bond albedo a. The sphere transmits a fraction t of the starlight that reaches it, and has absorptivity e
such that
a+t+e=1

(24)

(where we have chosen the symbol e in anticipation of an application of Kirchhoff’s law later).
From the perspective of the interior surface of the sphere, the star subtends a solid angle 2π(1 − s), where
p
s = 1 − (R∗ /R)2

(25)

represents the probability that a photon emitted from or reflected by the interior of the sphere in a random direction
will not strike the star before it strikes the sphere again.9
This sphere is an approximate stand-in for any Dyson sphere, where t may represent directions with no orbiting
material. While our parameter s invokes a single orbital radius for the material around the star, the formalism can
likely be generalized for a swarm at a variety of distances by using some effective value for s.
We consider an ensemble of photons emitted by the interior of the sphere, a fraction s of which will immediately
strike the star, and the rest of which will reach the interior of the sphere again.
In the limit of purely specular reflection, a photon that misses the star and is reflected will necessarily miss the star
on the second trip across the sphere, and so all of the remaining 1 − s photons will continue to reflect until absorbed
or transmitted, with probability e and t, respectively each time they encounter the sphere. The expectation value n
for the number of times a photon in this ensemble makes a chord across the sphere is thus
n=

∞
X
i=0

ai =

1
1−a

(specular case) (26)

In the limit of purely Lambertian scattering, a photon has a probability of striking the star of (1 − s) per trip, so by
a similar calculation to above the expectation value n is
n=

∞
X
i=0

ai si =

1
1 − as

(diffuse case) (27)

One might approximate more general reflectors as a compromise between these two expressions for n.
3.1.2. Fate of Stellar Photons
The fate of stellar photons depends on the nature of the reflection from the inside of the sphere, given by the Bond
albedo a.
In the case of specular reflection, by symmetry any stellar photon reflected by the sphere will return to the star,
and so the fraction of starlight absorbed by the sphere is simply f∗,s,spec = e, and the fraction returned to the star is
f∗,∗,spec = a. A fraction f∗,e,spec = t therefore escapes.
For diffuse reflection from a Lambertian inner surface of the sphere, a photon has a probability a(1 − s) of reflecting
back to the star and as of reflecting back to the sphere. The star thus absorbs a fraction f∗,∗,diff = a(1 − s)n of its
own photons, the sphere absorbs a fraction f∗,s,diff = en, and a fraction f∗,e,diff = tn is lost to space.
3.1.3. Thermal emission of the sphere
The radiative properties of the interior of the sphere depend on how it processes the stellar energy it does not reflect
or transmit, and so it might reradiate any fraction of the starlight it absorbs as thermal radiation. Here we will denote
the thermal luminosity emitted by the entire sphere Ls , and fraction of this emitted from the interior surface of the
sphere
Lint
ζ=
(28)
Ls
9 In the formalism of Badescu & Cathcart (2000), our s is equivalent to their cos δ or

√

1 − x2 .

11

Dyson Spheres

Absorbed by Star (*)
Absorbed by Sphere (s)
Escape (e)

Starlight (*)
Diffuse Specular

Thermal Emission from Sphere (s)
Diffuse
Specular

a(1 − s)
1 − as
e
1 − as
t
1 − as

ζ(1 − s)
1 − at s
ζset
1 − at s
ζstt
1−ζ +
1 − at s

a
e
t

ζ(1 − s)
ζset
1 − at
ζstt
1−ζ +
1 − at

Table 2. Expressions for the fraction f of stellar and thermal sphere photons that ultimately are absorbed by the star, absorbed
by the sphere, or escape, for a spherical shell, in the limits of purely diffuse and purely specular reflection from the shell.

There is no reason that the effective reflection, absorption, or even transmittance properties of the sphere should be
the same for this thermal emission as it was for the starlight, so we use the subscript t to indicate the thermal versions
of these properties.
For diffuse reflection, by a similar calculation to the one for the starlight we have that a fraction fs,∗,diff = ζ(1 − s)nt
is returned to the star—which is generally a small correction— a fraction fs,s,diff = ζset nt is returned to the sphere,
and a fraction fs,e,diff = ζstt nt of the interior luminosity is transmitted (with another fraction 1 − ζ radiated directly
to space).
In the case of specular reflection, the fate of these thermal photons is simple: a fraction fs,∗,spec = ζ(1 − s) strike
the star, and the rest strike the sphere until they are either absorbed or transmitted. Of the total thermal emission
then, a fraction ζset nt is ultimately absorbed, and a fraction 1 − ζ + ζstt nt is radiated away.
We combine the results of the fate of starlight and thermal emission of the sphere in the specular and diffuse cases
in Table 2.
3.2. Relating the Dyson Sphere Properties to Observables
Following Badescu & Cathcart (2000)10 , we refer to the intrinsic luminosity of the star from all interior processes
e distinguished from L, the luminosity from its surface, which is somewhat higher than L
e
(e.g. nuclear burning) as L,
because some if its emission is being returned by the sphere, and the emergent flux on the surface must increase to
maintain energy balance.
Following the AGENT formalism of Wright et al. (2014a), we consider the energy budget of the star plus sphere,
e generated by the star and generates power by other means equal to
where the sphere absorbs a fraction α of power L
e
e
L. The total luminosity of the system is then L(1 + ). The sphere ultimately radiates away to the external universe
e as thermal emission (which is lower than Ls because some emission is returned to the sphere or star), and has a
Lγ
e (for instance powerful laser or radio transmissions). By energy balance,11 we then have
nonthermal luminosity Lν
α+=γ+ν

(29)

For simplicity we will assume that any nonthermal emission is deliberately directed away from the star. By energy
balance on the surface of the star we have
e + Ls fs,∗ = Lf∗,s + Lf∗,e
L

(30)

e + Lf∗,s = Ls fs,∗ + Ls fs,e + Lν
e
L

(31)

and on the sphere we have

10 In what follows we roughly follow the notation of Badescu & Cathcart (2000), however readers wishing to compare the two treatments
should note that we use the subscript s to denote the sphere, while they use the same symbol to denote the star. We also use a to represent
the Bond albedo, where they use a to represent the absorptance (which we refer to as e).
11 The sphere cannot do significant amounts of work on long timescales without ultimately converting the energy to a low entropy form
such as nonthermal emission or as mass (captured by our parameter ν and subject to the usual Carnot efficiency limits, but see Badescu
2014) or dissipating it as heat (captured by our parameter γ.) While other sinks of energy exist (for instance it could be stored as chemical
or gravitational potential energy), they are infinitessimal compared to the total power emitted by the star over timescales on which such
spheres must exist in order for us to detect one, so we can ignore them. See Wright et al. (2014a).

12

Jason T. Wright

Solving these above two equations for L and Ls we have
L
(1 − fs,s ) + fs,∗ ( − ν)
=
e
fs,∗ f∗,e + fs,e (1 − f∗,∗ )
L

f∗,s + (1 − f∗,∗ )( − ν)
Ls
=
e
fs,∗ f∗,e + fs,e (1 − f∗,∗ )
L

(32)
(33)

Then we can express the two AGENT parameters that describe the observability of the system, α and γ, as
L
f
e ∗,e
L

(34)

Ls
f
e s,e
L

(35)

α=1−

γ=
The effective temperature of the star is then

T∗,eff =

L
4πσR∗2

 14
=

  14
L
Te∗,eff
e
L

(36)

and, if we choose a characteristic distance for the components of the sphere R, we can also define an effective temperature for its interior and exterior surfaces:
1
ζLs 4 e
Ts,eff
=
Tint,eff =
e
eL

1

1
(1 − ζ)Ls 4
(1 − ζ)Ls 4 e
Text,eff =
=
Ts,eff
e
4πσR2 eext
eext L


ζLs
4πσR2 e

 14



(37)
(38)

where we have applied Kirchhoff’s law to approximate the emissivity of the inner shell surface by its absorptivity e,
and we have introduced eext , the emissivity of the external surface of the sphere, which up to now has not been relevant
to the problem, and is only constrained to be eext < 1 − tt . We have also introduced nominal values of the effective
temperature of the star (the one it would have without the sphere around it) and the sphere (the value it would have
if it had no feedback on the star and all of the flux was radiated on the outside surface):

Te∗,eff ≡

e
L
4πσR∗2

Tes,eff ≡

e
L
4πσR2

! 14
(39)
! 41
(40)

We can then express the total spectrum of the system as three components: the stellar spetrum, the interior of the
shell, and the exterior of the shell. The specific flux received at Earth Φλ depends on the distance to the star, and for
spherical blackbody radius R at temperature T is given by
Φλ,BB = πBλ (T )

R2
d2

(41)

where Bλ is the Planck function and d is the distance to the object.
For the star-Dyson sphere system, a fraction f∗,e of the star’s emission escapes. The total emission from the sphere
lost to space is Ls fs,e , divided between the exterior surface, emitting a fraction (1 − ζ) of the total sphere luminosity
Ls , and the interior surface, emitting the balance, a fraction fint,e of which escapes. Solving for fint,e we have
Ls fs,e = ζLs fint,e + (1 − ζ)Ls

(42)

fint,e = (fs,e − (1 − ζ))/ζ

(43)

13

Dyson Spheres
The spectrum of the specific flux received at Earth from the star-Dyson-sphere system is then
Φλ =

π
(k1 Bλ (T∗,eff ) + k2 Bλ (Tint,eff ) + k3 Bλ (Text,eff ))
d2

(44)

where we have approximated the spectra of the three components by the Planck function for illustrative purposes and
where
k1 = R∗2 f∗,e

(45)

2

k2 = R efint,e

(46)

2

(47)

k3 = R eext

If a Dyson sphere were discovered, and if it conformed to the assumptions of this analysis, then the effective
temperatures and relative strengths of the three components combined with a parallactic distance would thus directly
reveal information about the properties of the Dyson sphere, parameterized here by R, a, e, at , et , eext , , ν and ζ, and
the star, parameterized by L̃ and R∗ . This is eleven parameters to be deduced from, at most, 6 observables, leaving
the system underconstrained. Further, it is unlikely that the interior and exterior components of the sphere’s emission
would be observationally distinct, since the thermal emission will likely be dominated by one of them. Analysis would
need to proceed by making assumptions about these parameters such as   1 and ν  1, η ∼ 0.5, eext = e, and to
constrain L̃ and R∗ using knowledge of stellar structure (but see Section 3.4).
In reality, a Dyson sphere may have materials at a range of distances with a variety of properties, and a more
informative spectrum that can be better modeled. But this parameterization allows for connecting upper limits and
Dyson sphere candidates to the regions of parameter space excluded or allowed by observations.
3.3. Example of Feedback from a Dyson Sphere
As an illustration of these results, we make use of the results of Section 3.1 to consider the simplified case of a passive
spherical shell (ν =  = 0) where the properties of the sphere are constant on the interior and exterior (ζ = 0.5) and
between starlight and thermal emission (i.e. dropping the t subscript). In the case of an even mixture of specular
reflection, absorption, and transmittance (a = t = e = eext = 31 ), we have
L 4−s
=
e
2
L
Ls 2
=
e
3
L
s+2
α=
6
s+2
γ=
6

(48)
(49)
(50)
(51)


T∗,eff = Te∗,eff
Tint,eff = Tes,eff
Text,eff = Tes,eff

4−s
2

 14
(52)
(53)
(54)

Figure 2 shows the spectrum of such a system where R = 1 au, and the central star is Sun-like, as observed at a
distance of 100 pc.
More generally, in these equations we can see the effects of feedback of the sphere on the star. In the limit of a very
large sphere (s → 1) 1/3 of the starlight is reflected back onto the star, where it must ultimately reemerge as starlight,
again with 1/3 reflecting back on the star. This series converges on a value of 1/2, meaning the stellar surface has a
luminosity 50% higher than the core (1/3 of which never leaves the sphere).
Meanwhile, fs,s = 1/4 of the emission from the sphere is trapped within the sphere, and the remaining fs,e = 3/4
e
e ultimately
that escapes is powered by the L/3 of starlight it absorbs. Its total luminosity is thus 2L/3,
but only L/2
emerges as waste heat.

14

Jason T. Wright

λFλ (erg/s/cm2 )

10

star
DS interior
DS exterior
total

−9

10−10

10−11
10−1

100

101
wavelength (µ)

102

Figure 2. Spectrum of a Sun-like star surrounded by a 1 au Dyson sphere, as observed from a distance of 100 pc. The sphere
transmits 1/3, absorbs 1/3, and reflects 1/3 of the photons that reach it, and radiates waste heat evenly between its interior and
exterior surfaces, which have the same effective temperatures. The interior surface is partially obscured by the sphere itself and
so appears dimmer. The stellar spectrum blueward of 24µ is a Teff = 5, 800 K dwarf star spectrum from the NextGen stellar
atmosphere grid (Allard et al. 1997; Hauschildt et al. 1999).

The effective temperature of the star is somewhat higher to accommodate the extra surface luminosity. The effective
temperatures of the surfaces of the sphere in this case are just as we would expect from a naive calculation without
stellar feedback, however.
The picture is altered for Dyson spheres smaller than a few stellar radii, because then the star captures a significant
amount of the sphere’s waste heat. This reprocesses the waste heat back into starlight, lowering α and γ. In the limit
that the sphere sits on the surface of the star (s → 0) it simply blocks its geometric area and we have α = γ = 1/3.
e 1/3 of which is reflected by the sphere, and 1/3 of
In this case the total surface luminosity of the star grows to 2L,
which is absorbed by the sphere. Of the 1/3 that is absorbed, half escapes to space and the other half is returned to
e escape as starlight and 1/3L
e reprocessed as waste heat.
the star. The star thus has 2/3L
3.4. Feedback on Stellar Structure
e is not affected by the presence of the
Up to this point we have assumed that the luminosity of the stellar interior, L,
Dyson sphere, but this is not strictly true. To first order, small amounts of energy returned to the stellar surface will
be re-emitted as starlight (the “reflection effect” of stellar binaries) but if the energy is carried into the stellar interior
by convection or other means, then it should alter the structure of the star, and therefore its total luminosity (not just
the luminosity of the surface) on a Kelvin-Helmholz timescale.
To see this, note that a key feature of the solutions to the equations of stellar structure is that stars have negative
gravitothermal heat capacity. This is a common feature of gravitationally bound systems: adding energy to them
causes them to expand and cool (i.e. their components slow down). This is a consequence of the Virial theorem, and
is akin to adding energy to a satellite: the satellite will attain a higher, less bound orbit, and as a result move more
slowly.
Similarly, stars are supported against gravity by their thermal energy, which is ultimately provided by nuclear
burning. When a Dyson sphere returns some of the escaping energy to the star, this provides additional support

Dyson Spheres

15

against gravity, and in response the star should either expand, lower its luminosity, or both. In fact, we expect both
since the pressure on the core is roughly (to an order of magnitude)
GM 2
(55)
R∗4
and the luminosity of the star is extremely sensitive to central pressure. This is the thermostat that keeps the core
temperature constant, and keeps stars stable. Without such a thermostat, any perturbative increase in core luminosity
would lead to an increase in core temperature and pressure, which would lead to higher luminosity in a positive feedback
loop, and every star would be destroyed in a runaway thermonuclear explosion, or cool and collapse until held up by
electron degeneracy pressure.12
In principle, therefore, a sufficiently insulating Dyson sphere could put enough energy back into its central star that
the star might expand, cool, and dim. This might be done intentionally, for instance to prolong the life of a star and
prevent it from entering the giant phase, or it might be an unwanted consequence of consuming most of the star’s
output. Regardless of the motivations for initiating such feedback, however, the effect on the star will be a calculable
consequence of the properties of the Dyson sphere, meaning that it is possible to connect observables like luminosity
and effective temperature of the starlight and waste heat to the physical parameters of the Dyson sphere.
This is an area of study ripe for investment, since the overall effects of Dyson spheres on the total luminosity of stars
have not previously been studied, and might lead to strong observable consequences that strengthen their detectability
in current or near-future all-sky surveys.
Pc ≈

4. EFFICIENCY AND OPTIMAL SIZE OF A DYSON SPHERE

4.1. Assumptions
Some authors (e.g. Suffern 1977; Badescu 1995) have presumed that Dyson spheres would constitute living surfaces
(either on the inside, outside, or in between) and/or that they would be engineered to maximize the work that could
be done or the efficiency with which starlight could be processed. In this work, we have generally remained agnostic
with respect to the purpose or design of a Dyson sphere. Here, we will follow the spirit of Dyson (1966) and explore the
maximum efficiency of a Dyson sphere allowed by physics as a function of its size, with minimal appeal to engineering
and function.
For scale, we will refer to nominal numbers for a “canonical” Dyson sphere consisting of a complete shell of orbiting
material at R = 1 au from a Sun-like star with T∗ = 5772 and R∗ = R . To be useful, the elements of the shell must
have some substance, which requires a large amount of mass. If the density of the shell is of order 1 g/cc, then one
Jupiter mass would provide for components a few meters thick.
We will make the assumption that the star is its only important source of energy (i.e.  = 0). Maximum efficiency
implies that all of the starlight is captured, and that the Dyson sphere does no work on the star, so we are in the limit
where e = eext = 1, f∗,s = 1, fs,∗ = 0, L = L̃, and the total waste heat of the Dyson sphere Ls fs,e = L(1 − ν).
If Dyson spheres are common enough to be observed by us, then they must be long-lived, so the nature of their
work must be sustainable on cosmic timescales.13 Wright et al. (2014a) argued that the long-term nature of the work
done by a Dyson sphere will likely be dissipative or emissive: the star’s energy cannot be stored on cosmic timescales
without heating or unbinding the Dyson sphere (except, perhaps, via energy-to-mass reaction). This is illustrated by
the Kelvin-Helmholtz timescale for the Sun: the Sun generates enough energy to completely unbind itself in ∼ 30 Myr.
The gravitational binding energy of the planets is significantly smaller than this: the Sun generates enough energy
to unbind every atom in Jupiter and eject it from the Solar System in less than 1,000 years. Only if the work of the
Dyson sphere is to deconstruct the star should we expect to find it doing lasting work on its system.
Whatever work a Dyson sphere does must therefore result in the energy leaving the system or being stored in some
manner with significantly more capacity than heat or gravitational potential energy. The only obvious such mechanism
would be to store the energy as mass. While converting starlight into, say, protons would seem inefficient (collecting
12 If the star is shell-burning, the shell’s pressure and therefore luminosity is set mostly by the surface gravity of the degenerate core,
not the weight of the envelope above it. The envelope then expands in response to the growing core luminosity without negative feedback,
and the star becomes a giant. In this case, the luminosity of the star is regulated by the lifting of the degeneracy of the core at high
temperatures, which causes the core to expand, its surface gravity to drop, and the shell luminosity to decrease.
13 This assumes that we do not live in a special cosmic time in which the rate of Dyson sphere creation is suddenly sharply rising above
zero. Some have questioned this assumption, most notably Annis (1999b) and Ćirković & Vukotić (2008) who have suggested that a recent
“astrobiological phase transition” in the Galaxy can help explain the Fermi Paradox (but see Carroll-Nellenback et al. 2019).

16

Jason T. Wright

mass from the stellar wind would be at least as effective), the production of antimatter is plausible activity that would
result in little emission.
We then have two limits to consider: that all of the work done by the Dyson sphere goes into the creation of mass
or the emission of low-entropy radiation (either way parameterized by ν in the AGENT formalism above) or else is
used in a dissipative way and emitted as waste heat (as in, for instance, computation).
4.2. Maximum Thermodynamic Efficiency of Dyson Spheres
If the purpose of the Dyson sphere is to do work, the thermodynamic efficiency η with which it does this work can
be computed as the fraction of starlight that goes into this work, equivalent to the starlight it receives minus the waste
heat the Dyson sphere disposes of:
4
4
L − 4πR2 σ(Text,eff
− Tmin
)
L
4
R2 (Te4 − Tmin
)
=1 −
2
4
R∗ T∗

η=

(56)

where for brevity we use Te ≡ Text,eff and drop the tilde and eff subscript on the stellar effective temperature and
where we have, for the first time in this work, included the effects of outside radiation falling onto the Dyson sphere,
which would approach Tmin in the absence of heating from the star.
The value of Tmin will depend on the Dyson sphere’s environment, but typical values of the interstellar radiation
field near the Sun are of order 1 eV/cm3 (Mathis et al. 1983; Strong et al. 2000), corresponding to Tmin ∼ 4 K.
Badescu (2014) explores the nuances of calculating thermodynamic efficiency when the source and sink of an engine
is radiation instead of a thermal bath. Following the spirit of that work,14 we consider the entropy received and
emitted by the Dyson sphere per unit time:

4
3
Ṡin = 4πσ R∗2 T∗3 + R2 Tmin
3
4
Ṡout = 4πσR2 Te3
3
The Dyson sphere works at maximum efficiency when the work it does generates no entropy, meaning
∆Ṡ ≡ Ṡout − Ṡin = 0

(57)
(58)

(59)

yielding
2
R∗
T3 − T3
(60)
= e 3 min
R
T∗
Applying this constraint, we find that a conservative upper bound of thermodynamic efficiency for a Dyson sphere of
temperature Te of:


Te 1 − (Tmin /Te )4
Te
≈1−
(61)
T∗ 1 − (Tmin /Te )3
T∗
where the latter approximation applies to waste heat temperatures significantly above Tmin , and is equivalent to the
Carnot limit. More realistic Dyson sphere geometries and properties will yield lower efficiencies. This expression is
simply a measurement of the energy available for work (i.e. the exergy15 ) that can be extracted by the Dyson sphere,
given by the contrast between the (low) entropy of the energy it collects from the starlight (at T∗ ) and the (higher)
entropy of its emitted radiation (at Te ).
η <1−

14 Badescu’s treatment is not directly applicable to our problem because all of the thermal photons radiated from the interior of our
Dyson sphere strike the Dyson sphere again while Badescu implicitly assumes all of those photons return to the heat source.
15 Exergy is thermodynamics jargon for the theoretical limit of the amount of energy available in a system for it to do work, given its
environment. It is equivalent to the Gibbs free energy for chemical systems at constant pressure or the Helmholz free energy for chemical
systems at constant volume.

Dyson Spheres

17

In the limit of infinitely large Dyson spheres, the temperature of the Dyson sphere Te → Tmin and the two sides of
Equation 61 reach their maximum value:
ηmax = 1 −

4 Tmin
3 T∗

(62)

which is 99.9% for our nominal Dyson sphere. Dyson spheres can, in principle then, convert most of the energy in
starlight into work.
4.3. Thermodynamic Efficiency of Low-Entropy Emission
We now risk speculating on the practical limits of alien technology by considering the engineering optimum for such
a Dyson sphere, as opposed to this theoretical limit.
By energy balance we have that the relationship among the total radiating area A of a Dyson sphere, its effective
temperature, and its waste heat luminosity is simply
4
Ls fs,e = L(1 − ν) + AσTmin
= AσTe4

(63)

If all of the work goes into low entropy emission or mass generation then we have ν = η, and neglecting the background
radiation for now, we find
A = 4πR∗2 (1 − η)−3

(64)

For reference, our nominal 1 au Dyson sphere would have Te = 160 K, and maximum efficiency η = 97%. This is
very close to the theoretical limit, though of course a species bent on capturing that last 3% of exergy could do so
with a larger Dyson sphere, at the expense of significantly higher engineering difficulty.
Equation (64) shows that for every additional “nine” of efficiency, the Dyson sphere requires three orders of magnitude
more radiating material. This implies that capturing another 2.5% of the exergy of starlight by building a larger Dyson
sphere of outer temperature 16K requires either a thousand of Jupiter masses (i.e. 1M ) or making do with a Dyson
sphere only millimeters thick. The latter option would seem to be at or beyond the limit of utility: even if the only
function of the Dyson sphere is to serve as a radiator of waste heat, transporting that waste heat to the shell itself
requires material, implying that the mass required for a Dyson sphere inevitably shares this steep scaling with efficiency
(but see the caveats in Sections 4.6 & 4.7). But regardless of the details, unless a technological species somehow incurs
negligible cost when adding material to its Dyson sphere, the optimum size of the Dyson sphere it builds will be
significantly smaller than its theoretical limit.
4.4. Thermodynamic Efficiency of Dissipative Work
If the purpose of the Dyson sphere is not to emit large amounts of low entropy emission or create mass, then the
work it does must ultimately be radiated away as waste heat, which increases the area of radiators needed (or the
temperature of the waste heat). By the same calculation as above but with ν = 0 in Equation (63) to account for this
extra energy to be radiated, we then have
A = 4πR∗2 (1 − η)−4

(65)

which is an even steeper function implying even smaller optimum Dyson spheres. In this case our nominal 1 au Dyson
sphere has Te = 390K and efficiency η = 93%, and achieving 99% efficiency with a larger Dyson sphere at the same
surface mass density would require 2.4 M of material.
4.5. Efficiency of Computation
In this latter case of purely dissipative work, one might follow Sandberg et al. (2016) and consider computations
the nominal kind of work performed since the amount of such work that can be done scales with exergy and does
not result in any stored or emitted energy—an ideal function for a Dyson sphere. Indeed, Sandberg (1999) provides
an extensive discussion of the limits of many aspects of Dyson sphere computation including memory storage density,
computational speed, and energy use.
Briefly, Landauer’s principle sets the minimum amount of heat generated by a single binary logical operation such as
AND or NOR at kT ln (2). This has the nice consequence that colder computers can do more operations with a given

18

Jason T. Wright

amount of energy. This means that large Dyson spheres win twice when their work is computational: once because
they can extract more exergy from starlight, and again because they need less energy per computation.
The rate of classical computation r at a distance R from a star at power level L at Te , and is
r=

ηL
kTe ln (2)

(66)

which for our nominal Dyson sphere is approximately 1047 logical operations per second. This rate is maximized for
very large Dyson spheres with Te → Tmin , which for the Sun would yield 1049 logical operations per second.
We can then define a computational efficiency ηcomp calculated as a Dyson sphere’s computational rate compared to
the maximum possible rate at Te → Tmin .
r
η Tmin
=
rmax
ηmax Te
which we have seen for our nominal Dyson sphere is around 1%. It would seem, then, that when optimizing for
computational rate instead of work, there might be great profit in investing in larger Dyson spheres.16
For Dyson spheres far from their limits (i.e. neglecting outside radiation and with η ∼ 1), we can write L ≈ AσTe4 ,
and so the scaling of computational rate with Dyson sphere area is
ηcomp =

(k ln (2))4 4
r
(67)
L3 σ
The cost function here is not as steep as with thermodynamic efficiency until Te → Tmin , but it still requires a factor
of 16 in material to double computing power. Dyson spheres used for computing might thus have larger optimal sizes
and lower optimal temperatures than other Dyson spheres, but there are still strongly diminishing returns.
We use the qualifier “classical” to describe this computing because it remains unclear if the entropy produced by
logic gates represents a fundamental limit of computing, or whether reversible computing techniques can surpass those
limits (see, e.g. Frank 2002). If so, then it is not immediately clear which aspects of Dyson spheres would optimize
such computation, although Sandberg (1999) provides some possibilities.
For instance, all physical systems are subject to noise and error, and so the entropy generated (and energy disposed
of) during error correction is likely a universal feature of all computers. A fully reversible computer might do many
more logical operations with a given amount of energy than its classical counterpart, but it still needs a source of low
entropy power to clear its computer memory for error correction. In this case, the rate of memory clearings a Dyson
sphere can perform for a given exergy is equal to its classical computation rate r, and this might drive a similar design
optimization.
A=

4.6. Very Cold Dyson Spheres
While the cost function for large Dyson spheres is very steep, it is possible that a species might find ways to make
the coefficient so small and the benefit function so large that very cold Dyson spheres would be common. For instance,
if the purpose of the Dyson sphere was only to shift starlight to the lowest possible frequency, and not to do any useful
work, then many of the above considerations are not relevant. In this case the minimum surface density allowed by
physics is quite low, because its only function is to absorb starlight.
Recently developed opaque metallic metamaterials are only tens of nanometers thick (Hägglund et al. 2013), which
approaches theoretical limits (Hägglund et al. 2010). At these surface densities (of order 10 g/cm3 × 10 nm = 10−5
g/cm2 ) one Jupiter mass would provide for a shell with R = 9000 au. Lacki (2016) describes a scheme with dipole
antennae that would use even less material for similarly sized Dyson spheres. If such a Dyson sphere could be
engineered with significant microwave emissivity (and if the issue of radiation pressure discussed in the next section
could be managed), its temperature would be close to Tmin .
This does not mean that the star would be completely hidden. In order to “blend in” with the cosmic microwave
background at T = 2.7 K, the Dyson sphere would have to be cooler than Tmin , which would require both actively
cooling the Dyson sphere and disposing of the excess stellar luminosity nonthermally. It would also be an incomplete
16 Or in waiting long enough that T
min falls. Sandberg et al. (2016) suggest that the reason we do not see Dyson spheres is that the
would-be builders are “aestivating,” i.e. in a state of suspended animation until the Universe cools enough for their computers to run more
efficiently. See, however, Bennett et al. (2019) for a critique of this idea.

Dyson Spheres

19

“cloak” because the microwave background and foreground are variable across the Dyson sphere’s sky, meaning that
the Dyson sphere would need to present a different thermal profile to observers in different directions.
4.7. Other Engineering Issues
Here, we have explored only the outer contours of the problem, probing the physical limits of efficiency and considering
only the trade-off of maximum efficiency with Dyson sphere mass. Badescu (1995) and Badescu (2014) consider the
maximum efficiency of an endoreversible reactor to be a more realistic upper bound. Such a calculation requires
additional assumptions about the engineering of the Dyson sphere, and will produce efficiencies below the conservative
upper limits here.
An additional engineering challenge for large Dyson spheres is radiation pressure. We have argued that available
mass is an important engineering constraint, but Dyson spheres cannot be made arbitrarily thin. A Dyson sphere
enfolding a Sun like star with a mass surface density near or below 0.8 g/m2 (Equation (23)) must not only manage
the energy and entropy it receives from the star but the momentum as well, lest it be blown away. A Dyson sphere
that does dissipative work might pass the momentum on in the form of waste heat (for instance if its outer surface
has a much higher effective temperature or microwave emissivity than its inner surface) but thin Dyson spheres doing
other forms of work will have to address this in other ways. For scale, one Jupiter mass at this critical surface density
would produce a shell with R = 30 au and with Te = 71 K.
An additional engineering challenge for massive Dyson spheres is gravity: once the mass of the Dyson sphere begins
to approach that of the star, its self-gravity will become dynamically important.
In short, we do not expect Dyson spheres to operate at very low temperatures for a variety of reasons, most
importantly the tradeoff between functionality and mass, except perhaps if the only purpose of the Dyson sphere is to
be as cold as possible. While the precise optimum is not clear and depends on their function and the cost function of
adding material to the Dyson sphere, temperatures of Te & 100K are not unreasonable and so are worth searching for,
and temperatures near Tmin would appear to be strongly disfavored on practical grounds, unless their only purpose is
to be cold.
5. SUMMARY

Dyson spheres are a plausible manifestation of extraterrestrial technology with strong observational consequences.
But despite being a well known part of SETI for over 60 years, significant theoretical and observational work remains
before upper limits on their existence can be computed.
The idea of a monolithic sphere or other structure, popular in science fiction, is a canard that does not originate with
Dyson. Monolithic spheres are not gravitationally stable, have no obvious utility beyond that provided by a swarm of
material, and appear to be mechanically impossible besides.
While the gross observational consequences of Dyson spheres are simple to calculate, the feedback from a Dyson
sphere on its star results in detectable changes to the stellar radiation (which we have calculated here under some
simplifying assumptions) and stellar structure (which have yet to be calculated.)
Typical sizes and temperatures for Dyson spheres will depend on their function, but the mass required to build
a useful Dyson sphere means there is some practical upper limit on their size (and so some lower limit on their
temperature). This limit is tightest for Dyson spheres doing purely dissipative work, somewhat lower for Dyson
spheres whose primary purpose is to generate low-entropy emission or antimatter, even lower for Dyson spheres doing
maximal amounts of computation, and lowest of all for Dyson spheres whose only purpose is to be as large and cool
as possible.
This treatment has not considered special cases that may evade some of these conclusions, for instance by considering
stars significantly more or less luminous than the sun, exploiting the special thermodynamic properties of black holes,
or employing non-electromagnetic physics to use neutrinos or gravitational waves. It has also ignored many practical
issues with Dyson spheres, for instance the mechanics of deconstructing planets or stars (e.g. Criswell 1986), the
effects of other material in the system (e.g. DeBiase 2008), and the potential that Dyson spheres might persist long
after the species that created them are gone (e.g. Arnold 2013; Ćirković et al. 2019). It has also largely considered
steady-state cases; the dynamics of stellar feedback and the construction or destruction of a Dyson sphere might also
have observable consequences.
Sixty years after Dyson’s original suggestion, there remains much work to do on the theory of his eponymous spheres.

20

Jason T. Wright

I thank Milan Ćirković and the editors of the Serbian Astronomical Journal for soliciting this review, and for their
helpful feedback. I thank Mashall Perrin, Geoff Marcy, David Kipping, Zaza Osmanov, Steinn Sigurdsson, Ibrahim
Semiz, Gerry Sussman, and Viorel Badescu for helpful discussions that improved this review. I thank John Gizis for
pointing me to Harrop et al. and references therein.
The Center for Exoplanets and Habitable Worlds is supported by the Pennsylvania State University, the Eberly
College of Science, and the Pennsylvania Space Grant Consortium.
This research has made use of NASA’s Astrophysics Data System Bibliographic Services.
REFERENCES
Allard, F., Hauschildt, P. H., Alexander, D. R., &
Starrfield, S. 1997, ARA&A, 35, 137
Annis, J. 1999a, Journal of the British Interplanetary
Society, 52, 33
—. 1999b, Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, 52,
19
Arnold, L. 2013, International Journal of Astrobiology, 12,
212
Arnold, L. F. A. 2005, ApJ, 627, 534
Badescu, V. 1995, Acta Astronautica, 36, 135
Badescu, V. 2014, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its
Applications, 410, 110 . http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0378437114003884
Badescu, V., & Cathcart, R. B. 2000, Journal of the British
Interplanetary Society, 53, 297
—. 2006, Acta Astronautica, 58, 119
Bennett, C. H., Hanson, R., & Riedel, C. J. 2019,
Foundations of Physics, 49, 820
Boyajian, T. S., LaCourse, D. M., Rappaport, S. A., et al.
2016, MNRAS, 457, 3988
Bradbury, R. J. 2001, in Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series,
Vol. 4273, The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence
(SETI) in the Optical Spectrum III, ed. S. A. Kingsley &
R. Bhathal, 56–62
Bradbury, R. J., Cirkovic, M. M., & Dvorsky, G. 2011,
Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, 64, 156
Carrigan, Jr., R. A. 2009, ApJ, 698, 2075
Carroll-Nellenback, J., Frank, A., Wright, J., & Scharf, C.
2019, AJ, 158, 117
Ćirković, M. M., & Vukotić, B. 2008, Origins of Life and
Evolution of the Biosphere, 38, 535
Ćirković, M. M., Vukotić, B., & Stojanović, M. 2019,
Astrobiology, 19, 1300
Cocconi, G., & Morrison, P. 1959, Nature, 184, 844.
https://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v184/n4690/
pdf/184844a0.pdf
Covington, T. 1991, in Resources of Near-Earth Space, 36

Criswell, D. R. 1986, in Interstellar Migration and the
Human Experience, ed. B. Finney & E. Jones, Los
Alamos Series in Basic and Applied Sciences Series
(University of California Press), p. 50.
https://books.google.com/books?id=iKnaLbRtQasC
DeBiase, R. L. 2008, Journal of the British Interplanetary
Society, 61, 386
Drake, F. D. 1961, Physics Today, 14, 40
Dyson, F. J. 1960a, Science, 131, 1667
—. 1960b, Science, 132, 250
—. 1966, in Perspectives in modern physics: Essays in
honor of Hans A. Bethe on the occasion of his 60th
birthday, July, 1966, ed. R. Marshak, J. Blaker, &
H. Bethe (Interscience Publishers), 641–655.
https://books.google.com/books?id=LtvvAAAAMAAJ
Frank, M. P. 2002, Computing in Science & Engineering, 4,
16.
https://aip.scitation.org/doi/abs/10.1109/5992.998637
Griffith, R. L., Wright, J. T., Maldonado, J., et al. 2015,
ApJS, 217, 25
Hägglund, C., Apell, S. P., & Kasemo, B. 2010, Nano
Letters, 10, 3135, pMID: 20698628.
https://doi.org/10.1021/nl101929j
Hägglund, C., Zeltzer, G., Ruiz, R., et al. 2013, Nano
Letters, 13, 3352, pMID: 23805835.
https://doi.org/10.1021/nl401641v
Harrop, B. L., & Schulze-Makuch, D. 2010, in Astrobiology
Science Conference 2010: Evolution and Life: Surviving
Catastrophes and Extremes on Earth and Beyond, Vol.
1538, 5469
Hauschildt, P. H., Allard, F., & Baron, E. 1999, ApJ, 512,
377
Imara, N., & Di Stefano, R. 2018, ApJ, 859, 40
Inoue, M., & Yokoo, H. 2011, ArXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1112.5519
Jugaku, J., & Nishimura, S. 2004, in IAU Symposium, Vol.
213, Bioastronomy 2002: Life Among the Stars, ed.
R. Norris & F. Stootman, 437
Kardashev, N. S. 1964, Soviet Ast., 8, 217
Lacki, B. C. 2016, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1604.07844

Dyson Spheres
—. 2019, PASP, 131, 024102
Mathis, J. S., Mezger, P. G., & Panagia, N. 1983, A&A,
500, 259
McInnes, C. R. 2003, Journal of the British Interplanetary
Society, 56, 308
Niven, L. 1970, Ringworld (New York, NY, USA:
Ballantine)
Opatrný, T., Richterek, L., & Bakala, P. 2017, American
Journal of Physics, 85, 14
Osmanov, Z. 2016, International Journal of Astrobiology,
15, 127
Osmanov, Z., & Berezhiani, V. I. 2018, International
Journal of Astrobiology, 17, 356
—. 2019, ArXiv e-prints, arXiv:1909.08851
Pan, B., & Cui, W. 2010, Marine Structures, 23, 227 .
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0951833910000390
Papagiannis, M. D. 1985, in IAU Symposium, Vol. 112, The
Search for Extraterrestrial Life: Recent Developments,
ed. M. D. Papagiannis, 543–546
Reynolds, A. 2008, House of Suns, Gollancz S.F (Gollancz).
https://books.google.com/books?id=nUfIAAAACAAJ
Rippert, E. D. 2014, ArXiv e-prints, arXiv:1412.1881
Sagan, C. 1973a, The cosmic connection. an extraterrestrial
perspective (Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor Press,
Doubleday, 1973)
—. 1973b, Icarus, 19, 350
Sagan, C., & Walker, R. G. 1966, ApJ, 144, 1216
Sandberg, A. 1999, Journal of Transhumanism now The
Journal of Evolution and Technology, 5, 1.
https://www.jetpress.org/volume5/Brains2.pdf
Sandberg, A., Armstrong, S., & Cirkovic, M. M. 2016,
Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, 69, 406

21

Scheuer, P. A. G. 1981, Journal of Astrophysics and
Astronomy, 2, 165
Semiz, İ., & Oğur, S. 2015, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1503.04376
Shkadov, L. M., ed. 1987, Possibility of controlling solar
system motion in the Galaxy
Slysh, V. I. 1985, in IAU Symposium, Vol. 112, The Search
for Extraterrestrial Life: Recent Developments, ed. M. D.
Papagiannis, 315–319
Stapledon, O. 1937, Star Maker (Methuen)
Strong, A. W., Moskalenko, I. V., & Reimer, O. 2000, ApJ,
537, 763
Suffern, K. G. 1977, Proceedings of the Astronomical
Society of Australia, 3, 177
Teodorani, M. 2014, Acta Astronautica, 105, 512
Timofeev, M. Y., Kardashev, N. S., & Promyslov, V. G.
2000, Acta Astronautica, 46, 655
Wright, J. T. 2018, ArXiv e-prints, arXiv:1803.06972
Wright, J. T., Cartier, K. M. S., Zhao, M., Jontof-Hutter,
D., & Ford, E. B. 2016, ApJ, 816, 17
Wright, J. T., Griffith, R. L., Sigurdsson, S., Povich, M. S.,
& Mullan, B. 2014a, ApJ, 792, 27
Wright, J. T., Mullan, B., Sigurdsson, S., & Povich, M. S.
2014b, ApJ, 792, 26
Wright, J. T., Sheikh, S., Almár, I., et al. 2018, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1809.06857
Wright, J. T., & Sigurdsson, S. 2016, ApJL, 829, L3
Zackrisson, E., Calissendorff, P., Asadi, S., & Nyholm, A.
2015, ApJ, 810, 23
Zackrisson, E., Korn, A. J., Wehrhahn, A., & Reiter, J.
2018, ApJ, 862, 21

