arXiv:astro-ph/0504648v1 29 Apr 2005 Lithopanspermia in Star Forming Clusters Fred C. Adams 1,2 and David N. Spergel 3 1Michigan Center for Theoretical Physics, University of Michi gan Physics Department, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 2Astronomy Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, M I 48109 3Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton Universi ty Princeton, NJ 08544 ABSTRACT This paper considers the lithopanspermia hypothesis in sta r forming groups and clusters, where the chances of biological material spreadi ng from one solar system to another is greatly enhanced (relative to action in the ﬁeld) due to the close proximity of the systems and lower relative velocities. These eﬀects mo re than compensate for the reduced time spent in such crowded environments. This pa per uses ∼ 300, 000 Monte Carlo scattering calculations to determine the cross sections ⟨σcap⟩ for rocks to be captured by binaries and provides ﬁtting formulae for oth er applications. We assess the odds of transfer as a function of the ejection speed veject and numberN⋆ of members in the birth aggregate. The odds of any given ejected meteroi d being recaptured by another solar system are relatively low, about 1 in 10 3 − 106 over the expected range of ejection speeds and cluster sizes. Because the number of e jected rocks (with mass m> 10 kg) per system can be large, NR ∼ 1016, virtually all solar systems are likely to share rocky ejecta with all of the other solar systems in thei r birth cluster. The number of ejected rocks that carry living microorganisms is much sm aller and less certain, but we estimate that NB ∼ 107 rocks can be ejected from a biologically active solar system . For typical birth environments, the capture of life bearing rocks is expected to occur Nbio ≈ 10 – 16,000 times per cluster (under favorable conditions), depending on the ejection speeds. Only a small fraction ( fimp ∼ 10−4) of the captured rocks impact the surfaces of terrestrial planets, so that Nlps ≈ 10−3 − 1.6 lithopanspermia events are expected (per cluster). Finally, we discuss the question of internal vs external seeding of clusters and the possibility of Earth seeding young clust ers over its biologically active lifetime. Key Words: Panspermia – Origin of life – Interstellar meteorites – 2 – 1. INTRODUCTION The question of whether life can be spread from one solar syst em to another is of long standing interest to astrobiology. Previous estimates (e.g., Melos h, 2003) suggest that the odds of both meteroid and biological transfer are exceedingly low. Howe ver, such estimates have been determined for the conditions in the local galactic neighborhood, i.e. , in the ﬁeld. The odds of transfer increase in more crowded environments. Although the vast majority of stars currently reside in the ﬁeld, most stars form within small groups or clusters, rather than in isolation (e.g., Lada and Lada, 2003; Porras et al. , 2003; see also Adams and Myers, 2001). Since the time scale f or planet formation and the time that young stars are expected to live in their bir th clusters are roughly comparable, about 10 – 30 Myr, debris from planet formation has a good chan ce of being transferred from one solar system to another. A related question is whether or not biologically active material can be transferred from one system to another. Because of the des tructive eﬀects of ultraviolet (UV) radiation, and other hardships of deep space, current think ing suggests that biological material must be encased in rock in order to survive the transfer proce ss. The required rock mass is often taken to be m> 10 kg (Horneck 1993; Nicholson et al. , 2000; Benardini et al. , 2003; Melosh, 2003) although better transfer odds can be obtained if this mass is smaller (Napier, 2004). As a result of the required UV shielding, this mechanism is generally call ed lithopanspermia. Suppose that life can be seeded into one solar system in a young cluster, either by d irect biogenesis or through a chance encounter with bio-invested material from outside the birt h aggregate. Subsequent dynamical interactions among the constituent solar systems can then a llow life to spread throughout the birth cluster. The goal of this work is to estimate the likelihood o f such transfer. The transfer of rocks between planets within a solar system i s a well established phenomena. Researchers on Earth regularly ﬁnd and study Martian meteor ites (McSween, 1985), and the dynamics of such transfer has been well studied (e.g., , Gladma n, 1997; Dones et al., 1999; Mileikowsky et al. , 2000). The transfer of rocky material between solar system s is more diﬃcult, but should still take place. The exchange of life bearing meteroidites betwe en solar systems is unlikely to occur between ﬁeld stars (Melosh, 2003) due to the high relative ve locities and low stellar density. As we show here, however, in young stellar groups and clusters, where most stars form, the stellar densities are higher and the relative velocities are lower. These properties increase the odds of transfer. Furthermore, previous estimates of capture cros s sections have focused on single stars; most stars live in binary systems and the capture cross secti ons for binaries are greatly enhanced. In this paper, we present a comprehensive evaluation of the l ithopanspermia mechanism in star forming groups and clusters. We ﬁrst perform a series of numerical calculations to estimate the distributions of ejection speeds for rocks exiled from t heir solar systems and discuss the distribution of rock sizes and masses. We next consider the dyna mics of young groups and clusters and ﬁnd the optical depth for ejected rocks to be recaptured b y other solar systems. In order to make such estimates, we calculate the capture cross section s using a Monte Carlo technique and a large ensemble ( ∼ 300, 000) of numerical experiments to sample the parameter space . Putting all of these components together, we estimate the expected numb er of rocks to be recaptured, the ex- – 3 – pected number of life bearing rocks to be transferred, and ﬁn ally the expected number of successful lithopanspermia events (per cluster). Note that clusters a re not guaranteed to have any of their member solar systems develop life during the 10 – 100 Myr that they remain bound. As a result, this paper calculates the odds of lithopanspermia events on ly for those clusters that produce at least one living system. 2. LITHOP ANSPERMIA IN GROUPS AND CLUSTERS 2.1. Ejection of rocky bodies from a solar system One can think of each solar system in the cluster as a source of rocky debris. In other words, each solar system produce a mass outﬂow rate of rocky materia l. Our present solar system contains about 50 Earth masses ( M⊕) of rocky bodies, with most of the mass residing in the cores o f the Jovian planets. The early solar nebula contained 50 – 100 M⊕ of heavy elements. Here, we parameterize the heavy element content MZ of nascent solar systems as MZ = F0M⊕, (1) where we expect F0 = 50 – 200 for typical systems. Since planets form within solar systems on time scales of rou ghly tp = 10 Myr (Lissauer, 1993), and since some fraction fe of the rocky material will be ejected during the course of pla net formation and subsequent dynamical evolution of the system , the mean mass loss rate (in rocks) from a young solar system is given by ⟨dM dt ⟩ = feF0M⊕ tp . (2) Numerical studies (Dones et al. , 1999; see also Melosh, 2003) suggest that about one third of the material not locked up in planets will be ejected from a given solar system containing giant planets (such as Jupiter and Saturn). Since planet formation is unli kely to be 100 percent eﬃcient, we might expect one third of the initial material to be left over , and one third of that to be ejected (with a good fraction of the remainder accreted by the centra l star), so that fe ≈ 1/10. Since the times scales for planet formation are roughly the same as the lifetimes for small stellar clusters (Binney and Tremaine, 1987), this process has time to grind t owards completion while the cluster remains intact, and hence each solar system contributes a ma ss MR = feF0M⊕ of rocky material to its birth aggregate. A conservative benchmark value for t his mass scale is thus MR ≈M⊕, with a corresponding mass loss rate of ⟨dM/dt⟩ ≈ 10−7 M⊕ yr−1 ≈ 2 × 1013 g s −1. This mass loss rate may seem large. For comparison, the mass equivalent loss due to solar radiation escaping from our solar system is ˙m =L⊙/c2 ≈ 4 × 1012 g s −1, only about ﬁve times smaller. The speeds of rocks ejected from a solar system depend on thei r initial location (the depth of the stellar gravitational potential well) and the mass of the scattering body (the depth of its – 4 – gravitational potential well). When biologically active r ocks are removed from the surface of their parent planet through impacts, they can either be directly e jected from the solar system or be left in orbit (about the central star) where they are subsequentl y ejected by other solar system bodies. As representative examples of this latter process, we have p erformed three ensembles of scattering calculations to sample the possible ejection speeds. In the se 3-body experiments, a small rocky body and a companion (either a giant planet or star) are place d in orbits about a primary star with mass M∗ = 1.0M⊙. The companion is taken to have a moderately eccentric orbit , whereas the rocks are given initial semi-major axes and eccentricit ies so that the orbits bring the bodies near each other (sometimes orbit-crossing). Speciﬁcally, the rocks have eccentricities randomly drawn from the interval [0,0.5] and semi-major axes a = ξaC, where aC is the semi-major axis of the companion and ξ is a log-random variable selected from the range log 10ξ ∈ [−1, 1]. The simulations are co-planar and are integrated using a Bulirs ch-Stoer scheme. The resulting distributions of ejection speeds are shown in Figure 1 for three representative cases: a Jupiter-like planet (with the mass of Jupiter and se mi-major axis aC = 5 AU), a Neptunelike planet (with the mass of Neptune and aC = 30 AU), and a 0.1 M⊙ binary companion with aC = 42 AU (near the peak of the binary period distribution). The distribution of ejection speeds is similar for the two planetary cases, with median values veject = 5.4 km/s (5.8 km/s) and mean values ⟨veject⟩ = 6.2 ± 2.7 km/s (6 .1 ± 1.3 km/s) for giant planet analogs of Jupiter (Neptune). These results are in good agreement with previous work that f ound ejection speeds of veject ≈ 5 ± 3 km/s for rocky bodies scattering out of a solar system due to p erturbations from Jupiter (Melosh, 2003). The distribution of ejection speeds for the stellar c ompanion has a somewhat smaller median (veject = 4.8 km/s) and mean value ( ⟨veject⟩ = 5.0 ± 2.5 km/s); more signiﬁcantly, the distribution is wider and has substantial support at smaller ejection spe eds. Additional simulations (not shown here) indicate that rocky ejecta from solar systems with sma ller primaries will generally have lower ejection speeds. We note that solar systems can have a wide va riety of architectures (e.g., Levison, Lissauer, and Duncan, 1998; Levison and Agnor, 2003), inclu ding planetary systems encircled by binary companions (e.g., David et al. , 2003), so that an even wider distribution of ejection speed s remains possible. 2.2. Distribution of rock sizes and masses For a given mass in rocky material, we need to specify its mass distribution. The distribution of interplanetary bodies has been discussed previously and th e diﬀerential mass distribution generally takes a power-law form dN dm =Bm−α, (3) whereB is the normalization constant. The slope α has a canonical value of about 1.83 for systems dominated by collisions (see, e.g., Hughes and Daniels, 198 2; Napier 2001) and about 1.67 for rocks hitting the atmosphere of Earth (Schroeder, 1991). We assum e here that the distribution of rocky bodies in a forming solar system has this general form, altho ugh the normalization (which sets the – 5 – total mass in rocky material) can vary from system to system. The distribution can be normalized by requiring a ﬁxed total mass MR in rocky bodies, i.e., MR =B ∫ dmm −(α−1). (4) In order to keep the integral from diverging, we introduce an upper mass cutoﬀ m2 and thereby obtain B = (2 −α)MRm−(2−α) 2 . (5) Similarly, in order to keep the number of rocky bodies from di verging, we must impose a lower mass cutoﬀ m1. For distributions of this type, namely with indices in the r ange 1 < α <2, essentially all of the mass resides in the upper end of the range, whereas a ll of the rocky bodies, by number, reside in the lower end of the range. In this setting, we are on ly interested in bodies larger than the minimum size/mass required to shield biological materi al. This lower mass limit m1 is often taken to be 10 kg (Melosh, 2003), although alternate values h ave been suggested (Napier, 2004). For given values of the upper and lower mass scales, the total number NR of bodies with mass m>m 1 thus becomes NR = 2 −α α − 1 MR m(α−1) 1 m(2−α) 2 . (6) For one set of typical values — α = 5/3, m1 = 10 kg, m2 = 0.1 M⊕, and MR =M⊕ (Melosh, 2003) — the total number of rocky bodies becomes NR ≈ 1016. For an alternate set of values — α = 11/6 and m1 = 10 4 kg (Napier 2004) — we obtain NR ≈ 8 × 1016. 2.3. Life bearing rocks Only some fraction of the material ejected from the solar sys tem will be biologically active (seeded with spores or other biological material). We denot e this fraction as fB, so that the total mass (per system) of biologically active material is fBNR. Although the fraction fB is not well determined, it is signiﬁcant that many bacteria – those know n as extremophiles – are well suited to survival in harsh conditions. In particular, the bacteri um Deinococcus radioduransseems almost designed for space travel – it can withstand extreme doses of radiation, cold, oxidation damage, and can survive for long periods without water (e.g., Minton , 1994; Battista, 1997; White et al. , 1999). Previous papers have estimated the minimum mass mB required for biologically active material to survive in deep space and found that mB ≈ 10 kg (Horneck, 1993; Nicholson et al. , 2000); this value motivates our choice of lower mass cutoﬀ m1 = mB. As a result, the maximum number of biologically active units that could be provided by a single solar system would be NR if all the rocks were biologically active. As discussed above, NR ∼ 1016, although this number is uncertain and varies from system to system. Nonetheless, this value pr ovides a good starting point. – 6 – Unfortunately, the eﬀectiveness of panspermia depends sens itively on the lower mass limit mB for life to survive in rocks. If the mass scale is much lower (e .g., Napier, 2004), then the steep distribution function (equation [3]) implies an enormous i ncrease in the number of available missiles. On the other hand, life bearing rocks that are captured by oth er solar systems and land on terrestrial planets are subject to another peril: The micro-organisms m ust survive the landing. Small rocks burn up in the atmosphere and/or reach temperatures too high for life to survive. Larger rocks will make it through the atmosphere and can have interior tempera tures low enough for life to survive, but such large rocks tend to have violent impacts with the pla netary surface. These impacts can also heat up the rocks and cause the destruction of biologica l material contained within. Some data on this issue exists: The observed mass distributions o f meteorites on the Antarctic ice (Huss, 1990) do not ﬂatten out for masses greater than about 100 gram s, which implies that the meteors larger than 100 grams have a good chance of surviving their fa ll through the atmosphere. The 10 kg rocks considered here should thus be safe (see also Well s, Armstrong, and Gonzales, 2003). Microorganisms in larger rocks have an even greater chance o f survival. Meter-sized bodies reach modest terminal speeds (for an atmosphere of terrestrial de nsity) and experimental data indicate that bacteria can survive the landing (e.g., Burchell et al. , 2001, 2004; Mastrapa et al., 2001). We also need an estimate of the fraction fB of ejected rocks that carry biological material. Suppose, for example, that life is seeded on a large terrestr ial planet in the system. It is reasonable to suppose that life would quickly spread over the surface an d into the planet down to depth ℓ of a few kilometers. As an optimistic benchmark scenario, we can assume that the mass 3( ℓ/RE)M⊕ ∼ 10−3M⊕ is biologically active and is blasted away from the surface b y the intense early bombardment phase of that solar system. If this mass is broken up into mB = 10 kg pieces, then the number of life bearing rocks would be NB ∼ 1020. However, it would be more likely for the mass to be broken up into a range of sizes, e.g., distributed according to the c onsiderations of the previous section. In this case, the number of biologically active rocks would be NB ≈ 1.5(ℓ/RE )M⊕/(m2 1m2)1/3 ∼ 1013. The number of biologically active rocks has been estimated p reviously (e.g., Melosh, 2003; Wallis and Wickramasinghe, 2004). As another benchmark, Me losh (2003) estimates that about 15 rocks per year (above the minimum mass mB) should be ejected from the surfaces of terrestrial planets due to impacts (see also Melosh and Tonks, 1994; for a more detailed discussion of boulder ejection, see Wallis and Wickramasinghe, 2004). Over the ti me scale of 10 Myr considered here, a terrestrial planet with life would contribute NB ∼ 107 life bearing rocks. Taken together, these considerations suggest that the number of life bearing rock s lies in the range NB = 10 7 − 1014, with the lower end of the range being strongly favored. We tak e NB = 10 7 as our standard value for the remainder of this paper. Notice, however, that a smal ler minimum mass mB (for biological protection) implies a larger number of rocks NR and a larger number of life bearing rocks NB. Since both values scale proportional to m−2/3 B , if mB were as small as 142 grams (the mass of a baseball), then the number of life bearing rocks would be lar ger by a factor of ∼ 17. On the other hand, during the late heavy bombardment of Earth, large impa cts may have led to a sterilization of the planet, at least on the surface. As a result, the number of biologically active rocks could be – 7 – much smaller than the numbers quoted above. 2.4. Dynamical scattering interactions in groups and clusters Stars – and hence solar systems – form in groups and clusters w ith a range of sizes, but a large fraction are born in stellar aggregates within the size rang e N⋆ = 100 – 1000. A cluster with N⋆ members has a typical radius of R =R(N⋆) = 1 pc ( N⋆/100)1/2, where this formula follows from a ﬁt to the data presented in Lada and Lada (2003) and Carpente r (2000). The average starting number density n⋆0 of solar systems in the birth cluster is given by n⋆0 = N⋆ 4(π/3)R3 ≈ 750 pc−3 πN⋆1/2 . (7) The eﬀective “scattering optical depth” τ for interactions between a passing body and a member of the cluster is given by the integral τ = ∫ n⋆⟨σ⟩vdt, (8) where ⟨σ⟩ is the cross section for interaction – in this case, the cross section for a solar system to capture a passing piece of rock. The scattering optical depth depends on the speeds at which r ocks are ejected from their solar systems. For ejection speeds less than (or comparable to) th e velocity dispersion of the cluster, the rocks are dynamically bound and will orbit within the gravit ational potential well of the cluster for many crossing times. In the opposite limit, high speed ro cks only experience a single crossing time before passing out of the cluster. As shown in §2.1, rocky bodies scattered by Jupiter and Neptune are expected to have ejection speeds veject ≈ 3 − 9 km/s, somewhat larger than the typical velocity dispersion vcls ≈ 1 km/s for a small cluster. As a result, many of the rocks will r eside in the high speed regime with v ∼ 5 km/s. Because the solar systems themselves are moving with relative speeds v ≈vcls ∼ 1 km/s, and because the scattering optical depth is a decreas ing function of v, using the velocity scale vcls results in the largest possible scattering optical depth τ , i.e., an upper limit on the eﬃcacy of transfer. For rocks that are bound to the cluster, we can “evaluate” the optical depth integral by writing it in the form τ = FRn⋆0v0tR0⟨σ⟩, (9) where the subscript ‘0’ refers to the values at the beginning of the cluster’s life. The time scale tR0 is the initial value of the dynamical relaxation time. The to tal eﬀective lifetime of the cluster is then given by the time scale FRtR0. Dynamical studies (see Binney and Tremaine, 1987) indicat e that clusters have total lifetimes of 50 – 100 times the initi al relaxation times. During this time, however, the number density n⋆ and typical speeds v of the solar systems decrease substantially. – 8 – We thus need to take lifetime factor FR to be somewhat smaller, FR ≈ 10. The starting relaxation time is given by tR0 = R v0 N⋆ 10 logN⋆ , (10) and the eﬀective optical depth of interaction becomes τ ≈ 3FRN⋆2⟨σ⟩ 40πR2 logN⋆ ≈ 24 N⋆ logN⋆ ⟨σ⟩ (1pc)2 . (11) This quantity will generally be less than unity, and thus rep resents the probability that a given piece of rock will be captured by some solar system in the clus ter, during the time interval for which the cluster remains intact. A related quantity is the optical depth of interaction ~τ for a given solar system to capture any piece of rock from an alien solar system. This second optical depth is given by the same integral form ~τ = ∫ nrock⟨σ⟩vdt, (12) wherenrock is the number density of rocky bodies that the solar system en counters. The remaining quantities are the same as before (equation [9]). In this cas e, we assume that each solar system ejects (on average) a given number NR of rocks, and that the velocity distribution of these rocky b odies follows that of the stars (which should be the case for low spe ed ejections since both populations are living in the same gravitational potential well). As a resul t, one expects that nrock ≈ (NR/N⋆)n⋆ and hence N⋆~τ =NRτ , where this latter quantity is the expected number of captur e events for the entire group/cluster. For rocks with higher initial velocities, the total path len gth sampled by a passing rock is of order one crossing length, i.e., ∫ vdt ≈R. The scattering optical depth is thus given by τ =n⋆⟨σ⟩R = 3N⋆⟨σ⟩ 4πR2 ≈ 24 ⟨σ⟩ (1pc)2 . (13) Because of the manner in which the cluster sizes R scale with stellar membership N⋆, the scattering optical depth τ is nearly independent of the cluster richness. This optical depth in the high speed limit is smaller than that of the low speed limit by a factor of N⋆/ logN⋆ and also has a smaller cross section (which is a sharply decreasing function of veject – see the following section). 2.5. Interaction cross sections The optical depths for interactions derived above can be app lied to a wide variety of events provided that the cross section for the event is known. In thi s context, we are interested in two separate but related issues: The capture of passing rocky bo dies by other solar systems (which are – 9 – mostly binaries), as well as the possibility that the rocky b ody strikes the surface of a terrestrial planet. The cross section for this process can thus be writte n in the form ⟨σ⟩ = ⟨σcap⟩fimp, (14) where ⟨σcap⟩ is the capture cross section and fimp is the fraction of captured rocks that strike the surface of a terrestrial planet in the system. We have calculated the capture cross sections ⟨σcap⟩ using a scattering code developed previously (Adams and Laughlin, 2001; Laughlin and Adams, 2000 ) to study the dynamics of solar systems interacting with binaries (most star systems are bi nary – see Abt, 1983). In this context, we perform a series of calculations to the study the capture o f rocky bodies by binary star systems. Individual encounters are treated as 3-body problems in whi ch the equations of motion are integrated using a Bulirsch-Stoer scheme. We separate out the se mi-major axis of the binary from the other variables (see below) and write the capture cross sect ion ⟨σcap⟩ in terms of the integral ⟨σcap⟩ ≡ ∫ ∞ 0 fcap(a)(4πa2)p(a)da, (15) where a is the semi-major axis of the binary orbit and p(a) is the distribution of a (determined from the observed distribution of binary periods – see Kroup a, 1995). This treatment includes only those interactions within the predetermined area 4 πa2 (more distant encounters are neglected because they have little eﬀect). The function fcap(a) represents the fraction of encounters that result in capture. Dynamical encounters between a given rock and a ﬁeld binary a re described by 10 input parameters (see Laughlin and Adams, 2000). These variables include the binary semi-major axis a, the stellar masses m∗1 and m∗2, the eccentricity ǫb and the initial phase angle ℓb of the binary orbit, the asymptotic velocity v∞ of the rock relative to the center of mass, the angles θ, ψ, and φ which describe the impact direction and orientation, and ﬁn ally the impact parameter h of the encounter. To compute the fraction of captures fcap(a) and the corresponding cross sections, we perform a large number of numerical experiments using a Monte Carlo sc heme to select the input parameters. The binary eccentricities are sampled from the observed dis tribution (Duquennoy and Mayor, 1991). Masses of the two binary components are drawn separately fro m an initial mass function (IMF) consistent with the observed IMF (in particular, the form ad vocated by Adams and Fatuzzo, 1996). The impact parameters h are chosen randomly within a circle of radius 2 a centered on the binary center of mass. The impact velocities at inﬁnite separation v∞ are sampled from a Maxwellian distribution with a given dispersion σv. Here, we calculate the cross sections as a function of the dispersion σv. For low ejection speeds, the rocks are bound to the cluster a nd the relevant velocity dispersion is determined by the gravity of the cluster ( σc ≈ vcls ≈ 1 km/s). For higher ejection speeds, the rocks are not necessarily bound and the relevant velocity dispersion is given by the dynamics of the ejection process (see Figure 1). – 10 – Using the methodology described above, we have performed ap proximately 300,000 numerical experiments to sample the parameter space. The resulting cr oss sections are shown in Figure 2 as a function of the velocity dispersion σv. Figure 2 also presents a ﬁt to the cross sections, where the ﬁtting function has the form ⟨σcap⟩ = (51, 900 AU2) v−1.79 kms exp[−0.235(lnvkms)2], (16) where vkms is the velocity dispersion in units of km/s. The capture cross sections calculated here are much greater than those used in the previous study of Melosh (2003) for two reasons: (1) Most stars reside in binary systems and binarity increases the interaction cross sections. The work of Melos h (2003) uses a Jupiter-mass companion, although the cross sections increase with companion mass; a n extrapolation of those results leads to estimates compatible with those calculated here (see als o Laughlin and Adams, 2000; Adams and Laughlin, 2001). (2) The cross sections are sensitive to the relative velocity of the interacting systems. In a young cluster this velocity scale is only σv ∼ 1 km/s and the ejection speeds veject ∼ 5 km/s; both values are much smaller than the velocity dispers ion of ﬁeld stars where σv ∼ 20 − 40 km/s. Although binarity increases the interaction cross section s, binary systems have a lower probability of supporting stable planetary orbits in their habit able zones and the companion can inhibit terrestrial planet formation. These eﬀects are surprisingl y modest: Over 50 percent of binary systems are wide enough to allow for Earth-like planets to remai n stable over the current 4.6 Gyr age of the solar system (David et al. , 2003). The reason for this large fraction of viable systems is that most binaries are wide, with the peak of the binary per iod distribution at Pb ≈ 105 days (Duquennoy and Mayor, 1991). Such orbits are wide enough ( a ∼ 42 AU for a solar mass primary) to allow stable orbits in the terrestrial region, as well as a stable ‘Jupiter’ with semi-major axis a = 5 AU. For this same reason, most binary companions do not inh ibit the formation of terrestrial planets (Quintana, 2004; Quintana et al. , 2002). 2.6. T ransfer probabilities Given the above considerations, we can now evaluate the odds for rocks to be ejected by one solar system and captured by another. The odds of life bearin g rocks being transferred can be determined similarly. Note that the results depend rather s ensitively on the ejection speeds for rocks expelled from a solar system. In order to cover the rang e of possibilities, we discuss both the low speed limit and the high speed limit. In the low speed limi t, deﬁned by when the ejection speed veject is less than the stellar velocity dispersion vcls in the cluster, the relative speed of interaction between rocks and solar systems is determined by the stellar motions and hence v =vcls ∼ 1 km/s. In the high speed limit, the ejection speeds are larger than r elative speeds between solar systems, and veject determines the relative speeds for capture interactions ( veject ≈ 5 km/s for many solar systems as illustrated by Figure 1). Because v ≈ 1 km/s represents an upper limit on the scattering – 11 – optical depth (see §2.4), we deﬁne a ﬁducial cross section ⟨σ⟩1 ≡ 52, 000 AU2 ≈π(129AU)2, as found numerically for σv = 1 km/s. In order to allow for easy scaling of our results, we a lso deﬁne a reduced cross section ⟨~σ⟩ ≡ ⟨σcap⟩/⟨σ⟩1. The velocity dependence of ⟨~σ⟩ is given by equation (16) and by Figure 2. In the low speed limit, the eﬀective optical depth of interact ion (per rock) becomes τ ≈ (3 × 10−5) N⋆ logN⋆ ⟨~σ⟩, (17) where we expect ⟨~σ⟩ ≈ 1. The typical stellar population for a clustered star forma tion region is about N⋆ = 300, so τ ≈ 0.0016, and the number of rocks needed to get a capture event is a bout τ −1 ≈ 630. In the high speed limit, the rocks only stay in the cluster for one crossing time and the eﬀective optical depth for interactions becomes τ ≈ (3 × 10−5)⟨~σ⟩, (18) where ⟨~σ⟩ ≪ 1. For a typical ejection speed veject = 5 km/s, for example, the reduced cross section ⟨~σ⟩ ≈ 0.0305 and the scattering optical depth is τ ≈ 10−6. In other words, only about one out of a million rocks are recaptured. The total number of capture events in the entire cluster is gi ven by Ncap = NRτ , where NR ∼ 1016 (see §2.2). For the low speed limit Ncap ≈ 1013, and for the high speed case with veject = 5 km/s, Ncap ≈ 1010. As a result, the solar systems in a typical birth aggregate w ill experience billions to trillions of capture events, where “ capture events” are the capture of rocky bodies from a single given solar system. It is possible – and e ven likely – that every solar system will contribute NR ∼ 1016 rocky bodies to the cluster environment. As a result, essent ially every solar system in a cluster can share rocky material with all of the other solar systems in its birth aggregate. The number of life bearing rocks is far lower than the total an d has a large uncertainty. Since the origin of life is presumably a rare event in contexts wher e panspermia is of interest, we expect that at most one solar system would (initially) become biolo gically active and capable of seeding the rest of its birth cluster. We thus consider only one syste m as the source of bioactive rocks. Keep in mind, however, that not all clusters are guaranteed t o develop life. As a result, the number of successful lithopanspermia events calculated here shou ld be multiplied by the fraction fcl of clusters that contain at least one living system (independe nt of panspermia). For our benchmark valueNB = 107, the number of captured life bearing rocks is Nbio ≈ 16,000 over the entire cluster in the limit of low ejection speeds. On average, every solar s ystem would capture about 50 life bearing rocks from the parent system. For higher ejection sp eeds (here, veject = 5 km/s), Nbio ≈ 10 and only 1 out of 30 solar systems in a typical birth cluster ar e expected to capture biologically active rocks. Nonetheless, some transfer of life bearing ro cks is likely to occur within young star clusters. – 12 – Although the capture of life bearing rocks is necessary to sp read life from one planet to another, it is not suﬃcient. A captured rock must eventually ﬁnd its wa y from its initial orbit (that resulting from the capture process) to the surface of a suitable terres trial planet. The probability fimp for a captured rock to strike a terrestrial planet is generally v ery small. Melosh (2003) has performed a series of simulations to estimate this quantity and ﬁnds th at the probability of impact over the entire age of our solar system (4.5 Gyr) is only about fimp ∼ 10−4. The probability of impact on a large rocky moon, in orbit about a giant planet, is somewhat s maller, fimp ∼ 10−5. As a working benchmark value, we adopt fimp ∼ 10−4. In this setting, however, the biologically active rocks are often captured while the solar systems are young and hence still in the process of building planets. These systems are extremely active and collisions are common. The life bearing rocks have a much better chance (compared with the case of mature solar systems) of colliding with other deb ris and infecting them with spores. Although a life bearing rock will collide with many other roc ky bodies, the eﬃciency of transfer (from rock to rock) is not known. In the long run, a large fract ion of the total rocky content of a solar system will become incorporated into surviving bodi es – giant planets, moons, terrestrial planets, or asteroids – so any infected rocks have a good chan ce of seeding life on larger bodies. This eﬀect will act to make the quantity fimp larger than that calculated previously for more mature solar systems. Our adopted ﬁducial value ( fimp ∼ 10−4) should thus be considered as a lower limit to the transfer eﬃciency. In addition to rocky bodies, comet s provide another useful vehicle for the transfer of biologically active material. As an added ad vantage, when comets pass through the atmosphere of an Earth-like planet, they tend to disintegra te into dust and can thereby deposit biological material in a viable state (e.g., Narlikar et al. , 2003). For further discussion regarding the survival of microorganisms during infall, see Hoyle et a l. (1999). As described above, the expected number of captured rocks th at are potentially biologically active is Nbio = 10 – 16,000 per cluster, depending mostly on the ejection sp eeds. Over this range, the expected number of biologically active rocks from a pare nt solar system that impact the surfaces of (potentially habitable) terrestrial planets in other so lar systems is about 0.001 to 1.6 per cluster. With these odds, biological transfer within a typical birth aggregate is quite possible. The discussion thus far determines the likelihood of biolog ically active rocks being transferred from a living solar system to the surface of a potentially hab itable planet in another system. In practice, however, only a fraction fseed of these rocks will lead to seeding of the new world. The diﬃculties associated with atmospheric entry, crashing on to the surface, and the necessity of landing in a nutrient rich location will lead to many failed attempts . This additional probability factor, which cannot be calculated within the scope of this paper, mu st be folded into any global assessment of the odds of lithopanspermia. These results are summarized in Figure 3, which shows the exp ected number of lithopanspermia eventsNlps = τf impNB as a function of mean ejection speed ⟨veject⟩. In this context, the velocity dispersion that determines the capture cross sections (see Figure 2) is given by the maximum of – 13 – the mean ejection speed ⟨veject⟩ and the cluster velocity dispersion vcls. The eﬀects of varying the cluster size N⋆ are illustrated by the three curves (for N⋆ = 100, 300, and 1000). At low velocities veject <v cls, the ejected rocks are bound to the cluster and the expected n umber of lithopanspermia events is maximized; in this limit, larger clusters produce higher numbers Nlps of expected events. At high speeds veject > vcls, the ejected rocks are unbound and generally pass through th e cluster only once. In this limit, the eﬀects of larger N⋆ (which increases the density of target solar systems) are nearly canceled by the eﬀects of increasing the cluster si zeR, so the optical depth for scattering interactions (and hence Nlps) is independent of cluster membership N⋆. Although equations (11) and (13) depict the transition between the low and high veloc ity regimes as a step function, the actual transition will not be as sharp. At intermediate ejec tion speeds veject ∼ 2 − 3 km/s, some rocks will remain in the cluster for several crossing times; in addition, some systems ( ∼ 10 percent) reside in the cluster core where the gravitational potentia l is deeper than average, perhaps by a factor of ∼ 10 (Binney and Tremaine, 1987), so higher ejection speeds ar e required for the rocks to become unbound. As a result, the transition from the low spee d limit to the high speed limit has been smoothed out in Figure 3 (with a transition width of 1 km/ s). 2.7. Long T erm Biological T ransformation of a Cluster The discussion thus far has focused on the ﬁrst 10 Myr of evolu tion, comparable to (but somewhat less than) the expected lifetimes for embedded groups a nd clusters. Although the majority of clusters will disperse after 10 – 20 Myr (e.g., Lada and Lad a, 2003), some fraction (roughly 10 percent) will remain bound for longer periods of time (100 – 5 00 Myr). In such environments, life has more time to spread throughout the cluster. This subsect ion considers the general transformation of a cluster from a nonliving state to one in which all o f the solar systems support life. Although most stellar aggregates will not live long enough t o complete this transition, this process is important in long-lived clusters. We assume here that the total number of stars N⋆ remains constant over the time span of interest. Let ND be the number of nonliving solar systems and NL be the number of living ones (ND +NL =N⋆). The infection rate Γ – the rate at which living systems can t ransfer life bearing rocks to terrestrial planets in nonliving systems – is given by Γ = ⟨σ⟩vnB, (19) where nB is the number density of life bearing rocks in the cluster at a given time. The transition from nonliving to living systems is described by the diﬀerent ial equation dND dt = −ΓND = −⟨σ⟩vnBND. (20) The number density of life bearing rocks nB depends on the number of living systems in the cluster and on how long they have been alive. If every living system pr ovides γ ≈ 15 rocks/yr to the – 14 – cluster, the population of life bearing rocks obeys the equa tion dnB dt =γn⋆(1 −fD), (21) where fD ≡ND/N⋆ is the fraction of nonliving solar systems. We can combine eq uations (20) and (21) to obtain d dt ( 1 fD dfD dt ) = −n⋆⟨σ⟩vγ(1 −fD). (22) The time scale t0 on which the fraction fD (and hence fL = 1 −fD) evolves is given by t0 ≡ (n⋆⟨σ⟩vγ)−1/2 ≈ 6.3Myr (N⋆/300)1/4⟨~σ⟩−1/2 (v/1kms−1)−1/2, (23) where we have used fimp = 10−4 and scaled the result using typical values in the second (app roximate) equality. The fraction of nonliving systems in the clu ster thus obeys the equation d d˜t ( 1 fD dfD d˜t ) = −(1 −fD), (24) where the dimensionless time ˜t =t/t0. The solution for the fraction fL = (1 −fD) of living systems as a function of dimensionless time is shown in Figure 4. As fo rmulated here, the solution can only depend on the initial condition fL(0), where we take the starting time to be when the ﬁrst solar system in the group develops life. Figure 4 shows the so lutions for three starting conditions, fL(t = 0) = 1 /N⋆, with N⋆ = 100, 300, and 1000. In smaller groups, the fraction fL of living systems is larger at the initial time, so the curve for fL(t) increases faster for smaller N⋆. Figure 5 shows the evolution in terms of physical variables – the larg er clusters produce many more living systems in the end (as expected), although the times scales a re somewhat longer. Notice that for typical values of N⋆, the time required for a cluster to make the transition to ful ly living (fL → 1) is longer than the expected lifetimes of these systems. 2.8. Time scales for lithopanspermia in clusters The basic scenario for lithopanspermia in clusters is outli ned above. To complete the discussion, we must examine the time scales involved in the process. Thes e time scales should be compared to the cluster lifetimes, which are expected to be of order 10 – 1 00 Myr, with considerable variation (Lada and Lada, 2003; Porras et al., 2003). The time required for biologically active rocks to be ejecte d from the parent solar system is probably the most important bottleneck in the process. For e xample, previous work has shown that the time required for Martian ejecta to be removed from a sola r system like our own is typically 30 – 50 Myr (Melosh, 2003; Gladman et al., 1996), where the minim um time for ejection is about 4 Myr. The median ejection time falls to only a few Myr when Jupi ter is placed at the orbit of Mars; extrapolation of Figure 3 from David et al. (2003) indicates that such a solar system architecture – 15 – would allow the Earth-like planet to remain stable for (roug hly) 200 Myr, longer than typical cluster lifetimes ( ∼100 Myr) and long enough for biological transfer to occur. Si nce solar systems are expected to have a wide variety of architectures, the tim e required for biologically active rocks to be ejected will vary greatly from system to system. In some cases, the rocks may not be ejected before the biologically active system leaves the cluster, a nd the lithopanspermia process will suﬀer from an added ineﬃciency. The time required for ejected rocks to travel from system to s ystem is relatively short (compared to the other times scales of interest). The ejection speeds l ie in the range 1 – 10 km/s and the cluster size is of order 1 pc. The corresponding travel times thus fall in the range 0.1 – 1 Myr, short enough not to be an issue. Erosion poses yet another potential problem facing biologi cally active rocks in space. For example, in the present Zodiacal cloud, a meter-sized rock c an be eroded on the relatively short time scale of 0.02 – 0.23 Myr, where this time scale depends se nsitively on the relative speed between the rocks and the eroding medium (see Napier 2004). T his time scale estimate is shorter than the time required for rocks to be ejected from the solar s ystem. Since younger systems contain even more gas and can drive more severe erosion, this eﬀect int roduces another ineﬃciency into the panspermia process. Lithopanspermia involves another rather long time scale. A fter a rock is captured by another solar system, a great deal of time passes before the rock land s on the surface of a terrestrial planet in the new system. The distribution of these time scales has b een calculated previously (Melosh, 2003). Most rocks are re-ejected (leading to the small fract ion fimp ∼ 10−4) with a median time of about 60 Myr. Although this time scale is comparable to (or perhaps longer than) the cluster lifetime, it is not a major obstacle for panspermia: The new s olar system can seed itself over a longer time scale, as long as the biologically active rocks a re not stripped out of the system as the cluster disperses. Of course, the most important, and most uncertain, time scal e is that required for life to develop in one of the member solar systems. Unfortunately, this time scale remains largely unknown. 3. CONCLUSION In this paper, we have reconsidered the hypothesis of lithop anspermia in the context of young, clustered star forming regions. In this environment, the co nditions are diﬀerent from those considered previously (namely in the ﬁeld) in several respects: [1 ] The density of solar systems is much greater and the relative velocities are lower; these qualit ies tend to enhance the transfer of any biologically active rocks that are present. [2] The systems live in the cluster for only 10 – 100 Myr, so the time scales available for transfer are shorter. [3] We also consider the fact that most stars reside in binaries; binarity increases the cross sections f or the capture of passing meteroids, but also decreases the range of parameter space available for ha bitable planets. In the early formative – 16 – phases of the solar system, rocky debris and bombardment are much more common, which also enhances transfer. However, the background UV radiation ﬁe lds are stronger in regions of clustered star formation and hence biological cargo is in greater dang er. 3.1. Summary of results [1] We have calculated the cross sections ⟨σcap⟩ for rocky bodies to be captured by binary star systems (which make up the majority of solar systems). T o determine each cross section, we use a Monte Carlo technique to sample the range of binary para meters, interaction geometries, and interaction speeds (for a given velocity dispersion σv). The resulting cross section is a steeply decreasing function of the velocity dispersion (see Figure 2) and can be ﬁt with a simple analytic form (see equation [16]). The resulting capture cross secti ons can be used in a wide variety of other applications. [2] Within typical star forming regions, the probability of any given ejected rock being recaptured by another solar system is relatively low. The eﬀective optical depth for this interaction is sensitive to the ejection speed of the rock from its original solar system. Over the expected range of clusters with N⋆ = 30 − 1000, the capture optical depth τ ≈ 0.0003 − 0.0043 in the limit where the mean ejection speed is less than or comparable to the velocit y dispersion of the stars in the cluster. For a higher mean ejection velocity ⟨veject⟩ ∼ 5 km/s, the optical depth is much lower, τ ≈ 10−6. In both limits, however, most rocks ejected from forming sol ar systems are not recaptured. [3] The total number NR of ejected rocks per solar system is large and the number of ca pture eventsNcap per cluster is given by Ncap ≈NRτ . Given the order of magnitude estimate NR ∼ 1016, every cluster will experience billions to trillions of capt ure events. Essentially all solar systems in a given birth aggregate are enriched (polluted) by rocks fro m other solar systems. In other words, the sharing of rocky material among young solar systems is in evitable. [4] The number NB of biologically active rocks ejected from a living solar sys tem is estimated to be NB ∼ 107 over the time spent in the birth aggregate (with considerabl e uncertainty). For clusters in which at least one system develops life, the numb erNbio of capture events for biologically active rock (per cluster) is given by Nbio ≈NBτ . In the low speed limit, the number of biologically active rocks captured (per cluster) is about Nbio ∼ 16, 000. This value is a steeply decreasing function of the rock ejection speed and reduces to Nbio ≈ 10 (per cluster) for the benchmark value ⟨veject⟩ = 5 km/s. If a solar system gives rise to life within a birth agg regate, then it is likely to transfer life bearing rocks to the other solar systems in the aggregate. (Note that only a fraction of clusters will develop life and thus be capable of spreadin g it through the mechanism considered here). [5] Only a fraction of the captured rocks that are biological ly viable will strike the surface of a terrestrial planet and thereby complete the lithopansper mia process. Previous studies estimated this fraction to be fimp ∼ 10−4. In general, the number of lithopanspermia events is given b yNlps ≈ – 17 – fimpNBτ . In the limit of low ejection speeds, only one or two lithopan spermia events are expected in a typical birth cluster. For higher speeds, ⟨veject⟩ ≈ 5 km/s, the expected number of successful lithopanspermia events per cluster is ∼ 10−3 and the odds of successful lithopanspermia are about 1 out of 1000. These general results are shown in Figure 3. A re lated quantity is the eﬀective eﬃciency of lithopanspermia, which is relatively low, i.e. , ǫlps ≡Nlps/N⋆ ≈ 3 × 10−6 − 5 × 10−3. The numbers quoted here apply only to those clusters that dev elop life and implicitly assume that all rocks that land on habitable planets will spread lif e. Neither of these assumptions is guaranteed to hold. In order to assess the global probabilit y of lithopanspermia, one must take into account that only a fraction fcl of clusters will develop life while they remain intact, and o nly a fraction fseed of rocks that land on suitable planets will be successful in e stablishing life. 3.2. External versus internal seeding In any panspermia scenario, a key bottleneck is the origin of life in the ﬁrst place. Of course, if the spontaneous origin of life were suﬃcently common, the re would no need for any panspermia mechanism to explain the presence of life, although biologi cal transfer would still be of interest. In the present context, an important issue is whether life is mo re likely to arise spontaneously within a birth cluster or be captured from the outside. In order to ma ke a quantitative assessment, we assume that life will arise with probability p for any given solar system within a time span of 10 Myr. Solar systems forming within a group or cluster (which r emains intact for about 10 Myr) will thus create life with probability p. The probability PC of a birth aggregate with N⋆ systems giving rise to life spontaneously is thus PC ≈N⋆p. For comparison, we must estimate the probability of the birt h cluster capturing life bearing rocks from the outside. The optical depth for capture is give n by τ =nσTℓ, where n is the number density of life bearing rocks, σT is the capture cross section of the entire cluster, and ℓ =vt is the eﬀective path length. Since v ∼ 40 km/s and t ∼ 10 Myr, the path length ℓ ∼ 400 pc. In the solar neighborhood, the number density of stars n⋆ ≈ 0.04 pc −3. If we assume that solar systems are biologically viable for ∼10 Gyr, then individual systems will create life with probab ility 1000p. The density of solar systems that give rise to life is 1000 n⋆p ≈ 40p pc−3. If each living solar system ejects 15 life bearing rocks per year ( §2.3), the density of life bearing rocks is n ∼ 6 × 1012p pc−3. The capture cross section for the entire cluster is approximate lyN⋆⟨σ(40km/s)⟩, where the cross section for an individual solar system to capture a high speed rock is ⟨σ(40km/s)⟩ ≈ 3 AU 2 (see equation [16]). The probability of the cluster capturing life bearin g rocks is thusτ =nσvt ≈ 180, 000N⋆p (per cluster). In order to compare with our estimate for the spont aneous rise of life, we must take into account the fact that only a fraction fimp of the life bearing rocks captured in this manner eventually strike the surface of a terrestrial planet and make a success ful transfer. For the benchmark value fimp ∼ 10−4, the probability of a cluster being seeded from the outside i s PC ≈ 18N⋆p. These results suggest that a young cluster is more likely to captur e life from outside than to give rise to life spontaneously. Once seeded, the cluster provides an eﬀe ctive ampliﬁcation mechanism to infect – 18 – other members. This formalism also provides an estimate of the probability that Earth has transferred life to other solar systems. This issue is especially pertinent bec ause Earth is the one planet where we know that life did develop. We consider the case of continued ejection of life bearing rocks over the age of the solar system, so we use conditions relevant to t he ﬁeld. The optical depth for a rock (from Earth) being captured by another solar system is given by τ = n⋆σv(∆ t), where n⋆ ≈ 0.04 pc−3,v ≈ 40 km/s, ∆ t ≈ 4 Gyr, and σ(40 km/s) ≈ 3 AU2. With these values, the optical depth for capture is τ ≈ 4.6 × 10−7. Following the same approximation scheme developed earlie r, we assume that the Earth ejects about 10 life bearing rocks per year and thus ejects NB ≈ 4 × 1010 such rocks during the time over which life has existed. Putting th ese two results together, we ﬁnd that NBτ/ 2 ≈ 9, 000 life bearing rocks will be captured by other solar system s (where we have included the factor of two to account for the fact that the rocks that ar e ejected ﬁrst have a longer travel time). Using the standard fraction fimp ≈ 10−4 for the number of captured rocks that make their way onto the surface of a habitable planet, the expected numb er of transfer events is about 0.9. In other words, these results suggest that life on Earth can b e transferred to one other habitable world in another solar system. This value reﬂects the steady state transfer rate of life from our solar system to others. In addition, our planet is thought to have experience a period of “late heavy bombardment” from about 4.4 to 3.8 Gyr ago, when a large numbe r of additional life bearing rocks could be ejected into space. This epoch implies an enhanceme nt in the transfer rate (and will be the subject of a forthcoming paper – G. Laughlin, private com munication). 3.3. Discussion and future work This paper shows that young star clusters provide an eﬃcient means of transferring rocky material from solar system to solar system. If any solar syst em in the birth aggregate supports life, then many other solar systems in the cluster can captur e life bearing rocks. Only a fraction of these systems will feed biologically active rocks onto th e surfaces of terrestrial planets, however, so the odds of successful lithopanspermia are low: In the lim it of low speed ejecta, only a few systems per cluster are expected to be biologically seeded t hrough this mechanism, although the eﬃciency is reasonably high (about ǫlps ≈ 0.005). If the origin of life is relatively common and if life bearing rocks can be ejected at low speeds, then dynamic al interactions in stellar birth clusters would provide an eﬀective mechanism for spreading life. This paper has explored the possibility that young clusters can lead to greater eﬃciency of panspermia. However, these cluster environments also pres ent additional hazards for the transfer of biological material. One obstacle is the increased level s of radiation at ultraviolet wavelengths. Previous work on this subject has shown that the radiation ﬁe lds in small clusters (those with a few hundred members) are generally not strong enough to aﬀec t circumstellar disks and planet formation (e.g., Adams and Laughlin, 2001; Adams et al., 200 4), although a deﬁnitive assessment of the consequences for biological material remains to be done . Further, the radiation ﬁelds increase – 19 – steeply with increasing cluster size N⋆ so that suﬃciently large clusters will present substantial hazards. Another potential issue is that of supernovae. Sin ce only about 3 out of every 1000 stars are massive enough to end their lives in a supernova explosio n, such events are rare in small clusters (Adams and Laughlin, 2001). Furthermore, the most massive s tars tend to live near the cluster centers, so that the majority of stars will be ∼ 1 pc away (see Adams and Myers, 2001). In the discussion thus far, we have estimated the likelihood of lithopanspermia events using conservative values for the input parameters. The resultin g odds of life being carried from solar system to solar system are high enough to be tantalizing, but not high enough to guarantee transfer. It is interesting to see what might happen with more optimist ic estimates. Consider the case of low ejection speeds so that the velocity dispersion of solar systems in the cluster determines the cross section, i.e., σv ≈ vcls ≈ 1 km/s and hence ⟨~σ⟩ ≈ 1. In this case, the interaction optical depth τ = 3 × 10−5N⋆/ logN⋆. Next we assume that the lower mass limit for spores to surviv e is mB = 142 g (the mass of a baseball) so that NB ≈ 1.7 × 108, and the eﬃciency of transfer is enhanced because of the extreme collisional activity of pla net formation so that fimp ≈ 10−3. We also assume that life bearing rocks that land on suitable pla nets will be successful in spreading life so that fseed = 1. With these values, the expected number of lithopansperm ia events (per cluster) is Nlps ≈ 5.1N⋆/ logN⋆ over the ﬁducial 10 Myr time scale. In this limit, life can be t ransferred to every solar system in a group with N⋆ = 100. In a larger cluster with N⋆ = 1000, 75% of the systems would become infected with life over the nominal 10 M yr time period; however, larger clusters remain intact much longer and have additional time to transfer biological material from system to system. As a result, optimistic circumstances all ow a cluster, once biologically seeded, to transfer life to the majority of its solar systems through the process of lithopanspermia. To further our understanding of the lithopanspermia mechan ism, additional calculations must be performed. One important quantity is the fraction fimp of captured material that falls onto the surfaces of habitable planets. This paper follows previous authors and uses the estimate fimp ≈ 10−4. Starting with the locations of captured rocks from the bina ry capture simulations, a large ensemble of dynamical calculations should be performed to d eterminefimp. A related issue is that for suﬃciently young solar systems, biologically active ro ck can be captured while the planets are still being assembled. During the planet formation epoch, r ock-rock collisions are common and spores could (in principle) be transferred from rock to rock , leading to an enhancement in the eﬀective value of fimp. Another important quantity is the minimum mass necessary f or biological material to survive in space. In the setting of a young cluste r, the travel time is much lower than in the ﬁeld (only ∼ 1 Myr compared to many Gyr), but the radiation ﬁelds are more i ntense. And ﬁnally, the number of biologically active rocks ejected by a given living planet should be estimated with greater precision. Acknowledgments We would like to thank Greg Laughlin for useful conversation s. We thank both referees — H. Melosh and B. Napier — for many useful comments that improv ed the paper. FCA is sup- – 20 – ported at the University of Michigan by the Michigan Center f or Theoretical Physics and by NASA through the Terrestrial Planet Finder Mission (NNG04G190G ) and the Astrophysics Theory Program (NNG04GK56G0). DNS is supported by the NASA Astrophysi cs Theory program. REFERENCES Abt, H. A. (1983) Normal and abnormal binary frequencies. Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 21, 343-372. Adams, F. C., and Fatuzzo, M. (1996) A theory of the initial ma ss function for star formation in molecular clouds. Astrophys. J. 464, 256-271. Adams, F. C., Hollenbach, D., Laughlin, G., Gorti, U. (2004) Photoevaporation of circumstellar disks due to external far-ultraviolet radiation in stellar aggregates. Astrophys. J. 611, 360- 379. Adams, F. C. and Laughlin, G. (2001) Constraints on the birth aggregate of the solar system. Icarus 150, 151-162. Adams, F. C., and Myers, P. C. (2001) Modes of multiple star fo rmation. Astrophys. J. 553, 744-753. Battista, J. R. (1997) Against all odds: the survival strate gies of Deinococcus radiodurans. Ann. Rev. Microbiol. 51, 203-224. Benardini, J. H., Sawyer, J., Venkateswaran, K., and Nichol son, W. L. (2003) Spore UV and acceleration resistance of endolithic Bacillus pumilus and Bacillus subtilis isolates obtained from Sonoran Desert basalt: implications for lithopansper mia. Astrobiology 3, 709-717. Binney, J., and Tremaine, S. (1987) Galactic Dynamics , Princeton University Press, Princeton. Burchell, M. J., Mann, J., Bunch, A. W., and Brando, P.F.B. (2 001) NOTE: Survivability of bacteria in hypervelocity impact. Icarus 154, 545-547. Burchell, M. J., Mann, J. R., and Bunch, A. W. (2004) Survival of bacteria and spores under extreme shock pressures Mon. Notices R. Astron. Soc. 352, 1273-1278. Carpenter, J. (2000) 2MASS observations of the Perseus, Ori on A, Orion B, and Monoceros R2 molecular clouds. Astron. J. 120, 3139-3161. David, E.-M., Quintana, E. V., Fatuzzo, M., and Adams, F. C. ( 2003) Dynamical stability of Earth-like planetary orbits in binary systems. Pub. Astron. Soc. Paciﬁc 115, 825-836. Dones, L., Gladman, B., Melosh, H. J., Tonks, W. B., Levison, H. F., and Duncan, M. (1999) Dynamical lifetimes and ﬁnal fates of small bodies: orbit in tegrations vs ¨Opik calculations. Icarus 142, 509-524. – 21 – Duquennoy, A., and Mayor, M. (1991) Multiplicity among sola r type stars in the solar neighborhood II. Distribution of the orbital elements in an unbiased samp le. Astron. Astrophys. 248, 485- 524. Gladman, B. (1997) Destination: Earth. Martian meteorite t ransfer. Icarus 130, 228-246. Gladman, B. J., Burns, J. A., Duncan, M., Lee, P., and Levison , H. F. (1996) The exchange of impact ejecta between terrestrial planets. Science 271, 1387-1392. Horneck, G. (1993) Responses of Bacillus subtilis spores to space environment: results from experiments in space. Orig. Life Evol. Biosph. 23, 37-52. Hoyle, F., Wickramasinghe, N. C., and Al-Mutti, S. (1999) Th e viability with respect to temperature of microoganisms incident on the Earth’s atmosphe re. Astrophys. Space Sci. 268, 45-50. Hughes, D. W., and Daniels, P. A. (1982) Temporal variations in the cometary mass distribution. Mon. Notices R. Astron. Soc. 198, 573-582. Huss, G. R. 1990. Meteorite infall as a function of mass – Impl ications for the accumulation of meteorites on Antarctic ice. Meteoritics 25, 41-56. Kroupa, P. (1995) The dynamical properties of stellar syste ms in the galactic disc. Monthly Notices R. Astron. Soc. 277, 1507-1521. Lada, C. J., and Lada, E. A. (2003) Embedded clusters in molec ular clouds. Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 41, 57-115. Laughlin, G., and Adams, F. C. (2000) The frozen Earth: binar y scattering events and the fate of the solar system. Icarus 145, 614-627. Levison, H. F., and Agnor, C. (2003) The role of giant planets in terrestrial planet formation. Astron. J. 125, 2692-2713. Levison, H. F., Lissauer, J. J., and Duncan, M. J. (1998) Mode ling the diversity of outer planetary systems. Astron. J. 116, 1998-2014. Lissauer, J. J. (1993) Planet formation. Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 31, 129-174. Mastrapa, R.M.E., Glanzberg, H., Head, J. N., Melosh, H. J., and Nicholson, W. L. (2001) Survival of bacteria exposed to extreme acceleration: Implications for panspermia. Earth Planetary Sci. Letters 189, 1-8. McSween, H. Y. (1985) SNS meteorites: clues to Martian petro logic evolution? Rev. Geophys. 23, 391-416. – 22 – Melosh, H. J. (2003) Exchange of meteorites (and life?) betw een stellar systems. Astrobiology 3, 207-215. Melosh, H. J., and Tonks, W. B. (1994) Swapping rocks: ejecti on and exchange of surface material among the terrestrial planets. Meteoritics 28, 398. Mileikowsky, C., Cucinotta, F., Wilson, J. W., Gladman, B., Horneck, G., Lindgren, L., Melosh, H. J., Rickman, H., Valtonen, M. J., and Zheng, J. Q. (2000) Na tural transfer of viable microbes in space. Part I. From Mars to Earth and from Earth to Mars. Icarus 145, 391-427. Minton, K. W. (1994) DNA repair in the extremely radioresist ant bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans. Mol. Microbiol. 13, 9-15. Napier, W. M. (2001) Temporal variation of the zodiacal dust cloud. Mon. Notices R. Astron. Soc. 321, 463-470. Napier, W. M. (2004) A mechanism for interstellar panspermi a. Mon. Notices R. Astron. Soc. 348, 46-51. Narlikar, J. V. et al. (2003) A balloon experiment to detect m icroorganisms in the outer space. Astrophys. Space Sci. 285, 555-562. Nicholson, W. L., Munakata, N., Horneck, G., Melosh, H. J., a nd Setlow, P. (2000) Resistance of Bacillus endospores to extreme terrestrial and extraterrestrial en vironments. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 64, 548-572. Quintana, E. V. (2004) Planet formation in binary star syste ms. PhD Thesis University of Michigan. Quintana, E. V., Lissauer, J. J., Chambers, J. E., and Duncan , M. J. (2002) Terrestrial planet formation in the Alpha Centauri system. Astrophys. J. 576, 982-996. Porras, A., Christopher, M., Allen, L., DiFrancesco, J., Me geath, S. T., and Myers, P. C. (2003) A catalog of young stellar groups and clusters within 1 kilopa rsec of the Sun. Astron. J. 126, 1916-1924. Schroeder, M. (1991) Fractals, Chaos, and Power Laws , W. H. Freeman, New York. Wallis, M. K., and Wickramasinghe, N. C. (2004) Interstella r transfer of planetary microbiota. Mon. Notices R. Astron. Soc. 348, 52-61. Wells, L. E., Armstrong, J. C., and Gonzalez, G. (2003) Resee ding of of early earth by impacts of returning ejecta during the late heavy bombardment. Icarus 162, 38-46. White, O. et al. (1999) Genome sequence of the radioresistant bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans R1. Science 286, 1571-1577. This preprint was prepared with the AAS L ATEX macros v5.2. – 23 – 0 5 10 15 20 0 10 20 30 40 50 Fig. 1.— Ejection speeds for rocky bodies removed from a sola r system. The solid curve shows the distribution of ejection speeds for rocky bodies on Jupiter -crossing orbits. The dashed curve shows the corresponding distribution of ejection speeds for rock y bodies on Neptune-crossing orbits. The dotted curve shows the distribution of ejection speeds for a stellar companion with mass M∗ = 0.1 M⊙ and with semi-major axis a = 42 AU (near the peak of the binary period distribution). All three distributions of ejection speed shown here have the sa me normalization. – 24 – 1 10 10 100 1000 Fig. 2.— Capture cross section for rocks interacting with bi nary star systems. The cross section ⟨σcap⟩ is shown as a function of the velocity dispersion σv. Typical star forming groups and clusters haveσv ≈ 1 km/s, corresponding to the left end of the curve; stars in th e ﬁeld have σv ≈ 20 − 40 km/s, corresponding to the right side of the curve. Rocks tha t are scattered out of solar systems display a range of ejection speeds (roughly spanning the ran ge shown here), depending on the location in their solar system from which they are ejected. T he solid curve shows the result of our numerical simulations; the error bars depict the one sta ndard deviation errors resulting from the Monte carlo scheme used to sample the input parameter spa ce. The dashed curve shows an analytic ﬁt to the cross section (see text). – 25 – 1 10 0.0001 0.001 0.01 0.1 1 10 Fig. 3.— Expected number of lithopanspermia events per clus ter. The three curves show the expected number of successful instances of biological tran sfer as a function of the mean ejection speed ⟨veject⟩. The capture cross sections are a function of velocity dispe rsionσv, which is set by the the maximum of the mean ejection speed ⟨veject⟩ and the cluster velocity dispersion vcls. The solid curve shows the number of events expected for a typical group /cluster with N⋆ = 300 members. The dashed curve corresponds to N⋆ = 100 and the dotted curve corresponds to N⋆ = 1000. – 26 – 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 Fig. 4.— Fraction of solar systems that contain life as a func tion of dimensionless time. The three curves show the result for diﬀerent starting conditions, i.e ., fL(t = 0) = 1/N⋆ withN⋆ = 100, 300, and 1000 (from left to right in the ﬁgure). – 27 – 0 100 200 300 400 0 200 400 600 800 1000 Fig. 5.— Number of solar systems that contain life as a functi on of physical time (in Myr). The three curves show the result for diﬀerent starting condition s, for clusters with N⋆ = 100, 300, and 1000. Each curve asymptotically approaches N⋆ in the long time limit.