 [1] ^ #1 [5] (#1) #5, Science #2 , #3--#4. [3] (#1) #2 , #3. [1] #1 document Exploring the Galaxy using space probes R.\ Bj rk ^1 ^1 Niels Bohr Institute, Juliane Maries vej 32, DK-2100 Copenhagen , Denmark, e-mail: rbjk@astro.ku.dk This paper investigates the possible use of space probes to explore the Milky Way, as a means both of finding life elsewhere in the Galaxy and as finding an answer to the Fermi paradox. I simulate exploration of the Galaxy by first examining how long time it takes a given number of space probes to explore 40,000 stars in a box from -300 to 300 pc above the Galactic thin disk, as a function of Galactic radius. I then model the Galaxy to consist of 260,000 of these 40,000 stellar systems all located in a defined Galactic Habitable Zone and show how long time it takes to explore this zone. The result is that with 8 probes, each with 8 subprobes 4\% of the Galaxy can be explored in 2.92 10^ 8 years. Increasing the number of probes to 200, still with 8 subprobes each, reduces the exploration time to 1.52 10^ 7 years. Introduction Exploring the Galaxy by the use of interstellar space probes is the only way to perform detailed investigations of extrasolar planets believed to harbor life. Also the Fermi paradox, quote If there are extraterrestrial civilizations out there then where are they? Why haven't we seen any traces of intelligent extraterrestrial life, such as probes, spacecraft or transmissions? quote can be investigated if we know how long time it takes to explore the Galaxy with space probes. Here I simulate exploration of the Galaxy with space probes using a numerical model of the Galaxy. But before going into detail with the model, I describe the initial parameters needed to built a model of the Milky Way. In Section the initial parameters for the simulation is derived. Section presents a model for exploring 40,000 stars in a box covering a distance of 300 pc above and below the Galactic plane as a function of Galactic radius. Section models the whole Galaxy based on these results and presents the final results and discussion. Initial parameters There are roughly 100 billion stars in the Milky Way (Allan 1973). The fraction of these stars that have planets suitable for harboring life is estimated to be 10 \% , all located in the so called Galactic Habitable Zone (GHZ), which spans the area 3-11 kpc from the Galactic Center (Lineweaver et al. 2004). This GHZ is comparable with the one found by Pe\ na-Cabrera et al. (2004), which extents from 4-17.5 kpc. In the following calculations, the Lineweaver GHZ is used. There are roughly 820 F, G, K and M stars pr 10^ 4 pc ^ 3 in the solar neighborhood, equal to a square box of 21.54^3 pc ^ 3 (Allan 1973). This corresponds to 0.0615 stars per pc ^ 3 if it is assumed that 50\% of the stars are in binaries and a binary is counted as one star. O and B stars are disregarded as these have to short a lifetime too harbor planets where life has time to evolve. Spectral class A stars are included as it is argued by Pe\ na-Cabrera et al. (2004) that these have a long enough lifetime to allow at least simple life to evolve. Binary systems consisting of two low mass stars are not disregarded as simulations have shown that these can harbor terrestrial-like planets (Lissauer et. al. 2004) The stellar number density of the Milky Way disk is assumed to decline exponentially with distance from the Galactic Center (GC). Measurements of the scale length gives results in the range 2.5-3.5 kpc (see Sackett 1997 for a review). Star counts from the Two-Micron All-Sky Survey (2MASS) yield 3.3 kpc (Lpez-Corredoira et al. 2002) whereas direct measurements of M stars with the Hubble Space Telescope by Zheng et al. (2001) results in 2.75 kpc. In the following a scale length of 3 kpc is used. The area to be explored is defined as the area between 3 kpc and 11 kpc from the GC and 300 pc above and below the Milky Way's thin disk, as this last figure is the scale-height of the Galactic thin disk (Gilmore \& Reid 1983). To find the number of stars in this area the stellar number density profile is simply integrated over this interval, with binaries counted as one star. With z denoting the height respectively above and below the Galactic Plane, r denoting the radial distance from the GC and _ GC denoting the stellar number density at 3 kpc radial distance from the GC, the number of habitable stars, N_ hab , is eqnarray N_ hab = _ 3 kpc _ 3\; kpc ^ 11\; kpc -.5cm 2 r e^ -r 3\; kpc \;dr 2 _ 0\; kpc ^ 0.3\; kpc -.5cm e^ -z 0.3\; kpc \;dz , eqnarray equal to 1.17 10^ 10 . The factor of two is caused by the equality between -z and z . These 1.17 10^ 10 habitable stars are an overwhelmingly large amount, and too many to include in a simulation. My approach will therefore be to examine how long time it takes a number of probes to explore a small number of stars, and see how this exploration-time scales as a function of the stellar number density, i.e. the Galactic radius. I also investigate how the exploration time scales as a function of the number of probes used. These results are then later used when simulating exploration of the entire Galaxy. Exploring 40,000 stars In this simulation, I investigate how long it will take to explore a volume containing 40,000 stars. In the following ``stars'' designate stars that can possibly sustain life. Thus, as already mentioned, O and B stars are excluded in the models. The model In the first part of my simulation 3D box-systems are modeled, each containing 40,000 stars, but located at different Galactic radii. The already mentioned exponential decline of the stellar density with Galactic radius means that there will be fewer stars per cubic pc further away from the GC, and each box will thus become bigger in order to contain the 40,000 stars. All the boxes go from -300 to 300 pc in the z direction. In regards to the exponential decline of the stellar density any spiral structure that the Galaxy might have is disregarded, as I assume that the density of low-mass stars does not increase strongly in the spiral arms. Exploration algorithm The 40,000 stars are explored by sending out one host probe which travels to some faraway star referred to as the ``destination star''. Once the probe arrives, it dispatches a number (4 or 8) smaller probes, that in total investigate the 40,000 nearest stars. They do this by always moving to the star nearest to their current location that have not been explored already. The distance and position of this star can easily be determined from its parallax. After all the 40,000 stars have been explored the probes return to the destination star, where they dock with the host probe for maintenance and prepare to travel to a new destination star. The time it takes to travel back to the host probe from the last star explored, once all 40,000 stars are covered, is a tiny fraction of the time it takes to explore the 40,000 stars, and thus this return time has no impact on the total exploration time. Once all the 40,000 stars have been explored and the probes have returned to the host probe, this moves to a new destination star some distance away where the smaller probes are released again to explore the 40,000 nearest stars and so on. In this way, the whole galaxy can be covered in a finite amount of time. For all probes a speed of 0.1c is assumed. This velocity is low enough that effects due to general relativity can be ignored, yet high enough that the travel time between stars are on the order of years. The smaller probes only do flyby investigations of the stars since the time and energy required to first brake and then reaccelerate the probe would slow the exploration time considerably. The time required to brake the spacecraft, examine all the planets in the given system in detail, and reaccelerate the spacecraft will be at least of the same order of magnitude as the travel time between two stars, thus reducing the number of stars visited in a given amount of time by at least a factor of 2. Therefore flyby investigation is assumed. The purpose of the flyby spaceprobes is to detect whether there are any possible habited planets in the system. If this is the case then a new probe can be launched from the mother planet to do detailed investigation. It should be relatively easy to detect life on the surface of planets even from a flyby spaceprobe. To use our own civilization as an example, the light-pollution and heavy radio-broadcasted communication would reveal our presence on the Earth easily to any flyby probe entering the Solar System, even if it were only equipped with technological equipment available today, such as a telescope equal to the Hubble Space Telescope's and a radio receiver. To prevent the small probes from visiting the same stars twice, each probe is limited to only investigate stars at a given height from the disk-plane. Thus the first probe will e.g. only explore stars in the range z = 0-50 pc and so on. In reality this could be done by making the probes calculate their distance from the disk plane based on parallax to a number of known disk plane stars. This approach effectively prevents probes from exploring the same stars. \\ The exploration pattern of such a setup can be seen in Fig. . The time it takes a given number of probes to fully explore a 3D box containing 40,000 stars as a function of Galactic radius is given in Fig. . The two different colored symbols are if either 4 or 8 small probes are used. The fitted functions are both exponential functions of the form a e^ b r . For 4 probes a=334,636\; [yr] and b=1.07732 10^ -4 \; [pc ^ -1 ] and for 8 probes a=172,734\; [yr] and b=1.05971 10^ -4 \; [pc ^ -1 ] . It thus takes of the order of 10^5 years to explore 40,000 stars, covering z from -300 to 300 pc. Having found out how long time it takes to explore 40,000 stars, as a function of Galactic radius, this result is used to simulate exploration of the entire Galaxy. Modeling the whole Galaxy The problem with modeling the whole Galaxy is that even when this is modeled consisting of systems each with 40,000 stars, there are still 260,000 such system in the Galaxy. This is a bit too many to be handled in a reasonable amount of time, so I focus only on the time needed to explore our quadrant of the Galaxy. Thus, only an area one fourth the size of the total circumference of the Galaxy, centered on the Solar System is explored. This reduces the number of systems needed to be explored by a factor of 4. In this quadrant of the Milky Way there will thus be 65,000 systems consisting of 40,000 stars each, clearly illustrating just how enormous the Galaxy is. In the following ``stars'' mean systems of 40,000 stars. The model of the Galaxy is build so that the stellar density declines exponentially with Galactic radius as already explained in Sec. . Each host probe always moves to the star located nearest to its present location that has not been explored yet. This means that not all stars in the vicinity of the home planet will be covered, but it maximizes the number of stars explored as a function of time. To prevent the host probes from exploring the same stars each host probe is assigned an angle in the disk plane as seen from the mother planet if looking towards the GC, which it has to stay inside. For example, if there are 4 probes, then the first could be assigned an angle from 0 to /2 and so on. This can easily be accomplished in reality by telling the probe to fix its orientation by means of distant galaxies. In my simulations the angle is chosen such that the number of stars are the same in each angle. This gives a larger angle to the probes exploring the outer regions of the Galaxy compared to the probes in the inner part of the Galaxy. Results I now simulate the entire Galaxy from 3 kpc to 11 kpc and explore one quarter of it. 4 or 8 host probes is send out. Each star in the Galaxy now represents 40,000 stars and each time a probe has explored one star here, the results from Fig. is used to add the time needed to explore the 40,000 stars at this point. For 4 probes, each with 4 subprobes, the time required to explore 10,000 systems, each containing 40,000 stars, is 1.16 10^ 9 years which is around 10 percent of the age of the Universe according to observational data of the microwave background radiation (Spergel et. al. 2006). As this is a completely unrealistic time for any civilization to wait, the simulation was also run for 8 probes, each with 8 subprobes. The Galaxy from this simulation is shown in Fig. . Here the time is 2.92 10^ 8 years, again an immense time. However, as seen in Fig. the probes manage to traverse distances of almost 4 kpc during that time, bringing them to the inner and outer edges of the Galaxy in the quadrant where they started. Discussion The scope of the simulation becomes clear when one realizes that the above mentioned times are only for exploring 10,000 of the 260,000 systems of 40,000 stars each. Thus it takes 2\% of the age of the Universe to explore 1/26 3.85\% of the Galaxy, using 8 probes with 8 subprobes. To explore the entire Galaxy with probes like this is virtually impossible. One could argue that using only 8 probes with 8 subprobes each is totally inadequate for exploring a whole galaxy. This is a good argument, but it must be remembered that these probes are by no means similar to the small interplanetary probes that are known today. They will be much larger and much more expensive to produce then any space probe previously built since they have to last for 10^ 9 years and be able to repair themselves. The economic feasibility of building such probes will not be discussed here. However, in order to accommodate this criticism, a simulation of the exploration of the Galaxy, using 200 host probes, each with 8 subprobes was ran. The result is that in this case, it took 1.52 10^ 7 years to explore the 10,000 nearest systems of 40,000 stars each. I realize that there are other problems with a simulation of the above type. First of all, it is assumed that the probes never fail or are destroyed. It seems very unlikely that a probe would even function the 10^5 years it takes to explore the 40,000 stars from -300 to 300 pc in the z -direction. All though I have used a relatively high probe velocity of 0.1 c , it is a possibility that even faster probes could be invented, and thus decreasing the exploration time significantly. One could also contemplate the idea of launching self-replicating probes i.e. probes that are able to build copies of themselves by harvesting materials from each stellar system they pass. The construction of such probes are technologically as difficult as producing the conventional probes proposed to be used to explore the Galaxy, as these conventional probes must operate for millions, if not billions, of years. Therefore one can argue that self-replicating probes should instead be used to explore the Galaxy, as using such probes will lead to much faster exploration times, as the number of probes increase as time goes by. In fact if self-replicating probes, or von Neumann probes as they are also termed, were used to explore the Galaxy it has been shown that a search of the entire Galaxy will take 4 10^ 6 -3 10^ 8 years dependent on the speed of the probes (Tipler 1980). This is much faster than using the non-replicative probes proposed in this paper. However, one should note that there could be complications with using self-replicating probes. Tipler (1980) himself points out that the program controlling the self-replicating probes would have to have so high an intelligence that it might ``go into business for itself'' and become out of control of the humans who designed it, resulting in unforeseeable consequences. Since the machines uses the same resources as humans, a self-replicating machine might regards humans as competitors and try to exterminate them. Chyba (2005) also points out that self-replicating probes might evolve to prey on each other, creating a sort of machine food-chain. This would of cause drastically reduce their exploration rate. Therefore the conclusion is that if perfect self-replicating probes could be built, these could explore the Galaxy much faster than the probes suggested here. However, building less-then-perfect self-replicating probes could, in the worst case scenario, have fatal consequences for the human race. There is also the problem that on the long time scales used for modeling the whole Galaxy, the differential rotation of the Galaxy will have an influence on the exploration time as well as the probes distance from the home planet and this effect has been neglected. And finally there is the important consideration that the search techniques proposed in this paper is basically a blind search. Each stellar system is searched individually, even though it may not host any planets at all. Of cause it would be much faster only to search the stars around which planets were known to exist. If the likelihood of planets existing around a star as a function of stellar type were known, one could implement this in a simulation to find the reduction in time by searching only stars with planets. Unfortunately we do not know this function and can thus only guess at the reduction in time. A reasonable assumption would that if only half the stars have planets, the search time will be reduced by roughly a factor of two. Note that the search should probably not be limited to systems with Earth-like planets. We do not know what form an extraterrestrial lifeform might assume, and thus we cannot exclude any planetary systems from our search. In this regard it is worth mentioning the DARWIN space telescope, currently in development by the European Space Agency. DARWIN, which is scheduled for launch around 2015, will be able to obtain spectra of planetary atmospheres of any terrestrial-like planets orbiting one of the nearest 1000 stars. This mission, together with other missions such as ``COROT'' or the ``Terrestrial Planet Finder'', both of which will be able to detect terrestrial-like planets around the closest stars, will in the near future provide us with candidate planets to be searched for life. Thus there is a reasonable possibility that in the nearby future the first human-made interstellar probes will begin to search the Galaxy for life. Thus it is important to develop search strategies that will maximize the exploration potential. Returning now to the results obtained in this paper, I seem to be able to conclude based on the results from my simulations that exploring the Galaxy by sending out probes to visit the other stars is horribly slow. However, unless travel methods are invented which gives access to faster-than-light-travel, there seems to be no alternative way to proceed than this proposed process. This could offer a possible explanation to the Fermi paradox. We have not yet been contacted by any extraterrestrial civilizations simple because they have not yet had the time to find us. Searching the Galaxy for life is a painstakingly slow process. References list 3em -3em 0pt 1pt [] Allan, C.W. 1973 Astrophysical Quantities London: Athlone Press, 3.rd ed. Chyba, C. F. \& Hand, K. P. (2005), ASTROBIOLOGY: The Study of the Living Universe, Annual Review of Astronomy \& Astrophysics , 43 , 31-74 Gilmore, G. \& Reid, I.N. (1983), The vertical structure of the Milky Way's stellar disk, MNRAS , 202 , 1025 Lineweaver, C.H.; Fenner, Y.; Gibson, B.K. 2004 303 59 62 , The Galactical Habitable Zone and the Age Distribution of Complex Life in the Milky Way Lissauer J.J., Quintana E.V., Chambers J.E., Duncan M.J., Adams F.C. (2004), Terrestrial Planet Formation in Binary Star Systems, RevMexAA , 22 , 99-103 Lpez-Corredoira M.; Cabrera-Lavers, A.; Garzn, F.; Hammersley, P. L. (2002), Old stellar Galactic disc in near-plane regions according to 2MASS: Scales, cut-off, flare and warp, A\&A , 394 , 883-899 Pe\ na-Cabrera G.V.Y \& Durand-Manterola H.J. (2004), Possible biotic distribution in our galaxy, Advances in Space Research , 33 , 114-117 Sackett, P.D. (1997), Does the Milky Way have a maximal disk?, ApJ , 483 , 103-110 Spergel, D.N. et. al. (2006), Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) Three Year Results: Implications for Cosmology, submitted to ApJ , astro-ph/0603449 Tipler, F.J. (1980), Extraterrestrial intelligent beings do not exist, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society , 21 , 267281 Zheng, Z.; Flynn,C.; Gould,A.; Bahcall,J. N.; SALIM, S. (2001), M Dwarfs from Hubble Space Telescope Star Counts , ApJ , 555 , 393-404 list document 