 1 COSMIC IRONY: SETI OPTIMISM FROM CATASTROPHES? Milan M. Ćirković Astronomical Observatory Belgrade Volgina 7, 11160 Belgrade SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO arioch@eunet.yu ABSTRACT. Classical arguments for skepticism regarding th e Search for ExtraTerrestrial Intelligence (SETI) are critically examined. It is suggested that the emergi ng class of “phase transition” astrobiological models can simultaneously account for all available astr ophysical and biological evidence, explain several unresolved puzzle in Earth sc iences, and rationally ju stify current and future SETI projects. In particular, the hypothesis of Annis that lo cal gamma-ray bursts drive the astrobiological phase transition deserves to be furt her quantitatively elucidated. Some epistemological and ethical ramifications of such a model are briefly discussed. KEYWORDS: Astrobiology, anthropic principle, gamma-ray bursts, philosophy of astronomy It is the thunderbolt that steers the course of all things. Heraclitus of Ephesus, cca. 550 BC INTRODUCTION: KEY ANTI-SETI ARGUMENTS It is hard to deny that the Search for Extra-Terrestr ial Intelligence (SETI) is one of the major scientific adventures in the history of huma nkind. However, four decades of seri ous SETI projects have not given results, in spite of the prevai ling “contact optimism” of 1960s a nd early 1970s, motivated largely by uncritical acceptance of the Drake equation. Conventional estimates of that period spoke of about 10 6 - 108 (!) advanced societies in the Milky Way formin g the “Galactic Club” (Bracewell 1975). Nowadays, even the greatest SETI optimists ha ve abandoned such fanciful numbe rs, and settled to a view that advanced extraterrestrial societies are rarer than previous ly thought. Today, it is widely recognized that the “contact pessimists” have a rather strong po sition (Hanson 1999; Bostrom 2002); most of recent scholarly monographs on the subject are strongly s ceptical towards the possibility of finding complex intelligent life elsewhere (e.g. Ward and Brownlee 2000; Webb 2002). Why is that so? Anti-SETI “rollback” of the late 1970s and 1980s has been essentially based on two widely discussed arguments: (1) Tsiolkovsky-Fermi-Viewing-Hart-Tipler's question 1 “Where are they?” in its modern von- Neumann-probe rendering, and (2) Carter’s (1983) “anthropic” argument. 1 Stephen Webb, in his recent monograph, so far the best histori cal introduction into the “Great Silence” problem (Webb 2002), dubbes the relevant question Tsiolkovsky-Fermi-Viewing-Ha rt’s. We find it only just to add Tipler to list, since his von Neumann probe set up gives the whole problem completely new flavor (Tipler 1980). Of course, it is best known simply as “Fer mi’s paradox” (which we shall use, for the sake of brevity, in the rest of the paper). 2 Tsiolkovsky, Fermi, Hart, and their supporters argue from the absence of extr aterrestrials on Earth and in the Solar System, and the fact that they have, ceteris paribus, more than enough time in the history of the Galaxy to visit, either in pe rson or through their self-replicat ing probes. Charac teristic time for colonization of the Galaxy, according to these investigators is 10 6 – 10 8 years, making the fact that the Solar System is (obviously) not col onized hard to explain, if not fo r the absence of extraterrestrial cultures. On the other hand, Carter’s “anthropic” argument (“argument from ignorance” would be a better label here) tries to infer conclusions from the possible relationships between the alleged astrophysical ( τ*) and biological ( τl) timescales. In the Solar system, τ* ≈ τl, within the factor of two. However, in general, it should be either τl >> τ* or τ* >> τl for two uncorrelated nu mbers. In the latter case, however, it is difficult to understand why the very first inhabited planet ary system (that is, the Solar System) exhibits τ* ≈ τl behaviour, since we would then expect that life (and intelligence) arose on Earth, and probably at other places in the Solar System, much earlier than they in fact did. This gives us probabilistic reason to believe that τl >> τ* (in which case the anthropic se lection effects explain very well why we do perceive the τ* ≈ τl case in the Solar System). Thus, according to Carter, the extraterrestrial life and intelligence have to be ve ry rare, which is the reason why we have not observed them so far. It seems clear that any genera l astrobiological scenar io capable of dissol ving these two crucial anti-SETI arguments would not only undermine the pos ition of “contact pessimists”, but also offer a valuable methodological guidelines for the SETI projects themselves. With this in mind, in the rest of this paper we suggest a “catastrophi c” astrobiological scenario based on the phase-transition of Annis (1999), which is capable of both refuting the anti-SETI arguments and give us significant rational basis for optimism in our searches for intelligent life elsewhere in the Milky Way. EVOLUTIONARY APPROACH TO THE ASTROBIOLOGICAL STATUS OF OUR GALAXY First, it is necessary to mention that both Fermi's “p aradox” and Carter’s argument have been criticized so far. Thus, for instance, the colonization timescale is still largely uncertai n; for instance, diffusion models of Newman and Sagan (1981) give the relevant timescale as ~10 9 years, which would correspond to the naive answer one is expected to give on the Fermi’s question: They are still on the way! Second, the issue of mo tivation of colonizers, and particular ly their von Neumann probes is much less clear and unambiguous than the “contact pessimist s” would have us believe. Notably, as suggested by Brin (1983) in his seminal review, the “deadly probe s” scenario (the idea that the dominant behavior of self-replicating probes is destru ction of nascent civilizations, not colonizing) is one of just a few theoretically satisfactory e xplanations of the “Great Silence”. In a similar vein, Kinouchi (2001) has recently argued that the phenomenon of persistence, well-known from statistical physics, holds the key for explanation of the apparent ab sence of extraterrestrial civiliza tions; in this picture, Galactic colonization by advanced ETIs could have already last for quite some time without influencing the Solar System. Wilson (1994) has persuasively criticized Carter’s usage of the anthropic principle to show that life is rare in the universe. However, the most important line of thought wh ich can easily defeat both Fermi’s and Carter’s arguments lies in investigation of hidden temporal assumptions in these arguments. Fermi et al. suppose that the history of the Galaxy is uniformitarian, in the sense that advanced technological communities could arise at any point in the Gala ctic history (except, perhaps, the first billion years or so, when the metallicity was too low; see Lineweaver 2001). Si milarly, Carter assumes that the only relevant astrophysical timescale is the Main Sequence stellar lif etime. Uniformitarianism has not shown brightly in astrophysics and cosmology, at least since the demise of the classical steady-state theory in mid-1960s (Kragh 1996). Today we are quite certain that evolutionary properties of astrophysical systems are from time to time guided by processes either rare or unique (like the primordial nucleosynthesis or the 3 reionization of intergalactic medium) or occuring at timescales so much vaster than the timescales of human civilization that the probabil ity of actually observing them is nil (like the recently computed evolution of M-dwarf stars 2). In the specific case, if the phase-transition model sketched in a brilliant short paper of Annis (1999; see also Clarke 1981) is correct—as we have more and more reasons to believe—the relevant timescale is the one desc ribing intervals between the major Galactic-wide catastrophes, precluding the complexification of planetary bi ospheres and, consequently, the development of intelligent observers. There are several plausible candidates for this global regulation mechanism. The strongest, as suggested by Annis in his ingenuous study, are gamma-ray bursts (henceforth GRBs), which accompany either a coalescen ce of binary neutron st ars or explosions of super-massive stars, also known as the hypernovae (for a review of GRB mechanisms, see Piran 2000). Astrobiological effects of GRBs have been investigated recently in a number of papers (Thorsett 1995; Dar 1997; Scalo and Wheeler 2002) , and much of the older litera ture dealing with effects of supernova explosions is useful in this case too (after appropriate sca ling, of course; see, for instance, Tucker and Terry 1968; Ruderman 1974; Clark, McCrea, and Stephenson 1977). It seems that each GRB is surrounded by a “lethality zone” in which its effects are deadly fo r complex lifeforms (eucaryotes); according to Scalo and Wheeler (2002). the radius of this zone is ~14 kpc, rather large in comparison to the Galactic habitable zone. The exact effects of a GRB within a “lethality zone” are still somewhat controversial, but it is clear that there will be at least two deadly effects capable of causing mass extinctions: (A) creation of nitrogen-oxi des (usually denoted by NO x) in the upper atmosphere, which will destroy the ozone layer for thousands of year s, thus enormously increasing UV radiation at planetary surface; and (B) creation of a longer delayed pulse of cosmic rays, which penetrate the atmosphere (and even rocks and soil up to several km of depth) and cause various sorts of damage to biological materials. Both these effects are prolonged in comparison to the GRB itself, thus affecting not only the hemisphere directed toward the source. In f act, the consequences in biological domain may last many generations, especially when one considers such effects as increase in frequency of cancers, and occasionally very long interval needed for a specie s to die out when its popul ation decreases below the so-called minimum viable population. Very recently, it has been suggested that one of the canonical “big five” mass extinctions in Earth’s history, namely the late-Ordovician one, was caused by a local gammaray burst (Melott et al. 2003). Other suggested regulation mechanisms are the clim atic change due to inte raction with Galactic spiral arms (Shaviv 2002), neutrino -induced extinctions (Collar 1996), or Galactic tides leading to the Oort comet cloud perturbations (e.g. Clube and Napier 1990; Rampino 1998). 3 Their common property is that they are global, i.e. influencing the entire Galactic habitable zone, or a large portion of it. Moreover, they reinforce each other; in other words, the total risk function is a sum of risk functions for each specific threat to biological sy stems. If the further research c onfirm that GRB-regulation however, has another desirable property: quantifiable secular evolution , which explains our existence at this particular epoch of the Galactic history. Notably, cosmology suggests th e rate of GRBs behaves, on the average, as ∝ exp(–t/ t), with the time-constant t of the order of 10 9 yrs (Annis 1999). Namely, as noticed by Norris (2000), we have to ensure that there is no “overkill” as far as the regulation mechanisms are concerned, and that our own existence is explicable in naturalistic terms. This is readily achieved within the framework of the GRB-dominated phase-transition picture: cosmology assures us that the average rate of GRBs increases with redshift , i.e. decreases with cosmic time. When the rate of catastrophic events is high, there is a sort of quasi-equilibrium state between the natural tendency of life 2 For this fascinating subject in theoretical astrophysics, see Laughlin, Bodenheimer, and Adams (1997). 3 The idea of Clarke (1981) that nuclear outbursts—similar to the ones observed in Seyfert galaxies —from the core of the Milky W ay can lead to devastation of habitable planets throughout the Galaxy has been, historical ly, the first global-regulation mechanism pr oposed. However, it seems to be abandoned as we learn more about the center of our Galaxy. (For variations—now of “only” historical importance—on the same theme s ee Clube 1978; LaViolette 1987.) 4 to spread and complexify and the rate of dest ruction and extinctions governed by the regulation mechanism(s). When the rate becomes lower than some threshold value, intelligent and space-faring species can arise in the interval between the two GRB-induced extinctions, and the Galaxy experiences a phase transition: from essentially dead place, with poc kets of low-complexity life restricted to planetary surfaces, it will, on a very short Fermi-Hart-Tipler ti mescale, become filled with high-complexity life. We are living within that interval of exciting time, in the state of disequilibrium (Almár 1992), on the verge of the Galactic phase transition. 4 In Heraclitus' aphorism quoted above, Galactic GRBs are the “thunderbolt” which steers the course of all things astrobiological. It is clear that this class of models effectiv ely removes the threat to ETIs from both Fermi-Hart- Tipler and Carter's arguments. Elsewhere in the Galaxy there are other planets with the level of complexity achieved more or less similar to the te rrestrial one. There simply was not enough time for them to come to us, since the astrobiological history—as far as complex metazoans are concerned—is different and significantly shorter from the history of dark matter, stars, and gas clouds which constitute the physical structure of th e Galaxy. Local astrobiologi cal clocks can tick at va rious rates, but they are all from time to time reset by the global regulation mechanism(s). But Fermi's question is rapidly becoming pertinent , when we realize that during the phase transition many advanced intelligent societies are bound to develop, but they are not all bound to expand to their utmost limits (that is, to colonize the Galaxy) within the same interval of time. On the other hand, the very exis tence of well-defined astrophysical and biological timescales is an unwarranted assumption of Carter's argument. This assumption is wrong in the context of the phasetransition models. The real timescales are specific to each planetary system, depending on such factors as the location of the system in the Galactic habitable zone (GRB distribution having a spatial, as well as temporal aspect!), peculiarities of the local envi ronment (notably the density and distribution of cometary and asteroidal material presenting the imp act hazard), and—of crucia l importance—the epoch of Galactic history. In other wo rds, there is no physical reason w hy on planet A, at galactocentric distance RA and at epoch t A we could not have τl >> τ* while on planet B (characterized by R B, tB, and probably some other astrobiological parameters) we could have τl << τ*. The dependence on the epoch is particularly important; to paraphrase the title of the controversial book by Ward and Brownlee (2000), Earths might be rare in time, not in space . This sort of models can al so shed some new light on the Drake equation (Walker and Ćirković 2003; Ćirković 2003). LESSONS: ASTROPHYSICS OF OPEN SYSTEMS The phase-transition models represent a natural exte nsion of the contemporary pictures developed in Earth sciences. We have recently learned that im pacts of extraterrestrial bodies had tremendous influence upon the evolution of the biosphere (Raup 199 1, 1999; Clube and Napier 1990). Even the mundane phenomena like cloudy skies are influenced by such previously un-dream t of factors like the low-energy cosmic ray flux (e.g. Carslaw et al. 2002) . In general, this is a part of the wider culturological tendency to re linquish the notion of a clos ed-box system in favor of open (complex) systems. Even in the connection with such rather well-understood threats to life on Earth as collisions with comets or asteroids, a wider connec tion is sought in investigation pos sible influences from without the Solar System (Matese and Whitman 1992; Matese and Whitmire 1996; Rampino 1998). For instance, it 4 Notice that the anthropic sele ction effect (cf. Bostrom 2002) readily explains why that is so, in spite of the very low a priori probability. Humans could not arise prior to the phase transition, since there was no time for high- complexity life to evolve without being destroyed by cosmic rays and other detrimental consequences of GRB regulation (or cumulative effects of impacts, close SNe, spiral-arms crossings, and other calamities). On the other hand, we could not arise later from the phase trans ition epoch for the same reason one does not expect to find a previously unknown stone-age tribe in the present-day Eur ope: high-complexity ecological niches do not allow spontaneous emergence of new lower-complexity lifeforms. 5 has been investigated whether the giant molecular clouds, concentrated toward the Galactic plane, or even the tidal force of the Galact ic disk itself can produce sufficient perturbations of the Oort cloud in order to cause impacting comet showers. Crossing of Galactic spiral arms has been repeatedly argued to be dangerous from the planetological, climatologi cal, and biological points of view (e.g. Marochnik 1983; Shaviv 2002). There is no reason to think that this tendency will be arrested or rejected in the years to come, as both astrophysicists and planetary scientists on one side and biologist s and ecologist on the other, probe more and more subtle and minuscu le effects, and their computer simulations become richer and richer with seemingly disconnected phenomena. Even the classical Gaia hypothesis (e.g., Lovelock 1988) is rather moderate in this respect, when astrobio logical issues are concerned. We envisage a tight interconnections of (astro)physical and (astro)biological aspects of reality on scales as large as the Milky Way galaxy. The closed-system innocence (or “splendi d isolation”) of Earth and its biosphere is forever lost. Two important practical conclusions for SETI projects are the following. (1) Phase-transition models suggest that extraterrestrial civilizations are vastly more lik ely to be of appropriate age for communication than could be inferred by naive appli cation of the Drake equati on. That is, we do not need to worry further about the se nsibility of attempting to communicate with bein gs billion or more years older from us. Phase-transition models predict that all Galactic civilizations will be of similar age, i.e. the time elapsed since the last “resetting” of th e astrobiological clock. (2) Future detailed numerical phase-transition theory (Ćirković and Sandberg, in preparation) will enable assigning statistical weights to various SETI target stars and planetary systems depending on their ag es and orbital elements in the Galaxy. For instance, it is in tuitively clear that we are more likely to encounter advan ced biospheres in the outer parts of the Galactic Habitable Zone than in the inner parts, since the density of GRBs and supernovae declines sharply with the galactocentric radius, so outer regions are more likely to stay undisturbed for sufficiently long time to allow fo r biogenesis and noogenesis. However, additional effects of metallicity, spir al-arm crossings, etc. have to be take n into account in the future numerical work in this direction. CONCLUSIONS The phase-transition models offer a hope of reconc iling both our astrophysical knowledge and negative SETI results on one hand, with na turalistic explanati ons for biogenesis a nd noogenesis and the Copernican Principle on the other. Thus, Fermi’s paradox is explained as a part of much wider astrobiological paradigm, which is certainly desirable from the methodological point of view. The price paid is obviousl y high, but not in usual epistemical sense, but rather in the ethical one. It means that enormous destruction of life is taking place in what is conventionally portrayed as peaceful and hospitable universe. GRBs occur once per day on the average, and they sample practically all galaxies within our particle horizon. Thus, if the picture suggested by the phase-transition model is correct, we are witnessing immense destructions of complex lifeforms (s ome of them undoubtedly intelligent, but not reaching the “immunity level”) throughout the universe on a daily basis! This cannot fail to be a depressing thought. Out pa st light-cone is full of slaughter houses on an unprecedented level. Statistically, an absolutely stagge ring majority of all lifeforms ev er emerging are exterminated by random and violent catastrophes of astrophysical or igin. The universe might be a significantly more cruel and inhospitable environment than it’s usually assumed. It is quite possible that simple organisms analogs to Deinococcus Radiodurans (Battista 1997) are by far the most prevalent form of life in the universe on the average. But on the balance, it is still hard to find this sc enario worse than any naturalistic alternative. As noted by many biologists, the role of mass extinctions in the hist ory of life here on Earth was ambiguous, both destructive and cons tructive (e.g., Raup 1994); we would not have been here almost 6 certainly if comet or asteroid did not struck Ea rth 65 Myr ago causing, among other things, the end of the epoch of giant reptilians. It is far from certain that, had this event not happened, the intelligence would have developed on Earth (by now, at least). This may mean, on the other hand, that those who survive are even more valuable than conventionally thought. On the bac kground of natural disast ers, even a single an thropogenic disaster (like the looming ecological dangers, nuclear warheads, or nanotechnology) is si mply the one disaster too many. If properly understood, the astrobiol ogical models can teach us the rarity of values – the ultimate products of generic creative and intelligent mi nds. In futures, these values will almost certainly (by one or another roughly human-com parable civilization) be spread to all corners of the Galaxy, and possibly even beyond. It is these values that we ought to seek in our peers through the SETI programs, but also – and foremostly – to advance in ourselves through the entire sc ientific and artistic endevor of humanity. Acknowledgements. The author thanks Larry Klaes, Robert J. Bradbury, Ivana Dragi ćević, Nick Bostrom, and Richard Catcart for useful and friendly discussions. Technical help of Vjera Miović, Ivana Dragićević, Branislav Nikoli ć, Ivan Almár, Vesna Miloševi ć-Zdjelar, Saša Nedeljkovi ć, Srdjan Samurović, and Mark A. Walker is also kindly appreciated. REFERENCES Almár, I. 1992, “Analogies between Olbers’ paradox and the Fermi paradox,” Acta Astronautica 26, 253-256. Annis, J. 1999, “An Astrophysical Explanation for the Great Silence,” J. Brit. Interplan. Soc. 52, 19. Battista, J. R. 1997, “Against All Odds: The Survival Strategies of Deinococcus radiodurans,” Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 51, 203-224. Bostrom, N. 2002, Anthropic Bias: Observation Selection Effects in Science and Philosophy (Routledge, New York). Bracewell, R. N. 1975, The Galactic Club: Intelligent Life in Outer Space (W. H. Freeman, San Francisco). Brin, G. D. 1983, “The ‘Great Silence’: the Controversy Concerning Extraterrestrial Intelligence,” Q. Jl. R. astr. Soc. 24, 283-309. Carter, B. 1983, “The anthropic principle and its implications for biological evolution,” Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London A 310, 347. Carslaw, K. S. et al. 2002, “Cosmic rays, Clouds, and Climate”, Science 298, 1732-1737. Clark, D. H., McCrea, W. H., and Stephenson, F. R. 1977, “Frequency of nearby supernovae and climatic and biological catastrophes,” Nature 265, 318-319. Clarke, J. N. 1981, “Extraterrestrial Intelligence and Galactic Nuclear Activity,” Icarus 46, 94-96. Clube, S. V. M. 1978, “Does our galaxy have a violent history?” Vistas in Astronomy 22, 77-118. Clube, S. V. M. and Napier, W. M. 1990, The Cosmic Winter (Basil Blackwell Ltd, Oxford). Collar, J. I. 1996, “Biological Effects of Stellar Collapse Neutrinos,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 999-1002. Criswell, D. 1985, “Solar system industrialization: Implications for interstellar migration,” in Interstellar Migration and the Human Experience, ed. by B. Finney and E. Jones (University of California Press), 50-87. Ćirković, M. M. 2003 “Resource Letter PEs-1: Physical Eschatology,” Am. J. Phys. 71, 122-133. Ćirković, M. M. 2004a “On the Temporal Aspect of the Drake Equation and SETI,” Icarus, submitted. Ćirković, M. M. 2004b “Earths: Rare in Time, Not Space?” J. Brit. Interplan. Soc. 57, in press. 7 Ćirković, M. M. and Dragićević, I. 2004 “How to undermine Carter’s ‘anthropic’ argument,” in preparation. Dar, A. 1997, “Life Extinctions by Neutron Star Mergers,” in Very High Energy Phenomena in the Universe; Morion Workshop, ed. by Y. Giraud-Heraud and J. Tran Thanh Van (Editions Frontieres, Paris), 379. Darling, D. 2001, Life Everywhere (Basic Books, New York). Des Marais, D. J. and Walter, M. R. 1999, “Astrobiology: Exploring the Origins, Evolution, and Distribution of Life in the Universe,” Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 30, 397-420. Ehrenfreund, P. et al. 2002, “Astrophysical and astrochemical insights into the origin of life,” Rep. Prog. Phys. 65, 1427-1487. Gonzalez, G., Brownlee, D., and Ward, P. 2001, “The Galactic Habitable Zone: Galactic Chemical Evolution,” Icarus 152, 185-200. Hanson, R. 1999, “Great Filter,” (preprint at http://hanson.berkeley.edu/greatfilter.html). Kinouchi, O. 2001, “Persistence solves Fermi paradox but challenges SETI projects,” preprint condmat/0112137. Kragh, H. 1996, Cosmology and Controversy (Princeton University Press, Princeton). Laughlin, G., Bodenheimer, P., and Adams, F. C. 1997, “The End of the Main Sequence”, Astrophys. J. 482, 420-432. LaViolette, P. A. 1987, “Cosmic-ray volleys from the Galactic center and their recent impacts on the Earth environment,” Earth, Moon, and Planets 37, 241-286. Lineweaver, C. H. 2001, “An Estimate of the Age Distribution of Terrestrial Planets in the Universe: Quantifying Metallicity as a Selection Effect,” Icarus 151, 307-313. Lovelock, J. 1988, The Ages of Gaia (W. W. Norton, New York). Marochnik, L. S. 1983, “On the origin of the solar system and the exceptional position of the Sun in the Galaxy,” Astrophys. Space Sci. 89, 61-... Matese, J. J. and Whitman, P. G. 1992, “A model of the Galactic tidal interaction with the Oort comet cloud,” Cel. Mech. and Dyn. Astron. 54, 13-35. Matese, J. J. and Whitmire, D. 1996, “Tidal Imprint of Distant Galactic Matter on the Oort Comet Cloud,” Astrophys. J. Lett. 472, L41. Melott, A. L. et al. 2003, “Did a gamma-ray burst initiate the late Ordovician mass extinction?” preprint astro-ph/0309415. Newman, W. I. and Sagan, C. 1981, “Galactic Civilizations: Population Dynamics and Interstellar Diffusion,” Icarus 46, 293-327. Norris, R. P. 2000, “How old is ET?” in When SETI Succeeds: The impact of high-information Contact, ed. A. Tough (Foundation for the Future, Washington DC), pp. 103-105. Oliver, B. M. 1973, “Conclusions and Recommendations: Project Cyclops Study,” Icarus 19, 425. Piran, T. 2000, “Gamma-ray bursts – a puzzle being resolved,” Physics Reports 333/334, 529-553. Rampino, M. R. 1998, “The Galactic theory of mass extinctions: an update,” Cel. Mech. and Dyn. Astron. 69, 49-58. Raulin-Cerceau, F., Maurel, M.-C., and Schneider, J. 1998, “From panspermia to bioastronomy, the evolution of the hypothesis of universal life,” Orig. Life Evol. Biosph. 28, 597. Raup, D. M. 1991, Extinction: Bad Genes or Bad Luck? (W. W. Norton, New York). Raup, D. M. 1994, “The role of extinction in evolution,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 6758-6763. Raup, D. M. 1999, The Nemesis Affair (2nd edition, W. W. Norton, New York). Sagan, C. 1973, “On the detectivity of Advanced Galactic Civilizations,” Icarus 19, 350-352. Scalo, J. and Wheeler, J. C. 2002, “Astrophysical and astrobiological implications of gamma-ray burst properties,” Astrophys. J. 566, 723-737. 8 Shaviv, N. J. 2002, “The spiral structure of the Milky Way, cosmic rays, and ice age epochs on Earth,” New Astronomy 8, 39-77. Shklovskii, I. S. and Sagan, C. 1966, Intelligent Life in the Universe (Holden-Day, San Francisco). Tarter, J. 2001, “The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI),” Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 39, 511-548. Thorsett, S. E. 1995, “Terrestrial implications of cosmological gamma-ray burst models,” Astrophys. J. 444, L53-L55. Tipler, F. J. 1980, “Extraterrestrial Intelligent Beings do not Exist,” Q. Jl. R. astr. Soc. 21, 267-281. Tucker, W. H. and Terry, K. D. 1968, “Cosmic Rays from Nearby Supernovae: Biological Effects,” Science 160, 1138-1139. Walker, M. A. and Ćirković, M. M. 2003, “Fermi Equation,” in preparation. Ward, P. D. and Brownlee, D. 2000, Rare Earth: Why Complex Life Is Uncommon in the Universe (Springer, New York). Webb, S. 2002, Where is Everybody? Fifty Solutions to the Fermi's Paradox (Copernicus, New York). Wilson, P. A. 1994, “Carter on Anthropic Principle Predictions,” Brit. J. Phil. Sci. 45, 241-253. 