1 A Computational Analysis of Galactic Exploration with Space Probes: Implications for the Fermi Paradox Carlos Cotta and Álvaro Morales ETSI Informática, Universidad de Málaga Campus de Teatinos, 29071 Málaga - Spain ccottap@lcc.uma.es Abstract. Temporal explanations to the Fermi paradox state t hat the vast scale of the galaxy diminishes the chances of establishing conta ct with an extraterrestrial technological civilization (ETC) within a certain time window. This argument is tackled in this work in the context of exploration probes, whose propagation can be faster than that of a colonization wavefront. Extensive computa tional simulations have been done to build a numerical model of the dynamics of the e xploration. A probabilistic analysis is subsequently conducted in order to obtain bounds on the number of ETCs that may be exploring the galaxy without establishing contact w ith Earth, depending on factors such as the number of probes they use, their lifetime an d whether they leave some long-term imprint on explored systems or not. The results indicate that it is unlikely that more than ~10 2-10 3 ETCs are exploring the galaxy in a given Myr, if t heir probes have a lifetime of 50 Myr and contact evidence lasts for 1 Myr. This bound goes down to ~10 if contact evidence lasts for 100 Myr, and is also shown to be inversely proportional to the lifetime of probes. These results are interpreted i n light of the Fermi paradox and are compatible with non-stationary astrobiological mode ls in which a few ETCs have gradually appeared in the Fermi-Hart timescale. Keywords: Fermi paradox, SETI, exploration probes, intelligent life, interstellar travel 1. Introduction One of the most recurring and interesting issues re garding the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) is the so-called Fermi paradox. The absence so far of any physical evidence of advanced extraterrestrial life, in the face of the large number of potentially habitable stellar systems and the vast age of the g alaxy gives rise to an apparent paradox, or –at the very least– to a problem (well- summarized in Fermi’s conspicuous question “Where is everybody?”) that demands an app ropriate solution. To illustrate this issue, the number of systems potentially capab le of harboring life in the galactic habitable zone (GHZ) [19] is ~10 10 [3] and the median age of Earth-like planets in th e Milky Way is 1.8 ±0.9 Gyr greater than that of Earth [25,12]. Needles s to say, there are also limiting factors to be taken into account, suc h as the rate at which complex life emerges, or at which it develops into a technologic al civilization. These and other factors are put together in the Drake equation, nam ely Nc=N*fpneflfifcL, stating the number of extraterrestrial technological civilizati ons (ETCs) in the galaxy at a given time, where the product N*fpne yields the number of potentially life-supportive p lanets, product flfifc yields the fraction of planets in which intelligen t technological life arises and L is the lifetime of such ETCs. Unfortunately, the v alues of some of these terms are highly speculative and therefore estimates on Nc vary from a few (even just one) to 2 thousands [15] or even millions of them [16]; see also [7]. The Fermi paradox arises from the implicit assumpti on that Nc is indeed large and that conditions for the emergence of ETCs have not changed significantly in the galactic timescale (we will return to this latter considerat ion in §4; check also [10]). In this scenario different answers have been suggested as a way of resolving the paradox (see e.g., [34]). While some of them rely on unverifiabl e conjectures about alien civilizations, many of them are based on more solid ground, such as physical considerations regarding the emergence of ETCs, or temporal issues regarding contact time. This work will initially focus on the latter class, which broadly speaking states that the time required to establish physical contac t is too large, given the size of the galaxy. In this sense, although some early works [2 1,23] proposed that a colonization wavefront could sweep the galaxy in less than 50 My r using ships moving at v=0.1c, a later analysis by Newman and Sagan [27] suggested t hat an ETC practicing zero population growth (a more conservative hypothesis b ased on the carrying capacity of the planetary environments colonized) needed a life time of 13 Gyr for its colonization wavefront to reach Earth. A timescale such as that mentioned is large enough to justify the absence of contact with a colonization wavefront (even more so considering that an ETC’s expansive thrust need not be constant throughout its history; see [2 0]) but it must be noted that other forms of contact exist, e.g., communication signals , exploration probes, etc. Regarding the case of exploration probes specifically, it is clear that they can advance much faster than a colonization wavefront, even without assumin g models of self-replicating probes [6,17,33]. A very interesting recent work on this t opic has been done by Bjørk [3], analyzing the timescale of galactic exploration by 4 and 8 probes, each of them endowed with a number of smaller subprobes used to explore a region around the host probe. He shows that this way of exploring the gala xy is extremely slow, being about 292 Myr required to explore only 4% of the galaxy w ith 8 probes. Again, this timescale may be large enough to make the chances of Earth be ing contacted by exploration probes from a single ETC very low. Nevertheless how these chances are affected by the fact that there might be multiple ETCs exploring th e galaxy is another issue. This problem is explored here using computational simula tions to obtain a model of the exploration dynamics and by doing a probabilistic a nalysis of the so-obtained data. The aim is to derive bounds on the number of ETCs that may be exploring the galaxy yet remain out of touch with Earth, using different ass umptions on how the number of such probes is distributed and what their lifetime and t heir behavior is (i.e., whether they left some long-term imprint on explored systems or not). 2. Methodology Following [3], the simulation of the exploration of the galaxy uses a two-level approach. To be precise, it is assumed that the exploration i s carried out by space probes, each of which is capable of deploying a swarm of smaller subprobes to explore a small sector of the galaxy. Upon completing this exploration, these subprobes return to their host probe, which then proceeds to travel to another sector. 2.1. Simulation Model Some uncertainty exists as to the extent of the GHZ , which might even encompass the whole galaxy [28]. In this work a GHZ encompassing stellar systems located at a radial distance ranging from 3 kpc to 11 kpc from the gala ctic center (GC) [26] and up to 300 pc above or below the galactic plane (GP) has been considered. This thin disk is 3 assumed to contain Nh=1.17·10 10 habitable stars [3], whose density δh decreases exponentially with the distance r from the GC (with a characteristic scale length of 3 kpc), as well as with the distance z above/below the GP (with a scale length of 300 pc). The GHZ is partitioned into annular sectors spannin g an angle α=π/600 and whose radial length is calculated so as to comprise N=40,000 stars (the same value as in [3]). Notice that these sectors have a larger length in o uter regions of the GHZ due to the density decline for increasing distances from the G C. The chosen value of α results in sectors whose width is very similar to their length (an aspect ratio between 0.89 and 1.38). Having done this, sectors placed from 3 kpc up to 11 kpc of the GC, in steps of 1 kpc are considered. For each of these nine sectors, 10 different instances are generated by sampling the density distribution given by δh. Simulations are done on each of these instances (§2.1.1) and the results are averaged in order to obtain more meaningful estimates of the time required to explore a sector located at the corresponding distance from the GC. Subsequently, simulations are done at the galaxy level, which is modeled as a grid of sectors. These simulations are performed using a different number of probes and different radial distances from the GC for the home system from which the probes are sent (§2.1.2). Again, these experiments are rep licated 10 times per parameter set in order to obtain a more representative depiction of the dynamics of the exploration. 2.1.1. Exploring a Sector The exploration of a sector is done by assuming eac h subprobe is assigned a nonoverlapping subset of the stars in the sector. Thes e will be visited by the subprobe (a constant velocity v=0.1c is assumed), which will return to the host pr obe (located at the center of the sector) afterwards. The total explora tion time is thus determined by the precise time the last subprobe docks back into the host probe. Clearly, both the assignment of stars to subprobes and the order in w hich the latter visits them have a deep impact on the total exploration time. Indeed, it can be seen that the underlying problem being faced here is the well-known vehicle routing problem [18,32]. Being an NP-hard problem, typical modern approaches for solv ing large instances of the problem rely on heuristic methods and most notably on meta-heuristic approaches [5]. Given the scale of the problem (tens of thousands o f stars), simpler heuristic approaches have been chosen in this work. Regarding the assignment of stars to subprobes, different strategies have been considere d: GP-parallel slices of a constant height, GP-parallel slices with a constant number o f stars, and angular regions with a constant number of stars. The results obtained do n ot differ in a great extent (they are comparable within a factor of 2) and indicate that GP-parallel slices with a constant number of stars (cf. [3]) perform well. Hence this assignment procedure is considered henceforth. Once the assignment of stars to subprobes is done, the problem is reduced to several –as many as there are subprobes– instances of the conspicuous traveling salesman problem, another NP-hard problem. It is re asonable to think that if the technology for attempting large-scale exploration b y space probes is available, so too will be the computational resources required to sol ve to optimality this kind of problems. Actually, solving instances of several te ns of thousands of cities is within reach of current state-of-the-art techniques (see, e.g., [2]); even more so considering that even years of computation would be negligible with respect to the time scale of exploring a sector. In order to get as close as possible to the optimal solution without resorting to intensive computation approaches, the nearest-neigh bor heuristic (NNH) [29,3] –i.e., always picking the nearest non-yet-visited star– ha s been used, followed by two local 4 improvement procedures ( ℓ-opt and 2-opt) aimed at alleviating the myopic beh avior of the greedy NNH strategy (NNH solutions can get stuc k with some long edges as the procedure advances). The first improvement strategy iteratively attempts to re-assign the last star visited by a subprobe to another one, if this results in an overall reduction in the exploration time. As to 2-opt [14], it is a wel l-known procedure that iteratively removes two non-adjacent edges from the tour and re connects it, keeping the modification if it results in tour length reduction . The procedure is repeated until no further improvement can be found; thus the resulting tour is locally optimal with respect to any replacement of two edges (hence the name of the procedure). The combined use of these two heuristics results in a mean reduction of slightly above 10% in the overall exploration time (i.e., the time of the last subprobe). 2.1.2. Exploring the Galaxy The data gathered during the simulation of the expl oration of sectors is used to model the dependency of the exploration time t on the distance r from the GC. This will be done using a least-square fit to a function t(r) –an exponential function of r; see §3. Once the exploration of a sector by a different num ber of subprobes is modeled, the exploration of the galaxy is approached as follows. First of all, the galaxy is modeled as a grid of sectors. As in [3] a galaxy quadrant is considered (given the time scale of the simulations –50 Myr, see §3– this constitutes a large enough playground), but unlike that work, no stochastic sampling of the density function is performed to place sectors. On the cont rary, a 300 × 244 sector grid is assumed, obtained by slicing the galaxy quadrant ra dially in intervals of α=π/600 rad and concentrically outwards in intervals dictated b y the corresponding length of sectors with N stars. The coordinates of each sector are then ran domly sampled within each of the boxes in this grid. This procedure has two adva ntages: (1) it fits the global stellar density (see Fig. 1), without being subject to larg e stochastic fluctuations and (2) it paves the way for analyzing the expansion of the ex ploration front using grid coordinates. The exploration is performed similarly to the case of sectors. Simulations are done from different starting points placed at different distances from the GC. To be precise, 244 values –a number dictated by the division of th e GHZ in sectors with N stars– of r Figure 1. Example of a galaxy quadrant with 73,200 sectors used in the simulations. 5 are considered, spaced according to the length of sectors in the grid: let l(r) be the radial length of a sector comprising N stars at distance r from the GC. Starting points at distances r1,…, r244 –given by r1 = 3 kpc and rj+1 = rj + l(rj)– are considered. In all cases, the starting point is at an angle π/4 from the X-axis. Sectors are distributed among probes using angular slices: taking any starting re ference line, an angle is chosen so that the angular slice whose vertex is in the home syste m contains Ns/k sectors, where Ns is the total number of sectors ( Ns=300 × 244=73,200) and k is the number of probes. The first probe is assigned this slice and the procedur e is repeated for the next probe, computing the angle from the boundary of the previo us slice, cf. [3]. The simulation then proceeds using the NNH heuristic as in sector exploration, but including not only inter-sector travel time but also sector-exploratio n time (computed using the regression model calculated before). No post-optimization is p erformed, since the time scale of the simulation does not allow an exhaustive exploration of the quadrant. The whole procedure is repeated 10 times for each starting po int and each number of probes considered, using a different quadrant generated in the same way. 2.2. Simulation Analysis As mentioned before, generating the galaxy quadrant as described allows the use of grid coordinates to model the evolution of the explorati on. This is particularly convenient given the symmetry of the search scenario: if probe s originating in sector ( i, j) –which corresponds to polar coordinates ( α·i, rj), with α and rj defined in the previous section– can reach sector ( i', j') with probability p after time t, then the same probability exists for (i″, j'), where i″ = 2 i − i' (i.e., mirror symmetry). Furthermore, the same hol ds for sector ( i+γ, j) with respect to sector ( i'+ γ, j'), for integer γ (i.e., circular symmetry). Since we are specifically interested in estimating the probability of probes reaching Earth, let us focus on the time at which the simula tions indicate that sectors with grid coordinates (i, j⊕) are visited, where j⊕ is the radial grid coordinate of Earth (~8,000 pc, which corresponds to j⊕=191 in the grid). More precisely, let us define i⊕=150 (without loss of generality). Now, let us consider a particu lar simulation in which probes originating at grid coordinates ( i, j) complete the exploration of sector ( i', j⊕) at time t. Due to the aforementioned symmetry, this is equival ent to ( i⊕, j⊕) being explored at time t by probes originating at (i ± ψ, j), where ψ = | i' − i⊕|. Since multiple simulations have been done, the prob ability of ( i⊕, j⊕) being explored at time t by probes emitted from sector ( i, j) can be estimated as relative frequency of this event. To do so, given that time is a continuous variable, it is discretized in intervals of 1 Myr. As a final consi deration, the analysis also includes the effect of galactic rotation, which causes a continu ous flux of stars through sectors. As a first approximation the rotation curve of stars within the GHZ can be considered flat [4]. Note that due to this differential rotation, the re lative position in grid coordinates of the home system from which probes were sent t Myrs ago will be different at the time the probes reach Earth. The analysis centers on sector coordinates at launch time though, so we can focus on the orbital velocity of stars at ra dial grid coordinate j⊕. These are assumed to orbit around the GC at 2.2 · 10 5 ms −1. Now let probes from sector ( i, j) start exploring sector (i', j⊕) at time t1, finishing the exploration at time t2. The corresponding probability is evenly split on sectors ( i ± ψ + ϖ , j), ω(t1) ≤ ϖ ≤ ω(t2), where ω(t) is the displacement in grid coordinates of stars in sector s ( i, j⊕) after time t. Note that the choice of a positive sign for ϖ is arbitrary, since it depends on how the positive direction of grid coordinates is interpreted. Let pijk (t) thus be the probability of a probe sent from sect or (i, j) reaching Earth 6 exactly t Myrs after its launch, provided that a total numbe r of k>0 probes were sent. Given a collection of distributions pijk (t) for different values of k, an aggregated probability distribution pij (t) can be obtained as a weighted combination pij (t)= Σkp(k|k>0)pijk (t), where p(k|k>0) is the probability that the emitting civilizatio n will use k probes, given that k>0. The value p*=p(k>0) is the probability that in the time frame of 1 Myr a civilization will attempt to explo re the galaxy with space probes. Subsequently the product p*pij (t) is the probability that a probe originating at a given star in sector ( i, j) will reach Earth exactly t Myrs after its launch. The value of p* is a free parameter that can be modulated to analyze the resulting change in the outcome of the model (see next section). As to values p(k|k>0), two scenarios are considered: p(k|k>0) ∝ k−1 (i.e., inversely proportional to the number of pro bes; this scenario is labeled S1 henceforth) and p(k|k>0) ∝ k−2 (i.e., inversely proportional to the total number of subprobes – see §3; this is labeled S2 he nceforth). The probability Pij (t) of any of these probes reaching Earth at least once an y time up to t Myr after launch can now be recursively computed as: ( )   >−−+− = = 1)() 1(1) 1( 1) 1 ( )( ttptPtP tp tP ij ij ij ij ij (1) This calculation conservatively assumes that probes from a certain sector can reach Earth more than once (i.e., probes sent in slightly different directions might visit the same star at different times due to galactic rotation). The present time is being taken as a fixed temporal endpoint, and therefore this distribution is better interpreted as stretching forward from t Myr ago until the present (the symmetry of the pro blem allows for this, since given any exploration interval we can always assume (i,j) coordinates relative to the location (i⊕, j⊕) of Earth at the beginning of that interval). This is a convenient way of modeling the problem: different values of t correspond to different launches (i.e., different probes with independent trajectories) and this simplifies the subsequent analysis. The probability of a probe originating an ywhere in the galaxy reaching Earth within our current time frame can now be computed. Let T be the lifetime of the probes (assumed constant for simplicity). Hence, we could in principle detect or be detected by probes sent at most T Myr ago. More precisely, let qij (t) be the probability of not being contacted by probes from sector ( i, j) exactly t Myr after their launch. Then, the probability q(T) of not being contacted in the current Myr by prob es sent from any sector up to T Myr ago is ( )∏∏∏∏ == −== ji T t N ij ji T t ij tpptqT , 1 * , 1 )(1)()(q (2) where N is the number of stellar systems in a sector, and the inner product comprises the potential launch times before the present. A simila r reasoning can be conducted to obtain the probability of Earth not having been eve r explored by probes of lifetime T launched at any time in the last T' Myr. This scenario would correspond to active probes that left some imprint on explored systems, e.g., a beacon to mark systems with complex life (this beacon need not be an active sig nal emitter but could be simply a passive object of clearly artificial origin). Note that the time window T' in which such exploration can take place can be larger than the l ifetime of individual probes, i.e., probes may last for T Myr, but they could be emitted at different times f rom different sectors (or even from the same one) in the last T' ≥ T Myr. Then, we have in this case 7 ( ) ( ) ( )∏ ∏ ∏∏     −−= =−= = − = ji T t N ij TTN ij ji T t N ij tPpTPp TtPpTT , 1 *)' ·( * , ' 1 * )(1)(1 )) ,(min( 1) ',( Q (3) As mentioned before, this assumes that probes may b e emitted multiple times even from the same sector, which is in principle possible (albeit extremely improbable for the parameter values considered in the experiments). A different approach can be taken assuming that probe emission from a certain sector is a non-repeatable event. Then, ∏ ∑     −−= = − ji T t tT ij ppTtPTT , ' 1 ' )~1 (~)) ,(min( 1) ',(Q (4) where p~ ≈Np * (assuming p*<< N−1) is the probability of such probes being emitted f or the first time from a certain sector. In practice, the numerical difference between this model and the previous one is negligible in the sim ulation setting considered. For notational simplicity, we will use q and Q in the following, when T and T' are indicated in the context. 3. Experimental Results The first set of simulations has been done at the se ctor level in order to model exploration time as a function of the distance to t he GC. Experiments have been done with a number of subprobes k∈{4,8,16,32,64,128,256}. For each value of k, mean times required to explore a sector at distance r from the GC (recall §2.1) are fitted to an exponential function rb kk keart =)( (cf. [3]). The results are shown in Fig. 2 and the fitted parameters are indicated in Table 1. Table 1. Parameters ak and bk obtained fitting the time that k subprobes take to explore a sector at distance r from the GC to an exponential function rb kk keart =)( . number of subprobes 4 8 16 32 64 128 256 ak [yr] 341,576 178,946 96,704 56,095 36,312 26,665 21,756 bk [pc −1] 1.0792·10 −4 1.0721·10 −4 1.0245·10 −4 9.3902·10 −5 8.2069·10 −5 6.7733·10 −5 5.8232·10 −5 The results obtained for 4 and 8 subprobes are compa rable to those reported in [3]; for a larger number of subprobes, the parameters ev olve quite regularly although for k≥128 finite effects start to be significant (the tim e subprobes take to get to exploration slices far from the GP and return to the host probe becomes a significant part of the total exploration time). This could be mitigated by using larger sectors, but this would also imply that the galaxy-level simulation would be mor e coarse-grained. To avoid potential distortions in the results due to this, u p to k=64 subprobes will be used in subsequent simulations. Next, simulations of the exploration of a galaxy qu adrant have been performed considering k ≤ 64 probes, each of them with the same number k of subprobes. For each value of k the simulations are replicated 10 times for each different position of the home sector (from grid coordinate j = 1 up to j = 244; i.e., 12,200 quadrant simulations in total). Unlike the case of sectors (in which simula tions were run until the whole sector was explored and the last subprobe returned to the host probe), simulations are here done for 50 Myr of simulated time. 8 Let us firstly consider the fraction of the galaxy that can be explored in a given time. As shown in Fig. 3, the number of explored se ctors grows linearly with time in all cases. A fit to a function fk(t)= ηkt indicates that the number of explored sectors per Myr is η4=6.18, η8=23.9, η16 =91.3, η32 =331 and η64 =1,080 for the corresponding number of probes. Thus, the projected time to explore a numbe r of sectors equivalent to a galaxy quadrant can be estimated in this scenario (assuming this constant rate of progress in the exploration, which is optimistic and hence provides a lower bound) as 11.8 Gyr for 4 probes and 3.1 Gyr for 8 probes, a completely unrea listic time in agreement with [3]. Note however that this time decreases down to 221 Myr for 32 probes and 68 Myr for Figure 2. Time required to explore a sector as a function of radial distance. Error bars are negligible (standard deviation is less than 1% of the mean). I n each case the dotted line is a fit to a function rb kk keart =)( . Figure 3. Number of sectors explored as a function of time, u sing different number of probes. The error bars indicate the standard deviation and each dotted line is a fit to a function fk(t)= ηk t. 9 64 probes (as an aside note, some experiments with 128 and 256 probes using the parameters indicated in Table 1 indicate that the q uadrant exploration time can be ~26- 34 Myr and ~10-13 Myr respectively). Although these times are still high, they are not off the scale anymore. This is particularly interesting from the point of view of multiple civilizations sending exploring probes. While the c hances of probes sent from a single source reaching a particular destination may be low , multiple emissions from different sources would substantially increase these chances. Using the data from the simulations the distributio ns pij (t) and Pij (t) have been computed as described in §2.2. Fig. 4 illustrates t he latter distribution. As expected, the distribution is elongated due to galactic rotation and is denser near Earth and in outer regions of the GHZ, since the higher concentration of stars towards the GC attracts more probes to sectors located at lower r coordinate. These distributions are used to compute q and Q, the probability of probes not visiting Earth within the last Myr or the last T′ Myr respectively. As mentioned before, a crucial p arameter to compute these values is p*, the probability of probes being sent from a certa in star in a certain Myr. Given the enormous number of potentially habitable systems stellar systems in the GHZ, a large enough value of p* can make it highly unlikely that no probe has ever reached Earth. This is depicted in Fig. 5, in which both q and Q –considering a time window T' = 100 Myr, an upper estimate of the Fermi-Hart time scale [21,31,12]– are represented as a function of p* in scenarios S1 and S2. As can be seen, there is a region of about two orders of magnitude in p* making Q change from near 0 (highly unlikely that probes have not visited Earth) to near 1 (high ly likely that probes have not visited Earth). The same holds for q both in S1 and S2. Assuming Earth has not been visited in the last 100 Myr (something that can be stated referring to sterilizing probes, or to probe s leaving perdurable beacons behind), this event is statistically unlikely (using Q<0.05 as a proxy for this) if p*>3.77·10 −10 [S1] (p*>1.35·10 −9 [S2]) if the lifetime of probes is 50 Myr. Given Nh=1.17·10 10 habitable Figure 4. Depiction of the hot zone of the GHZ from which probes can reach Earth up to T Myr after launch. By convention, Earth is always located at a n angle π/4 from the X-axis at the beginning of the exploration interval ( T Myr ago) and galactic rotation is counterclockwise. 10 stars in the GHZ, this translates to Nhp* ~ 4-16 civilizations at most sending such probes in any given Myr (this probability is assumed constant throughout the whole GHZ). In a more limited scenario in which contact is restricte d to the last Myr, this cutoff probability is p*=2.69·10 −8 [S1] ( p*=9.93·10 −8 [S2]), resulting in approximately 315- 1,160 civilizations exploring the galaxy in a given Myr. These values depend obviously on the lifetime of probes. Fig. 6 shows how the cut off value of p* varies along with the lifetime T of probes. As it can be seen, the relationship bet ween these values follows a power-law p*∝ T−γ , where γ ≈1 (a least-squares fit indicates values between 1.0 08 [ Q, S1] and 1.086 [ q, S2]). This relationship seems to be robust with r espect to the time window and the particular distribution of number of probes considered and could be used to project the critical value of p* for larger probe lifetimes. 4. Discussion The results of the simulations indicate that the ti mescale for exploring the galaxy with non-replicating probes is certainly very high if a reduced number of probes is used ( ∼12 Gyr for 4 probes and ∼3 Gyr for 8 probes, just for exploring 25% of the g alaxy). The question of whether an ETC might choose to attempt such an exploration in light of the enormous time required can however be ultimately an swered only in speculative terms, since this would imply making unjustified assumptio ns about the motivations and goals of a completely unknown species (it should be noted that automated probes may keep on exploring long after their creators cease to exi st). At any rate, this issue is independent of the analysis conducted, which has co nsidered a small time window in galactic terms, consistent for example with local e xploration initiatives. The situation is somehow different if a large number of probes is us ed (~40-60 Myr for 256 probes with 256 subprobes each). This latter timescale falls wi thin the exploration range of selfreplicating probes, suggested by Tipler [31] to be ~300 Myr (actually an overoptimistic bound, due to the implied mass consumption rate as pointed out by Sagan and Newman [30]). This may have an impact on the relative risk/benefit trade-off of this latter kind of Figure 5. Probability of probes not visiting Earth as a funct ion of p*, the probability of probes being sent from a certain star at a certain Myr. Probe li fetime is T=50 Myr and the time window T' for computing Q is 100 Myr. 11 probes, since they could be dominated in a Pareto s ense (given comparable exploration times, the less risky option is preferable) by an approach based on a large number of non-replicating probes, with the implications that this would have for an optimizationoriented ETC [11]. Regarding the critical number of ETCs sending out exploration probes above which non-contact becomes statistically unlikely, differe nt estimates have been found depending on whether contact close to our current t ime, or at any time during the last T′ Myr is considered. In the first case, this number m ay range from a few hundreds to several thousands per Myr. A Monte-Carlo simulation of the spatial distribution of these ETCs (using the density function δh) indicates that the nearest one would be at an average distance of ~150 pc for 10,000 ETCs, ~400 p c for 1,000 ETCs, ~1,100 pc for 100 ETCs and ~3,200 pc for 10 ETCs in the GHZ. Thes e distances are large enough, at least in their upper range, to make difficult the d etection of a Kardashev Type II ETC that was not directly signaling at us and even in t his case detection via traditional SETI approaches would be hard due to phenomena such as e .g., interstellar scintillation [13] (these inherent limitations strengthen the case for alternatives strategies other than radio-listening in the water hole region; see for e xample [22]). This is even more so in a scenario as suggested in [11], in which these advan ced ETCs follow an optimization approach as their existential imperative and hence would try to avoid any energy leakage. Failure to detect Dyson spheres via their infrared signature [24,8] also supports this (a recent report [9] indicates that a search o n the IRAS Low Resolution Spectrometer database sensitive enough to find sola r-sized Dyson spheres out to 300 pc left only 4 moderately interesting yet still ambigu ous candidates). It is suggested [11] that these introverted ETCs would use small researc h probes that would act as some kind of distributed sensorial apparatus. The bounds obtained in this work are not small enough to provide conclusive support of the unlikeliness of ETCs using intrusive probes in a short timescale though. The implications of absence of contact with perdura ble beacons left behind by exploring probes are also interesting. Independentl y of the reasons (which once again can only be conjectured) why an ETC might choose to attempt this kind of endeavor or not, it must be noted than the longer the time wind ow for leaving such beacons, the Figure 6. Relationship between the cutoff probability of pro bes being emitted and the lifetime of probes. The dotted lines represent a fit to a function p(t) = at b. 12 smaller the corresponding critical value of p* becomes (e.g., p*=2.41·10 −11 for T′ = 1 Gyr and p*=7.92·10 −12 for T′ = 3 Gyr [S1, T = 50 Myr]). This would demand a robust explanation of why no ETC attempted it if indeed th ere were many spacefaring ETCs at any time during galactic history. This problem can be solved if a physical mechanism poses a strict limit on the size of this time windo w. Such a mechanism was proposed by Annis [1], introducing an astrobiological disequili brium hypothesis. In this model, gamma-ray bursts act as a regulation mechanism, con stituting a source of global catastrophic events that wipe out most complex life in the GHZ. This model has been further studied by Ćirkovi ć and Vukoti ć [12], suggesting that we are now immersed in phase transition between a regime in which there ar e numerous astrobiological resetting events and a regime in which the natural decline in such events will result in a suitable environment for the emergence of numerous ETCs, eve ntually leading to the one or more Kardashev Type III ETCs. The duration of this phase transition is proposed to be the Fermi-Hart timescale. The outcome of the analys is at this timescale is compatible with this hypothesis: a GHZ mostly devoid of comple x life ~100 Myr ago and in which ETCs are gradually appearing does not require any a dditional assumption to account for a low maximum number of ETCs performing the kind of exploration considered. 5. Conclusions Exploring the galaxy with space probes would take a long time unless a high number of probes were used. A large enough number of ETCs con ducting exploration initiatives can however make it very unlikely that no probe eve r reach a particular stellar system. According to the numerical model devised, the numbe r of ETCs actively exploring the galaxy per Myr is bounded from above by ~10 2-10 3 (assuming probes have a lifetime of 50 Myr –which can be reasonably thought to fall wit hin the technological reach of a Kardashev Type II ETC and can be considered a short lapse in the galactic timescale– and that contact evidence lasts for 1 Myr). In this scenario, the nearest such ETC would be on average from several hundred up to around one thousand parsecs distance from Earth. This bound sharply decreases for fixed probe lifetime as contact evidence becomes longer-lasting (e.g., ~10 for 100 Myr), as it would be the case with, e.g., sterilizing probes. A parsimonious non-exclusive ex planation to this diminishing upper bound can be found in non-stationary astrobiologica l models, which impose a strict temporal limit for the emergence of complex life an d hence in the time window for contact. Future work will try to confirm these conc lusions on different simulation models, including a sensitivity analysis of the parameters involved. Acknowledgements We would like to thank the reviewers for their cons tructive comments and suggestions. Thanks are also due to José Muñoz for useful discus sions and to Spanish MICINN for support under project TIN2008-05941. References [1] J. Annis. “An astrophysical explanation for t he Great Silence”, JBIS , 52 :19–22, 1999. [2] D.L. Applegate, R.E. Bixby, V. Chvátal, W. Co ok, D.G. Espinoza, M. Goycoolea, and K. Helsgaun. “Certification of an optimal TSP t our through 85,900 cities”, Operations Research Letters , 37 :11–15, 2009. [3] R. Bjørk. “Exploring the galaxy using space p robes”, International Journal of 13 Astrobiology , 6:89–93, 2007. [4] A. Bosma. “21-cm line studies of spiral galaxie s. II. The distribution and kinematics of neutral hydrogen in spiral galaxies o f various morphological types”, Astronomical Journal , 86 :1825-1846, 1981 [5] C. Blum and A. Roli. “Metaheuristics in combi natorial optimization: Overview and conceptual comparison”, ACM Computing Surveys , 35 (3):268–308, 2003. [6] R.N. Bracewell. “Communications from superior galactic communities”, Nature , 186 :670–671, 1960. [7] M.J. Burchell. “W(h)ither the drake equation? ” International Journal of Astrobiology , 5(3):243–250, 2006. [8] R.A. Carrigan. “Searching for Dyson spheres w ith Planck spectrum fits to IRAS”, In 55 th International Astronautical Congress , Vancouver, Canada, 2004. IAC-04- IAA-11106. [9] R.A. Carrigan. “IRAS-based whole-sky upper li mit on Dyson spheres”, Technical Report 08-352, Fermilab, 2008. astro-ph:0811-2376. [10] M.M. Ćirkovi ć. “The temporal aspect of Drake equation and SETI”, Astrobiology , 4:225–231, 2004. [11] M.M. Ćirkovi ć. “Against the empire”, JBIS , 61 (7):246–254, July 2008. [12] M.M. Ćirkovi ć and B. Vukoti ć. “Astrobiological phase transition: Towards resolution of Fermi’s paradox”, Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres , 38 :535–547, 2008. [13] J.M Cordes, T.J.W. Lazio and C. Sagan. “Scinti llation-induced intermittency in SETI”, Astrophysical Journal , 487 :782-808, 1997 [14] G.A. Croes. “A method for solving traveling salesman problems”, Operations Research , 6:791–812, 1958. [15] M.J. Fogg. “Temporal aspects of the interact ion among the first galactic civilizations: The «interdict hypothesis»“, Icarus , 69 (2):370–384, 1987. [16] J. Freeman and M. Lampton. “Interstellar arc haeology and the prevalence of intelligence”, Icarus , 25 (2):368–369, 1975. [17] R.A. Freitas Jr. “A self-reproducing interste llar probe”, JBIS , 33 :251–264, 1980. [18] B.L. Golden and A.A. Assad. “ Vehicle Routing: Methods and Studies , vol. 16 of Studies in Management Science and Systems ”, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1988. [19] G. Gonzalez, D. Brownlee, and P. Ward. “The galactic habitable zone: Galactic chemical evolution”, Icarus , 152 (1):185–200, 2001. [20] C. Gros. “Expanding advanced civilizations in the universe”, JBIS , 58 (2):108– 111, 2005. [21] M.H. Hart. “An explanation for the absence of extraterrestrials on Earth”, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society, 16 :128–135, 1975. [22] A.W. Howard et al. “Search for nanosecond optical pulses from nearby solar-type stars”, Astrophysical Journal , 613 :1270-1284, 2004 [23] E.M. Jones. “Colonization of the galaxy”, Icarus , 28 (3):421–422, 1976. [24] J. Jugaku and S.E. Nishimura. “A search for Dyson spheres around late-type stars in the solar neighborhood”, In R. Norris and F. Sto otman (Eds.), Bioastronomy 2002: Life Among the Stars , vol. 213 of Proceedings of the IAU Symposium , page 437, San Francisco CA, 2002. Astronomical Society of the Pacific. [25] C.H. Lineweaver. “An estimate of the age dist ribution of terrestrial planets in the universe: Quantifying metallicity as a selection ef fect”, Icarus , 151 (2):307–313, 2001. [26] C.H. Lineweaver, Y. Fenner, and B.K. Gibson. “The galactical habitable zone and the age distribution of complex life in the Milky Way”, Science , 303 :59–62, 2004. 14 [27] W.I. Newman and C. Sagan. “Galactic civiliza tions: Population dynamics and interstellar diffusion”, Icarus , 46 (3):293–327, 1981. [28] N. Prantzos. “On the «galactic habitable zon e»”, Space Science Reviews , 135 (1– 4):313–322, 2008. [29] G. Reinelt. “ The Traveling Salesman Problem: Computational solut ions for TSP applications ”, vol. 840 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science . Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 1994. [30] C. Sagan and W.I. Newman. “The Solipsist Appro ach to Extraterrestrial Intelligence”, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society , 24 :113-121, 1983 [31] F.J. Tipler. “Extraterrestrial intelligent b eings do not exist”, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society , 21 :267–281, 1980. [32] P. Toth and D. Vigo. “ The Vehicle Routing Problem” , vol. 9 of Monographs on Discrete Mathematics and Applications . SIAM, Philadelphia PN, 2001. [33] F. Valdes and R.A. Freitas Jr. “Comparison o f reproducing and nonreproducing starprobe strategies for galactic exploration”, JBIS , 33 :402–406, 1980. [34] S. Webb. “If the Universe is teeming with aliens... where is everybody? Fifty solutions to the Fermi paradox”, Springer, New York NY, 2002. 