How to 0wn the Internet in Your Spare Time Stuart Staniford∗ Vern Paxson† Nicholas Weaver‡ Silicon Defense ICSI Center for Internet Research UC Berkeley stuart@silicondefense.com vern@icir.org nweaver@cs.berkeley.edu Abstract The ability of attackers to rapidly gain control of vast numbers of Internet hosts poses an immense risk to the overall security of the Internet. Once subverted, these hosts can not only be used to launch massive denial of service ﬂoods, but also to steal or corrupt great quantities of sensitive information, and confuse and disrupt use of the network in more subtle ways. We present an analysis of the magnitude of the threat. We begin with a mathematical model derived from empirical data of the spread of Code Red I in July, 2001. We discuss techniques subsequently employed for achieving greater virulence by Code Red II and Nimda. In this context, we develop and evaluate several new, highly virulent possible techniques: hit-list scanning (which creates a Warhol worm), permutation scanning (which enables self-coordinating scanning), and use of Internetsized hit-lists (which creates a ﬂash worm). We then turn to the to the threat of surreptitious worms that spread more slowly but in a much harder to detect “contagion” fashion. We demonstrate that such a worm today could arguably subvert upwards of 10,000,000 Internet hosts. We also consider robust mechanisms by which attackers can control and update deployed worms. In conclusion, we argue for the pressing need to develop a “Center for Disease Control” analog for virusand worm-based threats to national cybersecurity, and sketch some of the components that would go into such a Center. ∗Research supported by DARPA via contract N66001-00-C-8045 †Also with the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley. ‡Additional support from Xilinx, ST Microsystems, and the California MICRO program 1 Introduction If you can control a million hosts on the Internet, you can do enormous damage. First, you can launch distributed denial of service (DDOS) attacks so immensely diffuse that mitigating them is well beyond the state-ofthe-art for DDOS traceback and protection technologies. Such attacks could readily bring down e-commerce sites, news outlets, command and coordination infrastructure, speciﬁc routers, or the root name servers. Second, you can access any sensitive information present on any of those million machines—passwords, credit card numbers, address books, archived email, patterns of user activity, illicit content—even blindly searching for a “needle in a haystack,” i.e., information that might be on a computer somewhere in the Internet, for which you trawl using a set of content keywords. Third, not only can you access this information, but you can sow confusion and disruption by corrupting the information, or sending out false or conﬁdential information directly from a user’s desktop. In short, if you could control a million Internet hosts, the potential damage is truly immense: on a scale where such an attack could play a signiﬁcant role in warfare between nations or in the service of terrorism. Unfortunately it is reasonable for an attacker to gain control of a million Internet hosts, or perhaps even ten million. The highway to such control lies in the exploitation of worms: programs that self-propagate across the Internet by exploiting security ﬂaws in widely-used services.1 Internet-scale worms are not a new phenomenon [Sp89, ER89], but the severity of their threat has rapidly grown with (i) the increasing degree to which the In- 1 We distinguish between the worms discussed in this paper— active worms—and viruses (or email worms) in that the latter require some sort of user action to abet their propagation. As such, they tend to propagate more slowly. From an attacker’s perspective, they also suffer from the presence of a large anti-virus industry that actively seeks to identify and control their spread. 0 20 40 60 80 0 5000 10000 20000 Days Since July 18, 2001 Distinct Remote Hosts Attacking LBNL Jul 19 Aug 1 Sep 1 Sep 19 Oct 1 Code Red I v2 Code Red II Nimda Figure 1: Onset of Code Red I v2, Code Red II, and Nimda: Number of remote hosts launching conﬁrmed attacks corresponding to different worms, as seen at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Hosts are detected by the distinct URLs they attempt to retrieve, corresponding to the IIS exploits and attack strings. Since Nimda spreads by multiple vectors, the counts shown for it may be an underestimate. ternet has become part of a nation’s critical infrastructure, and (ii) the recent, widely publicized introduction of very large, very rapidly spreading Internet worms, such that this technique is likely to be particularly current in the minds of attackers. We present an analysis of the magnitude of the threat. We begin with a mathematical model derived from empirical data of the spread of Code Red I v2 in July and August, 2001 (Section 2). We then discuss techniques employed for achieving greater effectiveness and virulence by the subsequent Code Red II and Nimda worms (Section 3). Figures 1 and 2 show the onset and progress of the Code Red and Nimda worms as seen “in the wild.” In this context, we develop the threat of three new techniques for highly virulent worms: hit-list scanning, permutation scanning, and Internet scale hit-lists (Section 4). Hit-list scanning is a technique for accelerating the initial spread of a worm. Permutation scanning is a mechanism for distributed coordination of a worm. Combining these two techniques creates the possibility of a Warhol worm,2 seemingly capable of infecting most or all vulnerable targets in a few minutes to perhaps an hour. An extension of the hit-list technique creates a ﬂash worm, which appears capable of infecting the vulnerable population in 10s of seconds: so fast that no human-mediated counter-response is possible. We then turn in Section 5 to the threat of a new class of 2So named for the quotation “In the future, everyone will have 15 minutes of fame.” 0 50 100 150 0 500 1000 1500 2000 Days Since Sept. 20, 2001 Distinct Remote Hosts Attacking LBNL Oct 1 Oct 15 Nov 1 Nov 15 Dec 1 Dec 15 Jan 1 Jan 15 Nimda Code Red I v2 Code Red II Figure 2: The endemic nature of Internet worms: Number of remote hosts launching conﬁrmed attacks corresponding to different worms, as seen at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, over several months since their onset. Since July, 139,000 different remote Code Red I hosts have been con- ﬁrmed attacking LBNL; 125,000 different Code Red II hosts; and 63,000 Nimda hosts. Of these, 20,000 were observed to be infected with two different worms, and 1,000 with all three worms. (Again, Nimda is potentially an underestimate because we are only counting those launching Web attacks.) surreptitious worms. These spread more slowly, but in a much harder to detect “contagion” fashion, masquerading as normal trafﬁc. We demonstrate that such a worm today could arguably subvert upwards of 10,000,000 Internet hosts. Then in Section 6, we discuss some possibilities by which an attacker could control the worm using cryptographically-secured updates, enabling it to remain a threat for a considerable period of time. Even when most traces of the worm have been removed from the network, such an “updatable” worm still remains a signiﬁcant threat. Having demonstrated the very serious nature of the threat, we then in Section 7 discuss an ambitious but we believe highly necessary strategy for addressing it: the establishment at a national or international level of a “Center for Disease Control” analog for virusand worm-based threats to cybersecurity. We discuss the roles we envision such a Center serving, and offer thoughts on the sort of resources and structure the Center would require in order to do so. Our aim is not to comprehensively examine each role, but to spur further discussion of the issues within the community. 2 An Analysis of Code Red I The ﬁrst version of the Code Red worm was initially seen in the wild on July 13th, 2001, according to Ryan Permeh and Marc Maiffret of Eeye Digital Security [EDS01a, EDS01b], who disassembled the worm code and analyzed its behavior. The worm spread by compromising Microsoft IIS web servers using the .ida vulnerability discovered also by Eeye and published June 18th [EDS01c] and was assigned CVE number CVE-2001- 0500 [CV01]. Once it infected a host, Code-Red spread by launching 99 threads which generated random IP addresses, and then tried to compromise those IP addresses using the same vulnerability. A hundredth thread defaced the web server in some cases. However, the ﬁrst version of the worm analyzed by Eeye, which came to be known as CRv1, had an apparent bug. The random number generator was initialized with a ﬁxed seed, so that all copies of the worm in a particular thread, on all hosts, generated and attempted to compromise exactly the same sequence of IP addresses. (The thread identiﬁer is part of the seeding, so the worm had a hundred different sequences that it explores through the space of IP addresses, but it only explored those hundred.) Thus CRv1 had a linear spread and never compromised many machines. On July 19th, 2001, a second version of the worm began to spread. This was suspected informally via mailing list discussion, then conﬁrmed by the mathematical analysis we present below, and ﬁnally deﬁnitively conﬁrmed by disassembly of the new worm. This version came to be known as CRv2, or Code Red I. Code Red I v2 was the same codebase as CRv1 in almost all respects—the only differences were ﬁxing the bug with the random number generation, an end to web site defacements, and a DDOS payload targeting the IP address ofwww.whitehouse.gov. We developed a tentative quantitative theory of what happened with the spread of Code Red I worm. The new version spread very rapidly until almost all vulnerable IIS servers on the Internet were compromised. It stopped trying to spread at midnight UTC due to an internal constraint in the worm that caused it to turn itself off. It then reactivated on August 1st, though for a while its spread was suppressed by competition with Code Red II (see below). However, Code Red II died by design [ SA01] on October 1, while Code Red I has continued to make a monthly resurgence, as seen in Figure 2. Why it continues to gain strength with each monthly appearance remains unknown.3 We call this model the Random Constant Spread (RCS) model. The model assumes that the worm had a good random number generator that is properly seeded. We deﬁneN as the total number of vulnerable servers which can be potentially compromised from the Internet. (We make the approximation that N is ﬁxed—ignoring both patching of systems during the worm spread and normal deploying and removing of systems or turning on and off of systems at night. We also ignore any spread of the worm behind ﬁrewalls on private Intranets). K is the initial compromise rate. That is, the number of vulnerable hosts which an infected host can ﬁnd and compromise per hour at the start of the incident, when few other hosts are compromised. We assume that K is a global constant, and does not depend on the processor speed, network connection, or location of the infected machine. (Clearly, constant K is only an approximation.) We assume that a compromised machine picks other machines to attack completely at random, and that once a machine is compromised, it cannot be compromised again, or that if it is, that does not increase the rate at which it can ﬁnd and attack new systems. We assume that once it is compromised, it stays that way. T is a time which ﬁxes when the incident happens. We then have the following variables: • a is the proportion of vulnerable machines which have been compromised. • t is the time (in hours). Now, we analyze the problem by assuming that at some particular time t, a proportion of the machines a have been compromised, and then asking how many more machines,Nda, will get compromised in the next amount of timedt. The answer is: Nda = (Na)K(1−a)dt. (1) The reason is that the number of machines compromised in the next increment of time is proportional to the number of machines already compromised ( Na) times the number of machines each compromised machine can 3One possibility is that, since the default install of Windows 2000 server includes IIS, new vulnerable machines have been added to the Internet. 0 100,000 200,000 300,000 400,000 500,000 600,000 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 Hour of the day Number seen in an hour # of scans # of unique IPs Predicted # of scans Figure 3: Hourly probe rate data for inbound port 80 at the Chemical Abstracts Service during the initial outbreak of Code Red I on July 19th, 2001. The x-axis is the hour of the day (CDT time zone), while the y-axis is probe rate, the number of different IP addresses seen, and a ﬁt to the data discussed in the text. compromise per unit time (K(1−a)), times the increment of time (dt). (Note that machines can compromise K others per unit time to begin with, but onlyK·(1−a) once a proportion of other machines are compromised already.) This give us the differential equation: da dt =Ka(1−a) (2) with solution: a = eK(t−T) 1 +eK(t−T), (3) where T is a constant of integration that ﬁxes the time position of the incident. This equation has been well known for many years as the logistic equation, and governs the rate of growth of epidemics in ﬁnite systems when all entities are equally likely to infect any other entity (which is true for randomized spreading among Internet-connected servers, in the absence of ﬁrewall ﬁltering rules that differentially affect infectability from or to different addresses). This is an interesting equation. For earlyt (signiﬁcantly before T ), a grows exponentially. For large t (signiﬁcantly afterT ),a goes to 1 (all vulnerable machines are compromised). The rate at which this happens depends only onK (the rate at which one machine can compromise others), and not at all on the number of machines. This is interesting because it tells us that a worm like this can compromise all vulnerable machines on the Internet fairly fast. Figure 3 shows hourly probe rate data from Ken Eichmann of the Chemical Abstracts Service for the hourly probe rate inbound on port 80 at that site. Also shown is a ﬁt to the data with K = 1.8, T = 11.9, and with the top of the ﬁt scaled to a maximum probe rate of 510,000 scans/hour. (We ﬁt it to fall slightly below the data curve, since it seems there is a ﬁxed background rate of web probes that was going on before the rapid rise due to the worm spread.) This very simple theory can be seen to give a reasonable ﬁrst approximation explanation of the worm behavior. See also Section4.3 for validation of the theory via simulation. Note that we ﬁt the scan rate, rather than the number of distinct IPs seen at this site. The incoming scan rate seen at a site is directly proportional to the total number of infected IPs on the Internet, since there is a ﬁxed probability for any worm copy to scan this particular site in the current time interval. However, the number of distinct IPs seen at a site is distorted relative to the overall infection curve. This is because a given worm copy, once it is infected, will take some amount of time before it gets around to scanning any particular site. For a small address space, this delay can be sizeable and causes the distinct IP graph at the given site to lag behind the overall Internet infection rate graph. Two implications of this graph are interesting. One is that the worm came close to saturating before it turned itself off at midnight UTC (1900 CDT), as the number of copies ceased increasing a few hours before the worm’s automatic turnoff. Thus it had found the bulk of the servers it was going to ﬁnd at this time. Secondly, the infection rate was about 1.8 per hour—in the early stages of the infection, each infected server was able to ﬁnd about 1.8 other servers per hour. Although Code Red I turned itself off at midnight UTC on July 19th, hosts with inaccurate clocks kept it alive and allowed it to spread again when the worm code allowed it to re-awaken on August 1st. Figure 4 shows similar data and ﬁt for that incident. TheK here is about 0.7. Since the worm code-base was the same, this lower spread rate indicates that the number of vulnerable systems was a little less than 40% as many as the ﬁrst time around. That is, the data appears consistent with slightly more than half the systems having been ﬁxed in the 11 days intervening. 0 50,000 100,000 150,000 200,000 250,000 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 Hour of the day Number seen in an hour # of scans Predicted # of scans Figure 4: Hourly probe rate data for inbound port 80 at the Chemical Abstracts Service, for Code Red I’s reemergence on August 1st. The x-axis the time of day on August 1st (Central US Time). The y-axis shows the monitored probe rate and a ﬁt for the data discussed in the text. 3 “Better” worms—practice In this section, we explore the strategies adopted by the two major worms released subsequent to Code Red I: “Code Red II” and “Nimda.” 3.1 Localized scanning—Code Red II The Code Red II worm was released on Saturday August 4th, 2001 and spread rapidly [ CE01, SA01]. The worm code contained a comment stating that it was “Code Red II,” but it was an unrelated code base. It did use the same vulnerability, however—a buffer overﬂow in Microsoft’s IIS Web server with CVE number CVE-2001- 0500. When successful, the payload installed a root backdoor allowing unrestricted remote access to the infected host. The worm exploit only worked correctly when IIS was running on Microsoft Windows 2000; on Windows NT it caused a system crash rather than an infection. The worm was also a single-stage scanning worm that chose random IP addresses and attempted to infect them. However, it used a localized scanning strategy, where it was differentially likely to attempt to infect addresses close to it. Speciﬁcally, with probability 3/8 it chose a random IP address from within the class B address space (/16 network) of the infected machine. With probability 1/2 it chose randomly from its own class A (/8 network). Finally, with probability 1/8 it would choose a random address from the whole Internet. This strategy appears quite successful. The localized spreading allows the worm to quickly infect parts of the Internet that contain many vulnerable hosts, and also means that the infection often proceeds quicker since hosts with similar IP addresses are often close together in the network topology also. This strategy also allows a worm to spread very rapidly within an internal network once it manages to pass through the external ﬁrewall. Unfortunately, developing an analytic model for the spread of a worm employing this type of localized scanning strategy is signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult than the modeling effort in Section 2, because it requires incorporating potentially highly non-homogeneous patterns of population locality. The empirical data is also harder to interpret, because Code Red I was quite active when Code Red II was released. Indeed, it appears that Code Red II took a while to overcome Code Red I (see Figure 1), but fully determining the interplay between the two appears to be a signiﬁcant undertaking. 3.2 Multi-vector worms—Nimda As well illustrated by the Nimda worm/virus (and, indeed, the original Internet Worm [Sp89, ER89]), malevolent code is not restricted to a single technique. Nimda began on September 18th, 2001, spread very rapidly, and maintained itself on the Internet for months after it started. Nimda spread extensively behind ﬁrewalls, and illustrates the ferocity and wide reach that a multi-mode worm can exhibit. The worm is thought to have used at least ﬁve different methods to spread itself. • By infecting Web servers from infected client machines via active probing for a Microsoft IIS vulnerability (CVE-2000-0884). • By bulk emailing of itself as an attachment based on email addresses determined from the infected machine. • By copying itself across open network shares • By adding exploit code to Web pages on compromised servers in order to infect clients which browse the page. • By scanning for the backdoors left behind by Code Red II and also the “sadmind” worm [CE03]. Onset of NIMDA Time (PDT) 18 September, 2001 Conn / Sec 6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5 8.0 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 Connections/Second Figure 5: HTTP connections per second seen at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, rising due to the onset of Nimda, September 18. Figure 5 illustrates how rapidly the worm tried to infect one site, the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The x-axis plots hours past midnight, PDT, while they-axis plots HTTP connection attempts per second. Only connections from hosts conﬁrmed to have harbored Nimda are counted, to avoid possible confusion with concurrent Code Red connection attempts. After the onset of the infection, the total rate of probing was about 3 times that from the hosts subsequently conﬁrmed to harbor Nimda. Clearly, onset was quite rapid, rising in just half an hour from essentially no probing to a sustained rate of nearly 100 probes/sec. There is an additional synergy in Nimda’s use of multiple infection vectors: many ﬁrewalls allow mail to pass untouched, relying on the mail servers to remove pathogens. Yet since many mail servers remove pathogens based on signatures, they aren’t effective during the ﬁrst few minutes to hours of an outbreak, giving Nimda a reasonably effective means of crossing ﬁrewalls to invade internal networks. Finally, we note that Nimda’s full functionality is still not known: all that is known is how it spreads, but not what it might be capable of doing in addition to spreading, if it receives the right trigger, or a prearranged time rolls around. We return to this point in Section 7. 4 “Better” worms—theory There are several techniques which, although not yet employed, could further signiﬁcantly increase the virulence of a worm. Beyond the obvious factors of discovering more widespread security holes and increasing the scanning rate, some additional strategies a worm author could employ are: (i) hit-list scanning, (ii) permutation scanning, (iii) topologically aware worms, and (iv) Internet scale hit-lists. The goal is very rapid infection—in particular, considerably faster than any possible humanmediated response. A worm’s scanner can obviously be made signiﬁcantly faster than the ones seen today, by careful use of threading and an understanding of the protocols. By having many requests outstanding, a worm should be capable of scanning targets at a rate proportional to its access bandwidth. Since it only takes 40 bytes for a TCP SYN packet to determine if a service is accessible, and often only a few hundred bytes to attempt an exploit, the potential scans per second can easily exceed 100 for even poor Internet connections. This increases K by allowing a worm to search for a greater number of targets in a given period of time. Similarly, the more widespread the vulnerable software is, the faster a worm using that vulnerability can spread, because each random scan of the network is more likely to pick up a target, also increasing K. We should therefore expect that worm authors will devote considerable scrutiny to highly homogeneous, highly deployed services, both for the faster spreading and for the greater number of machines that could be compromised in a single attack. 4.1 Hit-list Scanning One of the biggest problems a worm faces in achieving a very rapid rate of infection is “getting off the ground.” Although a worm spreads exponentially during the early stages of infection, the time needed to infect say the ﬁrst 10,000 hosts dominates the infection time, as can be seen in Figure 3. There is a simple way for an active worm to overcome this obstacle, which we term hit-list scanning. Before the worm is released, the worm author collects a list of say 10,000 to 50,000 potentially vulnerable machines, ideally ones with good network connections. The worm, when released onto an initial machine on this hit-list, begins scanning down the list. When it infects a machine, it divides the hit-list in half, communicating half to the recipient worm, keeping the other half. This quick division ensures that even if only 10–20% of the machines on the hit-list are actually vulnerable, an active worm will quickly go through the hit-list and establish itself on all vulnerable machines in only a few seconds. Although the hit-list may start at 200 kilobytes, it quickly shrinks to nothing during the partitioning. This provides a great beneﬁt in constructing a fast worm by speeding the initial infection. The hit-list needn’t be perfect: a simple list of machines running a particular server type may sufﬁce, although greater accuracy will improve the spread. The hit-list itself can be generated using one or several of the following techniques, prepared well in advance, generally with little fear of detection. • Stealthy scans. Portscans are so common and so widely ignored that even a fast scan of the entire Internet would be unlikely to attract law enforcement attention or more than mild comment in the incident response community. However, for attackers wishing to be especially careful, a randomized stealthy scan taking several months would be very unlikely to attract much attention, as most intrusion detection systems are not currently capable of detecting such low-proﬁle scans. Some portion of the scan would be out of date by the time it was used, but much of it would not. • Distributed scanning. An attacker could scan the Internet using a few dozen to a few thousand already-compromised “zombies,” similar to what DDOS attackers assemble in a fairly routine fashion. Such distributed scanning has already been seen in the wild—Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory received 10 during the past year. • DNS searches. Assemble a list of domains (for example, by using widely available spam mail lists, or trolling the address registries). The DNS can then be searched for the IP addresses of mail-servers (via MX records) or Web servers (by looking for www.domain.com). • Spiders. For Web server worms (like Code Red), use Web-crawling techniques similar to search engines in order to produce a list of most Internetconnected Web sites. This would be unlikely to attract serious attention. • Public surveys. For many potential targets there may be surveys available listing them, such as the Netcraft survey [Ne02]. • Just listen. Some applications, such as peer-topeer networks, wind up advertising many of their servers. Similarly, many previous worms effectively broadcast that the infected machine is vulnerable to further attack. For example, because of its widespread scanning, during the Code Red I infection it was easy to pick up the addresses of upwards of 300,000 vulnerable IIS servers—because each one came knocking on everyone’s door! Indeed, some individuals produced active countermeasures to Code Red II by exploiting this observation, when combined with the backdoor which Code Red II installs [ DA01]. However, it is not a given that future worms will broadcast their presence, and we also note that worms could readily ﬁx the very security holes they exploit (such as is often already observed for attackers performing breakins manually), which undermines the superﬁcially appealing countermeasure of using the worm’s vector as a means by which to disable it. 4.2 Permutation Scanning Another limitation to very fast infection is the general inefﬁciency of random scanning: many addresses are probed multiple times. Similarly there is no means for a randomly scanning worm to effectively determine when all vulnerable machines are infected. Permutation scanning solves these problems by assuming that a worm can detect that a particular target is already infected. In a permutation scan, all worms share a common pseudo random permutation of the IP address space. Such a permutation can be efﬁciently generated using a 32-bit block cipher and a preselected key: simply encrypt an index to get the corresponding address in the permutation, and decrypt an address to get its index. Any machines infected during the hit-list phase (or local subnet scanning) start scanning just after their point in the permutation, working their way through the permutation, looking for vulnerable machines. Whenever the worm sees an already infected machine, it chooses a new, random start point and proceeds from there. Worms infected by permutation scanning would start at a random point. This has the effect of providing a self-coordinated, comprehensive scan while maintaining the beneﬁts of random probing. Each worm looks like it is conducting a random scan, but it attempts to minimize duplication of effort. Any time an instance of the worm,W , encounters an already-infected host, it knows that W′, the original infector of the host, is already working along the current sequence in the permutation, and is further ahead. Hence, there’s no need for W to continue working on the current sequence in addition toW′. Self-coordination keeps the infection rate high and guarantees an eventual comprehensive scan. Furthermore, it allows the worm to make a local decision that further scanning is of little beneﬁt. After any particular copy of the worm sees several infected machines without discovering new vulnerable targets, the worm assumes that effectively complete infection has occurred and stops the scanning process. A timer could then induce the worms to wake up, change the permutation key to the next one in a prespeciﬁed sequence, and begin scanning through the new permutation, starting at its own index and halting when another instance is discovered. This process insures that every address would be efﬁciently rescanned at regular intervals, detecting any machines which came onto the net or were reinstalled but not patched, greatly increasing a worm’s staying power. Otherwise, the worms are silent and difﬁcult to detect, until they receive attack orders (see Section 6). A further optimization is apartitioned permutation scan. In this scheme, the worm has a range of the permutation that it is initially responsible for. When it infects another machine, it reduces its range in half, with the newly infected worm taking the other section. When the range gets below a certain level, it switches to simple permutation scanning and otherwise behaves like a permutation scan. This scheme offers a slight but noticeable increase in scanning efﬁciency, by dividing up the initial workload using an approximate divide-and-conquer technique. Permutation scanning interacts particularly well with a worm which attacks multiple security holes: after deciding that the initial exploit is exhausted, the worm resets the permutation to its current address, changes the permutation key, and exploits the second security hole. Thus, even relatively rare secondary holes can be efﬁciently and quickly scanned once the worm has estab- 0 100,000 200,000 300,000 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Time (hours) Number of Instances Simulation K = 2.6, T = 5.52 Figure 6: The spread of a simulated worm capable of 10 scans/second in a population of 300,000 vulnerable machines and its comparison to the model developed in Section 2. The simulation and theoretical results overlap completely. lished itself on the network. It may seem that the permutation scanning algorithm is spoofable, but only to a very limited degree. If an uninfected machine responds to the scan in the same way as a worm, by falsely claiming to be infected, it will temporarily protect those machines which exist later in the current permutation from being scanned by the worm. However, since the permutation itself changes on every rescan, the set of machines protected is constantly changing. The result is that unless a very large number of uninfected machines respond to probes like an actual worm, the protection is almost nonexistent. 4.3 Simulation of a Warhol Worm A combination of hit-list and permutation scanning can create what we term a Warhol worm, capable of attacking most vulnerable targets in well under an hour, possibly less than 15 minutes. Hit-list scanning greatly improves the initial spread, while permutation scanning keeps the worm’s infection rate high for much longer when compared with random scanning. In order to evaluate the effects of hit-list and permutation scanning, we wrote a small, abstract simulator of a Warhol worm’s spread. The simulator assumes complete connectivity within a 232 entry address space 4 using a pseudo-random permutation to map addresses to a sub- 4In general, the Internet address space isn’t completely connected. If a machine is not reachable from an arbitrary point on the external 0 100,000 200,000 300,000 0 1 2 3 4 6 7 8 Time (hours) Number of Instances Conventional Fast Scanning Warhol Figure 7: The spread of three simulated worms in a population of 300,000 vulnerable machines: (i) a Code Red-like worm capable of 10 scans/second, (ii) a faster scanning worm capable of 100 scans/second, and (iii) a Warhol worm, capable of 100 scans/second, using a 10,000 entry hit-list and permutation scanning which gives up when 2 infected machines are discovered without ﬁnding a new target. All graphs stop at 99.99% infection of the simulated address space. set of vulnerable machines. We used a 32-bit, 6-round variant of RC5 to generate all permutations and random numbers. We can parameterize the simulation in terms of: the number of vulnerable machines in the address space; scans per second; the time to infect a machine; number infected during the hit-list phase; and the type of secondary scan (permutation, partitioned permutation, or random). The simulator assumes multithreaded scanning. To ensure that the simulator produces reasonable results, Figure 6 shows a comparison between the simulator’s output and the model developed in Section 2, for a worm capable of 10 scans/second in a population of 300,000 vulnerable machines. The simulation results ﬁt the model forK = 2.6 andT = 5.52. This represents a worm which is slightly faster (less than 50%) than Code Red I. Figure 7 then shows how both faster scanning and the Warhol strategies affect the propagation time. The faster scanning worm (capable of 100 scans/second) reduces the infection time down to under an hour, while the combination of hit-list scanning, permutation scanning, and fast scanning, further reduces infection time to roughly network, it is usually not reachable directly by a worm except through local scanning. 0 100,000 200,000 300,000 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 Time (minutes) Infected Machines Infected Machines Active Worms Dormant Worms Figure 8: A closeup of the behavior of the Warhol worm seen in Figure 7. The infection initially progresses rapidly— effectively all worms are actively scanning the net—but as infection rates near 100%, many worms have gone dormant, correctly concluding that there are few vulnerable machines remaining and should therefore cease scanning. 15 minutes. Figure 8 shows in more detail the behavior of the Warhol strategies. It gets a huge boost from the hit-list during the ﬁrst few seconds of propagation, quickly establishing itself on the network and then spreading exponentially. As the infection exceeds the 50% point, some of the worms begin recognizing that saturation is occurring and stop scanning. By the time the graph ends (at 99.99% of the simulated population), most of the worms have gone silent, leaving a few remaining worms to ﬁnish scanning the last of the address space. 4.4 Topological Scanning An alternative to hit-list scanning is topologically aware scanning, which uses information contained on the victim machine in order to select new targets. Email worms have used this tactic since their inception, as they harvest addresses from their victim in order to ﬁnd new potential targets, as did the Morris worm (necessary because of the very sparse address space when it was released) [Sp89, ER89]. Many future active worms could easily apply these techniques during the initial spread, before switching to a permutation scan once the known neighbors are exhausted. An active worm that attacked a ﬂaw in a peerto-peer application could easily get a list of peers from a victim and use those peers as the basis of its attack, which makes such applications highly attractive targets for worm authors. Although we have yet to see such a worm in the wild, these applications must be scrutinized for security. These applications are also vulnerable to contagion worms, as discussed in Section 5. Similarly, a worm attacking web servers could look for URLs on disk and use these URLs as seed targets as well as simply scanning for random targets. Since these are known to be valid web servers, this would tend to greatly increase the initial spread by preferentially probing for likely targets. 4.5 Flash Worms We further observe that there is a variant of the hit-list strategy that could plausibly result in most of the vulnerable servers on the Internet being infected in tens of seconds. We term this a ﬂash worm. The nub of our observation is that an attacker could plausibly obtain a hit-list of most servers with the relevant service open to the Internet in advance of the release of the worm.5 In addition to the methods already discussed for constructing a hit-list in Section 4.1, a complete scan of the Internet through an OC-12 connection would complete quickly. Given a rate of 750,000 TCP SYN packets per second (the OC-12 provides 622 Mbps, the TCP segment takes 40 bytes, and we allow for link-layer framing), and that the return trafﬁc is smaller in volume than the outbound (it is comprised of either same-sized SYN ACKs or RSTs, smaller ICMPs, or, most often, no response at all), it would take roughly 2 hours to scan the entire address space. Faster links could of course scan even faster. Such a brute-force scan would be easily within the resources of a nation-state bent on cyberwarfare. Given that an attacker has the determination and foresight to assemble a list of all or most Internet connected addresses with the relevant service(s) open, a worm can spread most efﬁciently by simply attacking addresses on that list. For example, there are about 12.6 million Web servers on the Internet (according to Netcraft [Ne02]), so the size of that particular address list would be 48 MB, uncompressed. The initial copy of the worm can be pro- 5Servers behind load balancers create complications here, as do machines that connect to the Internet with variable IP addresses but nonetheless have vulnerable services open. grammed to divide the list inton blocks, and then to ﬁnd and infect the ﬁrst address in each block (or an especially chosen high-bandwidth address in that block), and then hand the child worm the list of addresses for that block. That copy of the worm can then re-iterate the process to infect everything in its block. A threaded worm could begin infecting hosts before it had received the full host list from its parent to work on, to maximize the parallelization process, and it could start work on looking for multiple children in parallel. This design is somewhat fragile if an early copy of the worm is neutralized very quickly, or infects a site from which it cannot scan out. To mitigate this, the worm copies could overlap in their scanning so that all addresses were scanned a small number of times, with every target address being scanned by different paths through the infection tree. This has the additional sideeffect of removing the need for further parent-to-child communication after initial infection occurs. A related design would call for most of the address list to be located in pre-assigned chunks on one or a number of high-bandwidth servers that were well-known to the worm. Each copy of the worm would receive an assignment from its parent, and then fetch the address list from there. The server would only have to send out portions of the list, not the entire list; in principle, it should only have to transmit each address in the list once. In addition, after the worm has propagated sufﬁciently that a large number of copies are attempting to fetch their (now quite small) lists, at that point the worm collective could switch to sending around the address list with each new infection, rather than having the infectees each contact the server. This process will result in relatively little wasted effort. For example, if the worm had a list of Web servers, and a zero-day IIS vulnerability, about26% of the list would be vulnerable. No server would be probed twice. If n = 10, then the infection tree for the 3 million vulnerable servers would be just 7 layers deep. The spread rate of such a worm would likely be constrained by one of two things. The worm itself is likely to be small (Code Red I was about 4 KB, and a highly malicious worm could easily be less than 100 KB, even allowing for a complex payload). Thus, at the start, the address list is much larger than the worm itself, and the propagation of the worm could be limited by the time required to transmit the host list out of the initial infection site or servers where it was stored. Since all the children of the infection will have much smaller lists to transmit, these later lists are less likely to limit the worm spread (unless a ﬁrst generation child has less than 1/n of the initial copy’s bandwidth available to it). The exact time required to transmit the list will depend on the available bandwidth of the storage sites. As an example, however, we point out that a 48 MB address list could be pushed down an OC-12 link in less than a second.6 Thus, starting the worm on a high-bandwidth link is desirable for the attacker, and bandwidth is probably a concern at the next layer or two. Compression of the list could make the list delivery much faster. Indeed, we took a sorted list of the 9 million server addresses discussed in Section 5 and found that gzip compression shrinks the list from 36 MB to 13 MB, and differencing the addresses prior to compression reduced it to 7.5 MB. Another possible limitation is simply the latency required to infect each new layer in the tree. Given that probes can be issued in parallel, and substantially more threads can be spawned thann (the number of children), we do not have to add up the time required for a given copy to cycle through its list, but simply take the maximum infection latency. A single second is a reasonable latency, but with n = 10 and a large hit-list to transfer, it might take a little longer to get 10 copies of the worm through a given site’s link. However, not much longer—if a 5 KB worm can get 50% utilization through a 256 Kbps DSL uplink, it can transmit ten copies of itself in three seconds. That leads to a sub-thirty-second limit on the total infection time, given an infection tree seven layers deep and a design where the new worm children go to a server for their addresses. (An additional concern here is the possibility of elements of the worm interfering with one another, either directly, by inducing congestion, or indirectly, for example by overﬂowing ARP tables, as happened during the Code Red I outbreak [SA01]. These possibilities are difﬁcult to analyze.) In conclusion, we argue that a compact worm that begins with a list including all likely vulnerable addresses, and that has initial knowledge of some vulnerable sites with high-bandwidth links, appears able to infect almost all vulnerable servers on the Internet in less than thirty seconds. 6 Or, if we model TCP slow start, then assuming an RTT of 100 msec (high), 1500 byte segments, an initial window of 1 segment, and the use by the receiver of delayed acknowledgments, the transfer takes 2.3 seconds, using equation (10) of [ CSA00]. Since we control the receiver, we could perhaps turn off delayed acknowledgments, which lowers this to 1.5 seconds. We could even skip congestion control entirely, but that runs the serious risk of lengthening the transfer time by inducing packet loss, requiring retransmission. 5 Stealth worms—contagion The great speed with which the worms described in the previous sections can propagate presents a grave threat to the Internet’s security, because there is so little time available to react to their onset. Still, there might be a possibility of devising mechanisms that automatically detect the spread of such worms and shut them down in some fashion [ MSVS02]. Such mechanisms would likely be triggered by the singular communication patterns the worms evince—hosts generating much more diverse and rapid Internet trafﬁc than they usually do. We now turn to a different paradigm of worm propagation, contagion, which, while likely spreading signiﬁcantly slower than the rapidly-propagating worms, evinces almost no peculiar communication patterns. As such these worms could prove much more difﬁcult to detect and counter, allowing a patient attacker to slowly but surreptitiously compromise a vast number of systems. The core idea of the contagion model can be expressed with the following example. Suppose an attacker has attained a pair of exploits:Es, which subverts a popular type of Web server; and Ec, which subverts a popular type of Web client (browser). The attacker begins the worm on a convenient server or client (it doesn’t matter which, and they could start with many, if available by some other means), and then they simply wait. If the starting point is a server, then they wait for clients to visit (perhaps baiting them by putting up porn content and taking care that the large search engines index it). As each client visits, the subverted server detects whether the client is vulnerable toEc. If so, the server infects it, sending along bothEc andEs. As the client’s user now surfs other sites, the infected client inspects whether the servers on those sites are vulnerable to Es, and, if so, again infects them, sending alongEc andEs. In this fashion, the infection spreads from clients to servers and along to other clients, much as a contagious disease spreads based on the incidental trafﬁc patterns of its hosts. Clearly, with the contagion model there are no unusual communication patterns to observe, other than the larger volume of the connections due to the worm sending along a copy of itself as well as the normal contents of the connection—in the example, the URL request or the corresponding page contents. Depending on the type of data being transferred, this addition might be essentially negligible (for example, for MP3s). Thus, without an analyzer speciﬁc to the protocol(s) being exploited, and which knows how to detect abnormal requests and responses, the worm could spread very widely without detection (though perhaps other detection means such as Tripwire ﬁle integrity checkers [ Tw02] might discover it). In addition to exploiting the natural communication patterns to spread the worm, these might also be used by the attacker to then control it and retrieve information from the infected hosts, providing that the endemic trafﬁc patterns prove of sufﬁcient frequency and volume for the attacker’s purposes. (Or, of course, the attacker might more directly command the infected hosts when the time is ripe, “blowing their cover” in the course of a rapid strike for which keeping the hosts hidden can now be sacriﬁced.) As described above, one might ﬁnd contagion worms a clear theoretical threat, but not necessarily such a grave threat in practice. The example requires a pair of exploits, and will be limited by the size of the populations vulnerable to those attacks and the speed with which Web surﬁng would serve to interconnect the populations. While some argue the Web exhibits the “small world” phenomenon [ Br+00], in which the distance between different Web items in the hypertext topology is quite low, this doesn’t necessarily mean that the dynamic patterns by which users visit that content exhibit a similar degree of locality. We now present a more compelling example of the latent threat posed by the contagion model, namely leveraging peer-to-peer (P2P) systems. P2P systems generally entail a large set of computers all running the same software. Strictly speaking, the computers need only all run the same protocol, but in practice the number of independent implementations is quite limited, and it is plausible that generally a single implementation heavily dominates the population. Each node in the P2P network is both a client and a server.7 Accordingly, the problem of ﬁnding a pair of exploits to infect both client and server might likely be reduced to the problem of ﬁnding asingle exploit, significantly less work for the attacker. P2P systems have several other advantages that make them well suited to contagion worms: (i) they tend to interconnect with many different peers, (ii) they are often used to transfer large ﬁles, (iii) the protocols are generally not viewed as mainstream and hence receive less attention in terms of monitoring by intrusion detection systems and analysis of im- 7Of particular interest are ﬂaws which can only be exploited to infect hosts that initiate a connection. Such ﬂaws cannot be effectively used for fast-spreading worms, but are suitable for contagion worms. plementation vulnerabilities, (iv) the programs often execute on user’s desktops rather than servers, and hence are more likely to have access to sensitive ﬁles such as passwords, credit card numbers, address books, and (v) the use of the P2P network often entails the transfer of “grey” content (e.g., pornography, pirated music and videos), arguably making the P2P users less inclined to draw attention to any unusual behavior of the system that they perceive. The ﬁnal, sobering quality of P2P networks for forming contagion worms is their potentially immense size . We obtained a trace of TCP port 1214 trafﬁc recorded in November, 2001, at the border of a large university. Port 1214 is used by the KaZaA [Ka01] and Morpheus [Mu01] P2P sharing systems (both 8 built on the Fast- Track P2P framework [ Fa01]). As of January, 2002, the KaZaA distributors claim that more than 30,000,000 copies have been downloaded [ Ka01]. Since our data does not allow us to readily distinguish between KaZaA and Morpheus trafﬁc, for ease of exposition we will simply refer to all of the trafﬁc as KaZaA. Our KaZaA trace consists of summaries of TCP connections recorded by a passive network monitor. We have restricted the data to only those connections for which successful SYN and FIN handshakes were both seen (corresponding to connections reliably established and terminated, and eliminating unsuccessful connections such as those due to scanning). The volume of KaZaA trafﬁc at the university is immense: it comprises 5–10 million established connections per day. What is particularly striking, however, is the diversity of the remote hosts with which hosts at the university participated in KaZaA connections. During the month of November, 9 million distinct remote IP addresses engaged in successful KaZaA connections with university hosts. (There were 5,800 distinct university KaZaA hosts during this time.) Distinct addresses do not directly equate to distinct computers. A single address can represent multiple computers due to the use of NAT, DHCP, or modem dialups accessed by different users. On the other hand, the same computer can also show up as different addresses due to these mechanisms. Thus, we do not have a precise sense of the number of distinct computers involved in the November trace, but it appears reasonable to estimate it as around 9 million. KaZaA uses a variant of HTTP for framing its applica- 8 In early 2002, Morpheus switched to instead use the Gnutella P2P framework [Re02]. tion protocol. Given HTTP’s support for variable-sized headers, it would not be surprising to ﬁnd that a buffer overﬂow exploit of KaZaA exists. Given such an exploit, it is apparent that if an attacker started out having infected all of the university’sKaZaA hosts, then after a month they would have control of about 9 million hosts, assuming that the KaZaA clients are sufﬁciently homogeneous that a single exploit could infect them all.9 How plausible is it that the attacker could begin with control over all of the university’sKaZaA hosts? Quite: while the goal of the contagion worm is to evade detection, the attacker can likely risk a more blatant attack on a single university. If they can ﬁnd a university lacking in diligent security monitoring (surely there must be a few of these!), they can then compromise a single host at the university, engage in “noisy” brute-force scanning of the internal hosts to ﬁnd all of the KaZaA clients, and infect them. They then switch into contagion spreading.10 While the above argues that the attacker could gain the 9 million hosts within a month, the actual spread is likely much faster, because once a remote host is infected, it too contributes to spreading the contagion. Not only does this accelerate the epidemic, but it also likely turns it into a pandemic, because the remote hosts can connect with other remote hosts that wouldn’t happen to visit the university. Furthermore, depending on the protocol, a single infected node could pretend to have information it doesn’t have, in order to appear highly attractive and increase the number of connections received, although that would somewhat disrupt the normal patterns of communication. We would like therefore to better understand the rate at which a KaZaA contagion worm could spread, and to what breadth. To estimate this from just the university trace is difﬁcult, because we don’t know the total size of the KaZaA population. Doubtless it is larger than 9,000,000—but is it as high as 30,000,000, as indicated in [Ka01]? How many of those copies were redundant (same user fetching the software multiple times), or are no longer in use? On the other hand, could the population be higher, due to users getting copies of the clients from other sources than [Ka01]? Another problem is that we do not know the degree to 9 It is actually worse than this. It turns out [ Bd02, We02] that KaZaA already has a remote access backdoor installed! But for the purposes of our discussion here, we put aside this fact. 10We note that some P2P networks are also amenable to constructing ﬂash worms, because they include mechanisms by which an attacker can monitor portions of the global query stream in order to compile a hit-list of clients. Degree of Remote KaZaA Host P[X >= x] 1 5 10 50 100 0.00001 0.001 0.1 Figure 9: Complementary distribution of number of distinct local university hosts to which different remote KaZaA hosts connected. Both axes are log-scaled; the linear ﬁt shown in the plot corresponds to a Pareto distribution with shape parameter α = 2.1. which the university’s hosts are “typical.” We also lack any traces of their internal peer-to-peer trafﬁc, which, if frequent, would have major implications for the rate at which the worm could infect an entire remote site. We are pursuing further work in this area. First, we are attempting with colleagues to develop graph-based models with which we can then extrapolate properties of the spread of the contagion based on different sets of assumptions about the hosts in our trace. Second, we have obtained traces of KaZaA trafﬁc from another university (in another country), and will be analyzing these to determine the degree of overlap and cross-talk between the two universities, with which to then better estimate the total KaZaA population and its communication patterns. Finally, we are building a simulator for both active and contagion worms within various peer-to-peer topologies. As a last comment, we have evidence that the KaZaA network may behave like a “scale-free” topology in terms of its interconnection. Figure 9 shows the distribution of the degree of the remote hosts in the trace, i.e., the number of distinct local hosts to which each remote host connected during November, 2001. The plot is shown as a log-logcomplementary distribution function: thex-axis shows log10 of the remote host’s degree, and they-axis shows log10 of the probability of observing a remote host with that outdegree or higher. (Due to the immense size of the dataset, we plot a subset rather than the entire dataset, randomly sampled withp = 0.01.) A straight line on such a plot corresponds to a Pareto distribution. While the majority of the remote hosts connected to only one or two local hosts, for those connecting to three or more hosts, the ﬁt to a Pareto distribution (with shape parameterα = 2.1) is compelling. That the degree has such a distribution is then strongly suggestive that the underlying KaZaA network may exhibit a scale-free (or Zipf-like) topology. The propagation of contagion through such networks has recently been studied [ PV01]. While the discussion in that article is ﬂawed—it confounds the Internet’s underlying IP topology with email and Web application topology— the general framework the authors develop gives hope that we can leverage it to better understand the behavior of a KaZaA contagion worm. That said, we add that the degree of the local hosts is clearly not Pareto, so the analysis might not in fact apply. 6 Updates and Control The last facet of worm design we examine concerns mechanisms by which the attacker can control and modify a worm after its dissemination. The ease and resiliency with which an attacker can do so has serious consequences for both how the threat of a deployed worm can evolve, and the potential difﬁculty in detecting the worm’s presence and operation after the initial infection. Some previous worms such as the Goner mail worm [CE02] contained primitive remote control code, similar to many common “zombies”, allowing the authors and others to issue commands to a distributed DOS module through an IRC [ OR93] channel. (Indeed, the root backdoor installed by Code Red II also offered a form of unlimited remote control.) Others worms have attempted to download updates and payloads from web pages, such as W32/sonic [ Sy00]. Both of these mechanisms, when employed, were quickly countered by removing the pages and tracking the channels. Similarly, previously seen DDOS tools such as Stacheldraht [Di99] have included both encrypted communication and update mechanisms for directly controlling the zombies. Here we brieﬂy explore a more sophisticated method—direct worm-to-worm communication and programmable updates—which, while not yet observed in the wild, is a natural evolution based on the previous updatable worms and DDOS tools. 6.1 Distributed Control In a distributed-control worm, each worm has a list of other known, running copies of the worm and an ability to create encrypted communication channels to spread information. Any new command issued to the worms has a unique identiﬁer and is cryptographically signed using an author’s key. Once a worm has a copy of the command, the command is ﬁrst veriﬁed by examining the cryptographic signature, spread to every other known instance of the worm, and then executed. This allows any command to be initially sent to an arbitrary worm instance, where it is then quickly spread to all running copies. The key to such a network is the degree of connectivity maintained, in order to overcome infected hosts being removed from the network, and to hasten the spread of new commands. Although it is clear that a worm could spread information to its neighbors about other worm instances in order to create a more connected, highly redundant network, it is useful to estimate the initial degree of connectivity without these additional steps. If each worm node only knows about other nodes it has probed, infected, or been probed by, the average connectivity is still very high. With 1M hosts, using permutation scanning (with no halting), our simulator shows that the average degree of nodes in the worm network is 4 when 95% infection is achieved, and 5.5 when 99% infection is achieved. Additionally, each permutationbased rescan will add 2 to the degree of every worm, representing the copy discovered by each instance, and the copy which discovers each instance. Thus, after a couple of rescans, the connectivity becomes very high without requiring additional communication between the worm instances. Such a network could be used to quickly pass updates to all running copies, without having a single point of communication like that seen in previous worms, increasing the staying power by preventing the communication channel from being disrupted or co-opted by others, while still allowing the author to control their creation in a difﬁcult-to-track manner. 6.2 Programatic Updates The commands to a worm can of course be arbitrary code. Many operating systems already support convenient dynamic code loading, which could be readily employed by a worm’s author. Another possibility has the bulk of the worm written in a ﬂexible language combined with a small interpreter. By making the worm’s commands be general modules, a huge increase in ﬂexibility would be achieved. Of particular interest are new attack modules and seeds for new worms. If the author discovers a new security hole and creates a new attack module, this could be released into the worm network. Even if only a few thousand copies of the worm remain, this is enough of an installed base for a hit-list like effect to occur upon introduction of a new attack module, quickly spreading the worm back through the network. It is an interesting question whether it is possible for a worm author to release such a worm with the cryptographic modules correctly implemented. From experience, if the worm author attempts to build their own cryptographic implementation, this could well suffer from a signiﬁcant weakness that could be exploited for countering the worm. Yet there are a number of strong cryptographic applications and libraries that could be used by a worm author to provide the cryptographic framework, a good example being OpenSSL [ Op01], which includes an encrypted session layer, symmetric ciphers, hash functions, and public key ciphers and signatures to provide for code signing. 7 Envisioning a Cyber “Center for Disease Control” Given the magnitude of Internet-scale threats as developed in the previous sections, we believe it is imperative for the Internet in general, and for nations concerned with cyberwarfare in particular, to attempt to counter the immense risk. We argue that use of biological metaphors reﬂected in the terms “worms” and “viruses” remains apt for envisioning a nation-scale defense: the cyber equivalent of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the United States [CDC02], whose mission is to monitor the national and worldwide progression of various forms of disease, identify incipient threats and new outbreaks, and actively foster research for combating various diseases and other health threats. We see an analogous “Cyber-Center for Disease Control” (CDC) as having six roles: • Identifying outbreaks. • Rapidly analyzing pathogens. • Fighting infections. • Anticipating new vectors. • Proactively devising detectors for new vectors. • Resisting future threats. In the remainder of this section, we discuss each of these in turn, with our aim being not to comprehensively examine each role, but to spur further discussion within the community. 7.1 Identifying outbreaks As discussed earlier in this paper, to date Internet-scale worms have been identiﬁed primarily via informal email discussion on a few key mailing lists. This process takes hours at a minimum, too slow for even the “slower” of the rapidly-propagating worms, much less the very fast worms developed in Section 4. The use of mailing lists for identiﬁcation also raises the possibility of an attacker targeting the mailing lists for denial-of-service in conjunction with their main attack, which could greatly delay identiﬁcation and a coordinated response. Present institutions for analyzing malicious code events are not able to produce a meaningful response before a fast active worm reaches saturation. CDC Task: develop robust communication mechanisms for gathering and coordinating “ﬁeld information.” Such mechanisms would likely be (i) decentralized, and (ii) span multiple communication mechanisms (e.g., Internet, cellular, pager, private line). For ﬂash worms, and probably Warhol worms, arguably no human-driven communication will sufﬁce for adequate identiﬁcation of an outbreak before nearly complete infection is achieved. CDC Task: sponsor research in automated mechanisms for detecting worms based on their trafﬁc patterns; foster the deployment of a widespread set of sensors. The set of sensors must be sufﬁciently diverse or secret such that an attacker cannot design their worm to avoid them. This requirement may then call for the development of sensors that operate within the Internet backbone, as opposed to at individual sites, and actuators that can respond to various threats (see below). Clearly, widespread deployment and use of sensors raises potentially immense policy issues concerning privacy and access control. Present institutions lack the authority and mandate to develop and deploy Internet-wide sensors and actuators. 7.2 Rapidly analyzing pathogens Once a worm pathogen is identiﬁed, the next step is to understand (i) how it spreads and (ii) what it does in addition to spreading. The ﬁrst of these is likely easier than the second, because the spreading functionality—or at least a subset of it—will have manifested itself during the identiﬁcation process. While understanding the pathogen’s additional functionality is in principle impossible—since it requires solving the Halting Problem—it is important to keep in mind that the Halting Problem applies to analyzing arbitrary programs: on the other hand, there are classes of programs that are fully analyzable, as revealed by extensive past research in proving programmatic correctness. The question is then to what degree can worm authors write programs that are intractable to analyze. Certainly it is quite possible to take steps to make programs dif- ﬁcult to understand; indeed, there is a yearly contest built around just this theme [NCSB01], and our own unfunded research in this regard has demonstrated to us the relative ease of transforming a non-trivial program into an incomprehensible mess [Pa92]. CDC Task: procure and develop state-of-the-art program analysis tools, to assist an on-call group of experts. These tools would need to go beyond simple disassembly, with facilities for recognizing variants from a library of different algorithms and components from a variety of development toolkits, and also components from previous worms, which would be archived in detail by a CDC staff librarian. The tools would also need to support rapid, distributed program annotation and simulation. Furthermore, the team would need access to a laboratory stocked with virtual machines capable of running or emulating widelyused operating systems with support for detailed execution monitoring. (Less widely-used systems do not pose much of a threat in regards to Internet-scale worms.) In addition, code coverage analysis tools coupled with sample execution of the pathogen could help identify unexecuted portions of the code, which in turn might reﬂect the pathogen’s additional functionality, and thus merit detailed analysis. (Or such unused regions could simply reﬂect “chaff” added by the worm author to slow down the analysis; an “arms race” seems inevitable here.) Admittedly, any analysis involving humans might be too slow to match the pace of a rapidly-propagating worm. But clearly it will always prove beneﬁcial to know exactly how a worm spread and what it did, even after the fact; and for a large-scale cyberwarfare situation, speed will remain of the essence, especially as the “fog of war” may well retard the attacker’s full use of the worm. This is especially true if the worm is designed to accept updates, for although the worm’s spread may be extremely fast, the threat may continue as long as there are a signiﬁcant number of infected machines remaining on the Internet. Furthermore, for contagion worms, there may be signiﬁcantly more time available for analysis, if the worm is detected sufﬁciently early. 7.3 Fighting infections Naturally, we would want the CDC to help as much as possible in retarding the progress or subsequent application of the worm. CDC Task: establish mechanisms with which to propagate signatures describing how worms and their trafﬁc can be detected and terminated or isolated, and deploy an accompanying body of agents that can then apply the mechanisms.11 It is difﬁcult to see how such a set of agents can be effective without either extremely broad deployment, or pervasive backbone deployment. Both approaches carry with them major research challenges in terms of coordination, authentication, and resilience in the presence of targeted attack. As with sensors, the policy issues regarding the actual deployment of such agents are daunting—who controls the agents, who is required to host them, who is liable for collateral damage the agents induce, who maintains the agents and ensures their security and integrity? 7.4 Anticipating new vectors We would want the CDC to not only be reactive, but also proactive: to identify incipient threats. 11Such techniques should also be applied to the numerous strains of zombies present on the Internet, as they too are a signiﬁcant resource for an attacker. CDC Task: track the use of different applications in the Internet, to detect when previously unknown ones begin to appear in widespread use. Unfortunately, Internet applications sometimes can “explode” onto the scene, very rapidly growing from no use to comprising major trafﬁc contributors [Pa94]. Accordingly, tracking their onset is not a simple matter, but will require diligent analysis of network trafﬁc statistics from a variety of sources, as well as monitoring fora in which various new applications are discussed (since some of them may have trafﬁc patterns that are difﬁcult to discern using conventional trafﬁc monitoring variables such as TCP/UDP port numbers). CDC Task: analyze the threat potential of new applications. How widely spread might their use become? How homogeneous are the clients and servers? What are likely exploit strategies for subverting the implementations? What are the application’s native communication patterns? 7.5 Proactively devising detectors Once a new potential disease vector has been identiﬁed, we would then want to deploy analyzers that understand how the protocol functions, to have some hope of detecting contagion worms as they propagate. For example, to our knowledge there is no KaZaA module (one speciﬁc to how KaZaA functions) available for network intrusion detection systems in use today. Without such a module, it would be exceedingly difﬁcult to detect when KaZaA is being exploited to propagate a contagion worm. CDC Task: foster the development of application analysis modules suitable for integration with the intrusion detection systems in use by the CDC’s outbreakidentiﬁcation elements. 7.6 Resisting future threats Devising the means to live with an Internet periodically ravaged by ﬂash or contagion worms is at best an uneasy equilibrium. The longer-term requirement is to shift the makeup of Internet applications such that they become much less amenable to abuse. For example, this may entail broader notions of sandboxing, type safety, and inherent limitations on the rate of creating connections and the volume of trafﬁc transmitted over them. CDC Task: foster research into resilient application design paradigms and infrastructure modiﬁcations that (somehow) remain viable for adaptation by the commercial software industry, perhaps assisted by legislation or government policy. CDC Task: vet applications as conforming to a certain standard of resilience to exploitation, particularly selfpropagating forms of exploitation. 7.7 How open? A ﬁnal basic issue regarding the CDC is to what degree should it operate in an open fashion. For example, during an outbreak the CDC could maintain a web site for use by the research community. Such an approach would allow many different people to contribute to the analysis of the outbreak and of the pathogen, perhaps adding invaluable insight and empirical data. This sort of coordination happens informally today, in part; but it is also the case that currently a variety of anti-viral and security companies analyze outbreaks independently, essentially competing to come out with a complete analysis ﬁrst. This makes for potentially very inefﬁcient use of a scarce resource, namely the highly specialized skill of analyzing pathogens. A key question then is the cost of operating in an open fashion. First, doing so brings with it its own set of security issues, regarding authenticating purported information uploaded into the analysis database, and preventing an attacker from crippling the analysis effort by launching a side-attack targeting the system. Second, the attacker could monitor the progress made in understanding the worm, and perhaps gain insight into how it has spread beyond what they could directly gather for themselves, allowing them to better hone their attack. Third, some sources of potentially highly valuable empirical data might refuse to make their data available if doing so is to release it to the public at large. Given these concerns, it seems likely that the CDC would pursue a “partially open” approach, in which subsets of information are made publicly available, and publicly-attained information is integrated into the CDC’s internal analysis, but the information ﬂow is scrutinized in both directions. Unfortunately, such scrutiny would surely involve manual assessment, and could greatly slow the collection of vital information. A related question is how international in scope such a facility should be. A national facility is likely to have a simpler mission and clearer management and accountability. However, there are real beneﬁts to an international approach to this problem; one’s allies are awake and working while one sleeps. A worm released in the middle of the night in the US would be far more likely to receive intense early research and attention in Europe or Asia than in the US itself. Thus, at a minimum, national level CDCs are likely to need to maintain strong linkages with one another. 8 Conclusion In this paper we have examined the spread of several recent worms that infected hundreds of thousands of hosts within hours. We showed that some of these worms remain endemic on the Internet. We explained that betterengineered worms could spread in minutes or even tens of seconds rather than hours, and could be controlled, modiﬁed, and maintained indeﬁnitely, posing an ongoing threat of use in attack on a variety of sites and infrastructures. Thus, worms represent an extremely serious threat to the safety of the Internet. We ﬁnished with a discussion of the urgent need for stronger societal institutions and technical measures to control worms, and sketched what these might look like. 9 Acknowledgments Many thanks to Jim Ausman, Michael Constant, Ken Eichmann, Anja Feldmann, Gary Grim, Mark Handley, Roelof Jonkman, Dick Karp, John Kuroda, Cathy Mc- Collum, Mike Skroch, Robin Sommer, Laura Tinnel, Dan Upper, David Wagner, and Brian Witten for very helpful discussions, analysis, and measurement data. References [Bd02] Brilliant Digital Media. “Altnet—a vision for the future,” Apr. 2, 2002. http://www. brilliantdigital.com/content.asp?ID=779 [Br+00] Andrei Broder et al, “Graph structure in the web,” Proc. 9th International World Wide Web Conference , pp. 309–320, 2000. http://www9.org/w9cdrom/160/160.html [CSA00] Neal Cardwell, Stefan Savage, and Thomas Anderson, “Modeling TCP Latency,” Proc. INFOCOM, 2000. [CDC02] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Jan. 2002. http://www.cdc.org [CE01] CERT, “Code Red II: Another Worm Exploiting Buffer Overﬂow In IIS Indexing Service DLL,”Incident Note IN-2001-09, Aug. 6, 2001. http://www.cert.org/incident notes/IN- 2001-09.html [CE02] CERT, “CERT Incident Note IN-2001-15, W32/Goner Worm,” Incident Note IN- 2001-15, Dec. 4, 2001. http://www.cert.org/ incident notes/IN-2001-15.html [CE03] CERT, “CERT Incident Note IN-2001-11, sadmind/IIS Worm,” Incident Note IN- 2001-11, May 8, 2001. http://www.cert.org/ incident notes/IN-2001-11.html [CV01] Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures, “CVE-2001-0500,” Buffer overﬂow in ISAPI extension (idq.dll), Mar. 9, 2002. http:// cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name= CVE-2001-0500 [DA01] Das Bistro Project, 2001. http://www. dasbistro.com/default.ida [Di99] David Dittrich, “The ‘stacheldraht’ distributed denial of service attack tool”, Dec. 31, 1999. http://staff.washington.edu/dittrich/misc/ stacheldraht.analysis [EDS01a] Eeye Digital Security, “.ida ‘Code Red’ Worm,” Advisory AL20010717 , Jul. 17, 2001. http://www.eeye.com/html/Research/ Advisories/AL20010717.html [EDS01b] Eeye Digital Security, “Code Red Disassembly,” 2001. http://www.eeye.com/html/ advisories/codered.zip [EDS01c] Eeye Digital Security, “All versions of Microsoft Internet Information Services Remote buffer overﬂow,”AdvisoryAD20010618, Jun. 18, 2001. http://www.eeye.com/html/ Research/Advisories/AD20010618.html [ER89] Mark Eichin and Jon A. Rochlis, “With Microscope and Tweezers: An Analysis of the Internet Virus of November 1988,”Proc. 1989 IEEE Computer Society Symposium on Security and Privacy. [Fa01] FastTrack — P2P Technology. KaZaA Media Desktop, Jan. 2002. http://www.fasttrack.nu/ [Ka01] KaZaA Media Desktop, Jan. 2002. http:// www.kazaa.com/en/index.htm [MSVS02] David Moore, Colleen Shannon, Geoffrey M. V oelker, and Stefan Savage, “Internet Quarantine: Limits on Blocking Self- Propagating Code,” work in progress, 2002. [Mu01] Morpheus, Jan. 2002. http://www.musiccity. com/ [Ne02] Netcraft, “Netcraft Web Server Survey,” Jan. 2002. http://www.netcraft.com/survey/ [NCSB01] Landon Curt Noll, Simon Cooper, Peter Seebach, and Leonid Broukhis, The International Obfuscated C Code Contest, Jan. 2002. http://www.ioccc.org/ [OR93] J. Oikarinen and D. Reed, RFC 1459, Internet Relay Chat Protocol, May 1993. [Op01] The OpenSSL Project, http://www. openssl.org/ [PV01] Romualdo Pastor-Satorras and Alessandro Vespignani, “Epidemic spreading in scale-free networks,” Physical Review Letters , 86(14), pp. 3200–3203, April 2, 2001. [Pa92] Vern Paxson, 1992. http://www.ioccc.org/ 1992/vern.c [Pa94] Vern Paxson, “Growth trends in wide-area TCP connections,” IEEE Network , 8(4), pp. 8–17, July 1994. [Re02] The Register, “Old Morpheus still works for unhacked users,” http://www.theregister. co.uk/content/4/24445.html, Mar. 15, 2002. [SA01] SANS, “Code Red (II),” August 7, 2001. http://www.incidents.org/react/code redII.php [Sp89] Eugene Spafford, “An Analysis of the Internet Worm,” Proc. European Software Engineering Conference, pp. 446–468, Sep. 1989. Lecture Notes in Computer Science #387 , Springer-Verlag. [Sy00] Symantic, “Symantic Security Response: W32.Sonic.Worm,” Oct. 9, 2000. http://www.sarc.com/avcenter/venc/data/ w32.sonic.worm.html [Tw02] Tripwire Inc., “Tripwire for Servers,” 2002. http://www.tripwire.com/products/servers/ index.cfm? [We02] Nicholas Weaver, “Reﬂections on Brilliant Digital: Single Points of 0wnership”, 2002. http://www.cs.berkeley.edu/∼nweaver/ 0wn2.html