28 Vol 72 No.8 August 2019 JBIS
‘OUMUAMUA AND SCOUT ET PROBES 
JOHN GERTZ Foundation for Investing in Research on SETI Science and Technology (FIRSST), website: www.firsst.org. c/o Zorro 
Productions, 125 University Avenue, Suite 101, Berkeley, CA, 94710 USA. 
Email jgertz@firsst.org 
Numerous advantages may accrue to ET from the use of probes for the conveyance of information relative to the 
alternative of beaming information electromagnetically from its home star system. However, probes would benefit from 
a trans-galactic communications network to transmit information back to their progenitor civilization(s) and throughout 
the Galaxy. A model for such trans-galactic communications has previously been proposed, comprised of probes linked 
together by relay nodes. The current paper refines that model, specifying two types of probes or nodes, both part of a 
communications lattice. The first type of cellular probe (CP) is statically associated with individual stars, and the second 
type is a scout CP that traverses the galaxy surveying successive star systems rather than permanently residing within 
any one of them. CPs would communicate with adjacent CPs and, ultimately, through the network of CPs, with their 
progenitor civilization(s). The question of whether ‘Oumuamua is such a flyby scout CP is considered. Search strategies for 
CPs are suggested. 
 
Keywords: SETI, ET, Nodes, Probes, ‘Oumuamua
1 INTRODUCTION
There are strong arguments that ET might prefer to send infor-
mation-laden probes to our Solar System rather than commu-
nicate by beaming radio or laser messages from its home star 
system [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. For example: 
• Probes might conduct surveys of a solar system even in 
the absence of finding a communicative civilization.
• In the event that ET’s probe does encounter a technolog-
ical civilization, it can enter into an immediate dialogue 
unencumbered by hundreds or thousands of years of de-
lay engendered by the speed of light.
• Probes offer security for the sender as they need not re-
veal their progenitor’s coordinates.
• The cost per bit of information conveyed is likely to be 
much cheaper than that beamed by radio or laser bea-
con. The envisioned comparison is between a radio or 
laser signal directed at Earth continuously for millions or 
billions of years versus the cost of sending a single light 
weight probe at low speed from a low gravity launch site.
• The transmitting civilization need only launch its probe 
once, rather than be dedicated to broadcasting over po-
tentially millions or billions of years.
• A remote civilization will face severe, if not insurmount-
able problems in knowing how to communicate to an un-
studied recipient civilization in a fashion that will be un-
derstood. A probe can first study its target civilization at 
JBIS VOLUME 72 2019 PAGES 182–185
close range and thereafter communicate in a fashion that 
can be understood; perhaps even in the local language (in 
the case of Earth, English or some other terrestrial lan-
guage).
• Were ET to transmit via beacon it would require one gar-
gantuan receiver for each star it had targeted (perhaps 
numbering in the millions). These would have to be ded-
icated receivers because ET would have no idea when a 
response will be received. Each receiver would have to 
be gargantuan because it must be capable of deciphering 
an Arecibo class signal, since the civilization they will 
hear from is likely to be nascent and not capable of much 
more. ET would then face the same challenge as Earth in 
correctly decoding any message. 
• The sending civilization need not itself persist once its 
probe(s) is launched and thus co-exist in time with the 
recipient civilization, thus solving for the problem of L in 
the Drake Equation.
Probes, however, as classically postulated by Bracewell [1] 
and others, suffer from one possible challenge: communication 
would likely be one-way only. Earth would receive as much in-
formation as the probe wished to impart, but the probe’s pro-
genitor civilization would learn nothing about us unless it had 
equipped its probe with a massive radio or laser transmitter.
To overcome this challenge, a second type of probe, a node, 
could function as a signal relay station. Nodes might be resi-
dent in orbit around every star, or around stars spaced as far 
from one another as ET’s cost/benefit analysis might determine 
to be most efficient. These spacecraft would not just contain the 
JBIS Vol 72 No.8 August 2019 29
information with which they were launched, but could acquire 
information indefinitely from adjacent spacecraft, and through 
those, ultimately acquire input from an entire communication 
network spread throughout the Galaxy. As such, they would act 
as galactic libraries, constantly growing in content, irrespective 
of whether the total number of extant contributing civilizations 
increased or decreased over time. These spacecraft might func-
tion both as probes, collecting information about the solar sys-
tems that they pass through, and as nodes, passing information 
along to similar nearby spacecraft. Like cell phone cameras and 
voice recorders, they could collect data, as well as both receive 
data and transmit data, much as smartphones pass along data 
through towers and the Internet. The nomenclature of “probes” 
and “nodes” might then be replaced by a new term, cellular 
probe (CP).
2 NOMADIC CELLULAR SCOUT PROBES
Land based AI or land based biological beings would presuma-
bly construct and launch CPs. 
The CP hypothesis as previously postulated was more or less 
static, with CPs associated with individual stars or small group-
ings of stars, such that the distance between them is approxi-
mately equal to the maximum distance allowable for reliable 
communication. To this structure is now added fleets or waves 
of scout CPs that would traverse the galaxy searching for nas-
cent technological civilizations. CPs might fly in squadrons or 
lines or be spaced like pearls on a string, so that they might pass 
along data from one scout to the next until it arrived at a static 
CP . From there, data would traverse the entire galactic network 
from one static CP to the next and back to the land bases from 
whence they were launched. 
In this manner, all CPs, whether of the scout or static vari-
ety, would be in communication with all other CPs, and even-
tually with the civilization(s) to which they belong. Each scout 
CP might pass close enough to each star in its path to bend 
it into a new trajectory toward the next star, with trajectory 
bending presumably being aided by a solar sail or some other 
propulsion system. A single scout CP could fly by an arbitrar -
ily large number of stars, sequentially harvesting energy and 
receiving a gravity slingshot assist with each stellar bypass. As 
each scout CP caromed from one star to the next, it could gain 
speed and direction from the velocity vector of each star. A 
neatly organized wave of scout CPs might soon become disor-
ganized as its members ricocheted off successive stars. While 
CPs may generally remain packed tightly together in order to 
facilitate communication, any scout CP that travelled too far 
afield from its group might potentially upload its collected 
data to a static CP the next time it came within communi-
cation range. CPs could ricochet among the stars indefinite-
ly. However, they would face an ultimate speed limit of 537 
km/s, the galactic escape velocity, beyond which they would 
be ejected from the galaxy. If CPs are easily replaceable, per -
haps they might be sacrificed in an effort to sample more star 
systems within a given unit of time. 
After one or a few passes, in order to optimize efficiency over 
time, many or most star systems might be dropped from the 
master destination list as uninteresting, for example, because 
they lack biological (or at least habitable) planets or moons. 
The Sun would presumably have remained on the refined flyby 
list because an earlier wave of CPs would have determined that 
it harbored a planet with a biosphere, or at least that it has large 
amounts of liquid water on its surface as well as plate tectonics, 
which would be obvious from multiple flybys over deep time. 
Consequently, the ratio of CPs to stars required in order to 
adequately cover any desired region of the Milky Way is much 
less than 1:1. Waves of scouts need not be sent very often. 
Perhaps Earth is visited only once in a 100,000 years, which 
would seem to be a more than adequate time interval prior to 
the determination that at least one Earth species had become 
technologically active. After all, save for the last ~10,000 years, 
Earth’s biological changes as might be recorded by a scouting 
CP occurred at such a slow pace that sampling at 100,000 year 
intervals would show only gradual changes, much like the indi-
vidual frames of a movie. It is possible that visits were paced in 
accordance with life markers. For example, flybys might have 
occurred only once in 100 million years until the detection of 
significant atmospheric oxygen, and then increased to once in 
one million years thereafter until the passage of enough time, 
as predicted by ET’s models of evolution, for the emergence of 
mega fauna. Thereafter, flyby frequency might have been in-
creased significantly or a permanent static CP installed. 
The point is that waves of scouting CPs, each close enough 
to another to facilitate communication, may make better eco-
nomic sense than the classic probe model of one civilization 
sending a message in a bottle to another civilization. Were 
ET to employ scout probes and it were to encounter a nascent 
civilization emitting electromagnetic (EM) transmissions, the 
scout would require only one modest sized receiver/transmit-
ter pointed at a nearby relay node. Translations and formatting 
would take place by this local discovery probe and transmitted 
via a system of relay nodes and in a format that ET will under-
stand [10, 11].
Whatever their number, no one alien civilization may be 
able to maintain such a vast lattice of static and scouting CPs. 
However, it may well be within the capacity of a galactic club 
of civilizations acting in concert. Earth may one day be invited 
to join that club. Indeed, playing its role in the maintenance of 
the galactic communications architecture may be Earth’s price 
of admission. In addition to normal maintenance, Earth might 
house large server farms of data, be a construction and launch 
site for new CPs, especially if new scouts are needed to replace 
CPs that are lost from the galaxy because they are designed to 
exceed its 537 km./sec. escape velocity.
Once a technological civilization is located, scouts might be 
superseded by classical probes left to orbit the local star or its 
technologically active planet(s) or moon(s). 
A permanent CP might be deployed in our Solar System in 
at least one of three ways:
• A passing scout CP might deploy a sub-CP . As a reasona-
ble guess, a flyby CP would have detected Earth’s techno-
logical EM emissions from a distance of at least one LY , 
and possibly much further. It could then release a sub-CP 
to use its own propulsion system to decelerate. This would 
apply to future CPs, but not necessarily to ‘Oumuamua 
(considered below) because the earliest it would have 
been able to detect Earth’s EM would have been about 
1940, at which time it was <.01LY from Earth. 
• The first scout CP to detect Earth’s EM might itself decel-
erate into a Solar or Earth orbit. The feasibility for this en-
tirely depends on the distance at which the EM is detect-
ed, the velocity of the CP at the time of detection, and the 
‘OUMUAMUA AND SCOUT ET PROBES
30 Vol 72 No.8 August 2019 JBIS
ability of the CP’s propulsion system to decelerate from 
that distance within the time necessary to do so.
• The first scout CP to detect Earth’s EM might pass the 
detection along the communications lattice such that 
another scout CP can make the necessary course and 
velocity corrections to eventually become a resident CP 
within our Solar System. For example, were ‘Oumuamua 
a scout CP , it could pass information about Earth along to 
the next CP scheduled to pass Earth some thousands or 
tens of thousands of years hence, or to some other near -
er scout that might course correct. That CP would have 
ample time to decelerate. Alternatively, if the discovering 
CP cannot decelerate in time it might instead ricochet off 
a nearby star in such a fashion as to return to our Solar 
System, decelerating en route. 
3 IS ‘OUMUAMUA AN ET SCOUT CELLULAR PROBE?
‘Oumuamua (officially known as 1I/2017 U1) is the first object 
observed within our Solar System that has been conclusively 
determined to have originated from elsewhere in the Galaxy. 
Although it entered our Solar System about 40,000 years ago, it 
was only first observed on October 19, 2017, after it had already 
passed near the Sun on its way out of the Solar System [12]. 
Abraham Loeb triggered international headlines in late 2018 
when he made the case that ‘Oumuamua may be of artificial 
construction [13]. Specifically, he and a colleague postulated 
that the available, but scanty, evidence supports the thesis that 
‘Oumuamua is a solar sail detached from its mother ship—in 
effect, alien space junk. The reasoning behind deeming this 
to be “junk” is that ‘Oumuamua is erratically tumbling, and it 
is hard to imagine how a tumbling solar sail could be of any 
functionality. Loeb’s evidence for its artificial origin includes its 
shape, which might be a flattened oval, and hence, to his mind, 
a solar sail; its unusual shininess; and the small (<0.1%) unex-
plained deviation in its trajectory as it passed the Sun relative 
to what would have been expected due to the effects of gravity 
alone. 
3.1 ‘Oumuamua Does Not So Neatly Fit Loeb’s Space Junk 
Model
Loeb’s determination of this to be space junk flies in the face 
of another of his evidentiary supports, namely, that if ‘Oumua-
mua were ejecta from a forming star system, there would have 
to be 10 15 such pieces of ejecta per star system for one to be 
expected to meander through our Solar System at this time. 
However, what is true about ejecta would be equally true for 
unguided space junk. There would have to be 10 15 such piec-
es of space junk per star for one such piece to coincidentally 
intersect our inner Solar System at this time. New Horizons 
has recently discovered that Kuiper object 2014 MU69 (Ul-
tima Thule) is shaped like a flattened pancake, undercutting 
Loeb’s position that ‘Oumuamua’s possibly similar shape may 
not be natural.
 
3.2 ‘Oumuamua Is Not Likely to Be a Functioning Spacecraft
Even discounting Oumuamua’s tumbling, it still does not fit 
any model for what might be expected from a functioning alien 
probe surveilling our Solar System. 
• Attempts have been made to listen for narrowband radio 
messages from ‘Oumuamua by the SETI Institute’s Allen 
Telescope Array (ATA) and Breakthrough Listen’s Green 
Bank Telescope, and none have been detected (Green 
Bank’s detection threshold was ~1000 times greater than 
that of the ATA) [15]. 
• A surveillance probe might be expected to enter the Solar 
System along the plane of the ecliptic for its best view of 
the planets. Oumuamua’s entry and exit inclinations were 
far from the ecliptic. 
• An alien probe on a flyby mission through our Solar Sys-
tem might be expected to be coming from some other 
nearby star and to be headed toward some nearby star. If, 
for example, ‘Oumuamua were coming from a close en-
counter with Alpha Centauri (4.3 light years), and headed 
for another close encounter with Barnard’s star (6.0 light 
years), it might be interpreted as almost irrefutable evi-
dence in favor of a first detection of ET. In contrast, ‘Ou-
muamua seems to have come from nowhere in particular, 
and is now headed toward nowhere in particular. Extrap-
olations of its trajectory in both directions show that it 
has not passed and will not pass within the inner solar 
system of any other star in at least the past or future one 
million years, and probably much longer [15]. 
• An alien CP might be expected to slow down as it en-
tered the inner Solar System in order to better surveil and 
communicate, and to speed up as it left in order to get to 
the next destination as quickly as possible. ‘Oumuamua 
has done the opposite, fully obeying the laws of gravity 
(apart from the, as yet, not fully explained small deviation 
of <0.1%).
• Moreover, its interstellar cruising speed relative to the 
Sun is just 26.33 km/s, not much greater than the New 
Horizons spacecraft now headed toward interstellar space 
at 16.26 km/s. At 26.33 km/s, it would take almost 50,000 
years to arrive at Alpha Centauri, were it headed there, 
which it is not. Surely, an advanced civilization going to 
all the trouble of sending a scout CP can do better than 
that. There should be no reason that CPs could not attain 
the maximum speed of 537 km/s if they are not allowed to 
escape the galaxy, and much more if they are expendable.
3.3 Some Speculations that Favor ‘Oumuamua as an ET 
Probe
• Although ‘Oumuamua did not enter our Solar System 
along the ecliptic and therefore missed an opportunity to 
closely surveil most planets, it did pass within 0.16 AU, or 
about 15 million miles, of Earth, the planet of probable 
most interest to aliens. 
• Although ‘Oumuamua is traveling at a relatively lazy 
speed for practical interstellar travel and headed to no 
known destination, it is still possible that it will use an on-
board propulsion system to speed up and change course 
at some point in time. 
• Although ‘Oumuamua is not coming from nor headed to 
any nearby stars, the model developed in Section 2 above 
allows for the possibility that CPs only fly by stars of in-
tense interest, presumably because they contain biological 
planets. It may well be that there are no other such planets 
in our neighborhood.
JOHN GERTZ
JBIS Vol 72 No.8 August 2019 31
• Although ‘Oumuamua is tumbling, suggesting that if it is 
a solar sail it is non-functioning one, it may not have ran-
domly entered our Solar System. It is possible that it was 
intentionally or unintentionally jettisoned after its associ-
ated probe was already inside or headed directly toward 
our Solar System [16].
4 SEARCH STRATEGIES
Although the preponderance of evidence does not support the 
hypothesis that ‘Oumuamua is a CP of alien derivation, further 
data collection is warranted:
• It seems only prudent to continue to monitor ‘Oumua-
mua for radio, IR or laser transmissions.
• Ideally, ‘Oumuamua should be observed for accelera-
tions or a change in trajectory not explained by gravity. 
Unfortunately, it is already beneath the detection thresh-
old of Hubble and all terrestrial telescopes unless very 
large amounts of telescope time would be devoted to the 
task of further observing such a dim object.
• Direct observations were made by various observatories 
of the departing Oumuamua. A small (<0.1%) deviation 
from the course predicted by gravity alone was observed. 
Although this can most probably be explained by out-
gassing, no actual outgassing was observed [17]. Avail-
able databases should be examined for the incoming 
‘Oumuamua to determine whether there were any other 
deviations in course or velocity unexplained by gravity or 
outgassing.
• Were ‘Oumuamua a transiting alien spaceship (assum-
ing that it is actually functioning rather than inert space 
junk), it might have deposited a smaller probe into a tight 
solar orbit once it had detected Earth’s technological EM, 
such as originates from terrestrial television broadcasts 
and radar. That probe might be left behind to further 
surveil Earth, decode its EM and eventually communi-
cate with it. ‘Oumuamua might be akin to a Pony Ex-
press rider, dropping off the mail as it rode by. Therefore, 
we should monitor the area immediately around the Sun 
for such a left behind probe. A tight solar orbit would 
allow it to harvest energy. I have argued elsewhere that 
tight solar orbits might be preferred so that adjacent CPs 
know exactly where to aim narrow beamed lasers [11]. 
Had ‘Oumuamua left behind a CP , that CP might even 
now have begun to study our languages and number sys-
tem from Sesame Street, our math from Khan Academy, 
and the rest from Y ouTube and Wikipedia. Observations 
of the space around the Sun are warranted in any event, 
since even if ‘Oumuamua is not itself an alien spaceship 
or CP , an actual alien CP may have been deposited at any 
time in the past. 
• ‘Oumuamua might be a transiting CP , while a permanent 
CP might reside on an asteroid, the Moon, in a tight orbit 
around the Sun or elsewhere within our Solar System. It 
might even be in Earth orbit and have been misclassi-
fied as space junk. Transiting or permanent CPs within 
our Solar System presumably have detected our EM and 
know we are here. It might therefore seem reasonable to 
target local objects with METI transmissions [18]. It is 
possible, as METI proponents have suggested, that ET 
protocols include a proscription against transmitting to 
Earth unless and until Earth intentionally transmits first. 
Perhaps this applies equally to local CPs as it does to a re-
mote ET. However, METI transmissions aimed at targets 
within our Solar System should not inadvertently illumi-
nate background stars. Therefore, they should transmit at 
a power that is no higher than Earth’s omni-directional 
EM leakage, or if at higher power, never while the tar -
get is traversing the plane of the Milky Way or occult-
ing a nearby star. Local METI might be encouraged on 
three additional grounds: (a) It gives METIists practice 
in message construction and transmission; (b) there is at 
least as good a chance that ET is sending probes rather 
than beaming transmissions from their home planets so 
their efforts would not be assumed to be wasted; and (c) 
receipt of a return message would be methodologically 
feasible since when transmitting to the stars one must re-
serve a telescope for the return message at a future time 
that is equal to at least twice the time for a transmission 
to arrive at each target star (which is completely im-
practical). If anti-METIists (this author included) were 
amenable to restricted local METI this might form the 
basis of a grand compromise between the warring camps, 
restoring peace to the SETI community.
5 CONCLUSIONS
The current speculations are meant to illustrate a crucial 
point, namely, that an efficient transgalactic communication 
network should consist not only of permanently placed CPs, 
but also of flyby scout CPs. It is plausible that the transgalactic 
communication architecture described in this paper emerged 
from an earlier architecture wherein individual civilizations 
sent probes out in concentric spheres, which then, upon en-
countering one another, linked together to form the lattice 
postulated here. 
SETI is a proto-science, not unlike the alchemy of the Mid-
dle Ages. In that era, there were real laboratories in which real 
experiments with real chemicals, minerals and metals were 
conducted, resulting in some real understandings of how 
matter could be manipulated. However, in the absence of any 
atomic or molecular theory or a periodic table, the alchemists 
were grasping at straws, and prone to often filling the void of 
their knowledge with wild flights of imagination in which an 
astrological influence or a Philosopher’s Stone could be in-
voked to explain anything. 
With little more than a pixel to go upon, Loeb probably 
mischaracterized a very interesting rock as an ET solar sail, 
just as a low resolution photo of a small Martian mountain 
taken by Viking led some researchers to wrongly conclude that 
it was an artificially crafted humanoid face [19]. Indeed, once 
the true nature and prevalence of technological life in the uni-
verse is finally understood, most of our current speculations 
will probably look as naive as medieval alchemy. Nonetheless, 
even as alchemists paved the way for a scientific understand-
ing of matter, so too do our current speculations serve as im-
portant way stations in the quest for knowledge. The grand ex-
periment, known as SETI, should persevere, employing search 
strategies informed by these speculations.
Acknowledgement
The author gratefully acknowledges the kind assistance of 
Geoff Marcy in the organization of the ideas expressed in this 
paper.
‘OUMUAMUA AND SCOUT ET PROBES
32 Vol 72 No.8 August 2019 JBIS
1. R. N. Bracewell, The Galactic Club: Intelligent Life in Outer Space, W . W . 
Norton & Company, New Y ork, 1974.
2. R. Bracewell, “The Opening Message from an Extraterrestrial Probe” , 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, Vol. 11, pp.58-60, 1973.
3. R. Freitas, “ A Self-Reproducing Interstellar Probe” , JBIS, 33, pp.251-264, 
1980.
4. R. Freitas, “Interstellar Probes: A New Approach to SETI” , JBIS, 33, 
pp.103-109, 1980.
5. R. Freitas, “The Case for Interstellar Probes” , JBIS, 36, pp.490-495, 1983.
6. R. Freitas and F . Valdes, “ A Search for Natural or Artificial Objects 
Located at the Earth-Moon Libration Points” , Icarus, 42, 442-447, 1980.
7. R. Burke-Ward, “Possible Existence of Extra-Terrestrial technology in 
the Solar System, ” JBIS, 53, pp. 2-12, 2000. 
8. C. Rose, and G. Wright, “Inscribed Matter as an Energy-Efficient Means 
of Communication with an Extraterrestrial Civilization” , Nature, 431, 
pp.47-49, 2004.
9. J. Gertz “E.T. Probes: Looking Here As Well As There” , JBIS, 69, pp. 88-
91, 2016.
10. J. Gertz, ”Nodes: A Proposed Solution to Fermi’s Paradox, ” JBIS, 70, , pp. 
454-457. 2018
11. J. Gertz, “ET Probes, Nodes, and Landbases: A Proposed Galactic 
Communications Architecture and Implied Search Strategies” , JBIS, 71, , 
pp. 71-79. 2018
12. K.J. Meech, et al. (20 November 2017). "A brief visit from a red and 
extremely elongated interstellar asteroid", Nature, 552, , pp. 378–381. 
2017
13. A. Loeb, Abraham (20 November 2018). “6 Strange Facts about the 
Interstellar Visitor 'Oumuamua” , Scientific American blog, November 
20, 2018, https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/observations/6-strange-
facts-about-the-interstellar-visitor-oumuamua/ last retrieved, February 
26, 2019.
14. C. Bailer-Jones, et. al., “Plausible Home Stars of the Interstellar Object 
‘Oumaumau Found in Gaia DR2” , , arxiv.org/pdf/1809.09009.pdf. 2018
15. J.E. Enriquez, et. al., “Breakthrough Listen Observations of 
1I/'Oumuamua with the GBT” , , arXiv:1801.02814. 2018
16. D. Brin, personal communication.
17. D. Seligman, G. Laughlin, and K. Batygin, “On the Anomalous 
Accelerations of 1I/2017 U1 'Oumuamua” , , arXiv: 1903.04723v1. 2019
18. J. Gertz, Reviewing METI: A Critical Analysis of the Arguments, JBIS, 
69, 31-36, 2016
19. B. O’Leary, “ Analysis of Images of the ‘Face’ on Mars and Possible 
Intelligent Origin” , JBIS, 43, , 203-208. 1990
REFERENCES
Received 14 March 2019 Approved 10 June 2019
JOHN GERTZ