JBIS Vol 74 No.2 January 2021 15
STRATEGIES FOR THE DETECTION OF ET PROBES 
Within Our Own Solar System
JOHN GERTZ Zorro Productions, 2249 Fifth St., Berkeley, CA, 94710, USA
Email: jgertz@zorro.com
Arguments are reviewed in support of the hypothesis that ET would more likely send physical probes to surveil our Solar 
System and communicate with Earth than to communicate from afar with interstellar radio, infrared or laser beacons.  
Although the standard SETI practice of targeting individual stars or galaxies with powerful telescopes might detect a 
foreground local probe by serendipity, an intentional hunt for those probes would entail a different set of strategies, most 
notably sacrificing sensitivity (needed to detect a very faint and very distant signal) in exchange for a widened field-of-view 
(because a local signal can be reasonably hypothesized to be relatively bright).  This paper suggests a number of strategies 
to detect local ET probes. 
 
Keywords: SETI, ET, Probes, Lurkers, Nodes, METI
1 INTRODUCTION
The first paper describing a modern method for the detection of 
extra-terrestrials (ET) was published by Cocconi and Morrison 
in 1959 [1]. Morrison and Cocconi had proven that a strong ra-
dio transmitter could send decodable signals across interstellar 
space (beacons). The next year, Frank Drake conducted the first 
modern SETI search when he trained the Green Bank Telescope 
(GBT) on two nearby Sun-like stars [2]. In 1961 Schwartz and 
Towne expanded the scope of SETI with a proof that powerful 
lasers could also transmit information across interstellar space 
[3], thus giving birth to optical SETI (OSETI). Less well-re -
membered, but also in 1960, Robert Bracewell first suggested 
that aliens might prefer to send surveilling and/or information 
laden probes to our Solar System rather than to communicate 
via electromagnetic (EM) interstellar beacons [4, 5]. Since then, 
others, as well as myself, have enhanced the arguments favoring 
local AI probes over interstellar beacons [6-13]. 
Among those reasons are the following:
• Probes might outlive their progenitor civilizations, di -
minishing or eliminating the need for an L factor in the 
Drake Equation, which posits a dependence between the 
likelihood of a detection and the average lifetime of alien 
civilizations. It stands to reason that if a civilization only 
transmits signals from its home star for 10,000 years, and 
that those 10,000 years do not overlap with our current 
time (as adjusted by distance in light years), then we will 
not be within that signal’s light cone and therefore not be 
able to detect its signal. However, probes might outlive 
their progenitor civilizations by an arbitrarily long period 
of time. Even if two civilizations co-exist in time, their 
transmitters and receivers also must align in time. Un -
less one or both have all-sky-all-the-time capabilities or at 
least a very short duty cycle, temporal alignment will not 
likely be achieved.
JBIS VOLUME 73 2020 PAGES 427-437
• Probes can surveil their target solar systems, and there -
fore can conduct useful science on behalf of the civiliza -
tion(s) that sends them. Beacons return no information 
unless and until detected by a technological species and 
a message deliberately sent in reply. Flyby alien probes 
might have determined that Earth was biologically ac -
tive billions of years ago. Perhaps they have continued to 
fly by at 100 million-year intervals ever since, noting the 
rise of atmospheric oxygen and the biosphere’s advance 
to multicellularity. Perhaps, as an example, in accord -
ance with ET’s models indicating the average length of 
time from the onset of multicellularity to the emergence 
of the first technologically capable species, permanent 
probes were first placed into our solar system 100 mil -
lion years ago. 
• A distant radio beacon’s signal may be so diminished by 
the time it reaches Earth that in the absence of a gargan -
tuan radio receiver and long integration times, nothing 
more than a carrier signal may be discernible. A laser 
would fade to nothing due to signal spread and absorp -
tion by interstellar dust within approximately 1,000 light 
years. Because the transmitting civilization may be vastly 
different than the receiving civilization, the former’s mes-
sage, even if accurately received, may not lend itself to 
decoding, such that we will never understand what was 
intended. The situation with a local probe is completely 
different. Once a technological civilization does arise on 
a surveilled planet, after a period of study and decoding, 
the probe is perfectly positioned to communicate to that 
civilization with a flux that will be orders of magnitude 
greater than a distal beacon, and in a manner that will be 
comprehensible.
• Probes are safer than beacons for their progenitors. In the 
absence of any knowledge of a target civilization’s capabil-
ities and intentions, probes offer anonymity, as they need 
16 Vol 74 No.2 January 2021 JBIS
not reveal their progenitor’s location. Beacons, virtually 
by definition, do.
• Probes throughout the Milky Way might be linked by 
way of a communications network of nodes with knowl -
edge constantly accumulating and growing within the 
network, regardless of whether the total number of cur -
rently contributing civilizations increases or decreases 
with time. The fact that Earth is a biological planet may 
be recorded in an atlas appended to the so-called Ency -
clopedia Galactica, and therefore known to all, regardless 
of whether any particular civilization has analyzed Earth’s 
atmosphere for itself because it just happens to have an 
edge-on line of sight to Earth as it transits the Sun.
Although speculation about ET probes is as old as specula -
tion about interstellar ET beacons, almost all search efforts to 
date have been focused on the detection of interstellar beacons, 
and almost none have explicitly hunted for local probes. Given 
the strong arguments favoring probes, a possible reason for this 
imbalance can be framed by the old expression, “if all you have 
is a hammer then every problem becomes a nail. ” Applied to 
SETI, astronomers armed with such sensitive radio telescopes 
as Arecibo and Green Bank, and such powerful optical tele -
scopes as Keck, failed to search for local and potentially far 
more obvious targets for which such sensitive telescopes would 
not be necessary. Although such astronomers can sensibly ar -
gue that their interstellar searches might detect a foreground 
probe by serendipity, it is equally true that a search for local 
probes might detect by serendipity a background interstellar 
beacon. Nonetheless, best search strategies between the two 
paradigms will differ.
2 ARE PROBES LURKERS?
Allen Tough was the first to adopt the term, “lurkers, ” in the 
nonfiction SETI literature to describe probes that were inten -
tionally hiding from us within our Solar System. In the 1990’s 
he ran a welcoming website where ET might announce itself. 
David Brin popularized it, proposing that they are intentionally 
hiding within our Solar System. In an open letter, David Brin 
made a passionate plea to these lurkers to reveal themselves 
[14]. In doing so, he gave many reasons why lurkers might be 
lurking; for example, they are stealing our IP without any in -
tention of giving us their knowledge in return, they are waiting 
until we have achieved some further developmental milestone, 
or they wish to spare us from culture shock. Brin’s denotation 
of “lurkers” has been taken up by others [15]. Clearly, the term 
“lurkers” is a pejorative, conjuring images of pedophiles or 
muggers, or, more generally denoting nefarious purposes.
While Brin’s various scenarios are plausible, he neglected to 
include the four most likely reasons as to why we have not yet 
detected an ET probe:
• Prior to about 100 years ago, an ET probe’s camera 
might have registered some indication that one Earth 
species had developed some technological capabilities, 
perhaps by detecting agriculture, pyramids, or cities. 
However, only the commencement of EM transmissions 
would have afforded an ET probe the possibility of in-
depth study of the nature of that species. ET may now be 
surveilling Earth in an attempt to understand us before 
initiating communication. Thanks to the arduous dec -
ades-long research of E.O. Wilson and others, we now 
know something about the lives of ants [16]. However, 
we still know next to nothing about the communica -
tions of cuttlefish, dolphins, or ravens, and are far even 
from a clear understanding of chimpanzees. It may be 
that understanding human beings and their languages 
is just too difficult for an ET probe to decode in only 
the roughly 100 years since it might first have detected 
artificial electromagnetic waves (EM) emanating from 
Earth, even allowing that such a probe might have an 
onboard computer of immense power. Moreover, from 
the probe’s point of view, until the early 50s and the be -
ginning of regular television broadcasts, it would have 
had to rely only upon a cacophony of disembodied radio 
voices in a multiplicity of languages, lacking all visual 
referents. It is hard to imagine what useful information 
might be gleaned from that. Perhaps an alien probe 
is still trying to decipher our language through Sesa -
me Street, our math through Khan Academy, and the 
rest through Y ouTube. We will hear from such a probe 
only after it has decoded our languages and our culture. 
However, when we do hear from it, the transmission will 
be bright, and its transmission may be in the Queen’s 
own English, or, alternatively, in Chinese, Urdu, or some 
other terrestrial language. A sub-possibility is that the 
probe is hibernating, perhaps buried beneath the reg -
olith of an asteroid for protection from radiation and 
micrometeorites, and only pokes out an antenna once 
a century or once a millennium to test for artificial EM. 
Presumably, it knows that Earth is biologically active, 
but would not know exactly when Earth’s first techno -
logical species might emerge. In such a case, it may not 
have been monitoring Earth’s EM since the first possible 
moment about a century ago, that is, with the advent of 
commercial radio broadcasts. 
• The probe may not be fully autonomous but reports 
back to some home base. I have postulated that the gal -
axy may be laced with a communication network medi -
ated by and through nodes that might be located around 
many or most stars [10,11,12]. For the purposes of this 
paper, probes will be considered as those alien crafts 
that are surveilling and possibly now or in the future 
transmitting to Earth, while nodes will be considered to 
be further away (e.g., at 550 AU) communication relay 
hubs. The local probe(s) would transmit its Earth-relat -
ed data back through the communications network to 
its home base for fuller decoding and analysis, as well as 
for instructions on how to proceed. If such a local probe 
is in communication with a home base, say, at a distance 
of 100 light years, and that data stream began in about 
1920, then the very earliest that we might expect to hear 
from that probe would be 100 years from the present. 
• As a consequence of the foregoing two points, ET may 
be on the cusp of communicating to Earth with a loud 
or bright signal emanating from within our own So -
lar System. The timeframe for the arrival of that first 
communication is unknowable, but may be measured 
in months or years, rather than centuries or millennia. 
It is incumbent upon Earth to be as ready as possible to 
receive that signal.
• The local ET probe(s) is communicating with us, but we 
have failed to detect the communication simply because 
we have not pointed telescopes at the right coordinates, or 
we have detected it, but have mischaracterized and there-
fore ignored the signal. If a radio signal, it might have 
JOHN GERTZ
JBIS Vol 74 No.2 January 2021 17
been miscategorized as RFI, for example, because of the 
lack of an expected Doppler shift (i.e., the local ET probe 
might correct for its motion and the Earth’s orbital and 
rotational motion, but probably not for latitude differenc-
es in rotational motion due to the different latitudes of 
the various telescopes that might first detect its signal), or 
because, being in local motion, it would be absent upon 
re-targeting the same sidereal coordinates. If it was a la -
ser, it might not have been subjected to spectrographic 
examination and found to be monochromatic, and hence 
artificial.
• A fifth possibility, not mentioned by Brin but nonetheless 
plausible, is that galactic metalaw [17] stipulates that it is 
incumbent upon a primitive civilization, such as our own, 
to initiate contact if we want it. This has been the con -
tention of a number of SETI researchers and enthusiasts 
for some time, some of whom have organized as METI 
International [18]. This is known as Active SETI or Mes-
saging SETI (METI), and it is highly controversial [19, for 
a review].
Since none of these reasons are nefarious in and of them -
selves, the term “lurkers” should be avoided, and researchers 
are cautioned to revert to Bracewell’s neutral term, “probes. ” 
3 SEARCH STRATEGIES
Each of the five contingencies cited above suggests a set of 
search strategies. While assigning search techniques to each 
contingency, it should be emphasized that there is overlap 
among them, such that a technique suggested by one contin -
gency might be effective for another as well. 
3.1 ET is surveilling us with a fully autonomous probe(s) that 
may communicate in due course when it is ready or may 
remain silent indefinitely (i.e., it is truly lurking). 
An ET probe operating under this eventuality will be the most 
difficult to detect. Not only will it not be transmitting to Earth 
at this time, but neither will it be in communication with any 
other ET probe or node, making it subject to possible eaves -
dropping. However, once that fully autonomous local probe 
does intentionally signal Earth, reason suggests that it will be 
an unmistakably bright or loud signal relative to the capabili -
ties of our most sensitive telescopes.
Until then, our two best hopes for detecting a non-transmit-
ting probe are (a) to look for an anomalous optical object or (b) 
to detect its infrared (IR) waste heat. 
1. The most obvious vantage point from which an ET probe 
might surveil Earth would be from Earth orbit. A thor -
ough examination of existing public and classified data -
bases is warranted. Perhaps an alien probe has been misi-
dentified as space junk. Perhaps there is a satellite that the 
U.S. assumes is a secret Russian or Chinese spy satellite 
and that the Chinese and Russians assume is an Ameri -
can classified spy satellite, but is in fact alien. Perhaps an 
ET probe is hiding behind a human built satellite [20]. 
However, other than for purposes of camouflage, there is 
no apparent reason why an alien probe need be in either a 
low Earth orbit (why would it submit itself to atmospheric 
drag?) or in a geosynchronous orbit, so a search for an 
Earth orbiting probe should be expanded to encompass 
all directions and altitudes. Whatever its orbit, it would 
likely require some sort of propulsion system to prevent 
long term orbital degradation.
2. Perhaps a probe was in Earth orbit until the mid-20th 
century and then decamped to an asteroid or some other 
place to avoid detection after we became spacefaring. It 
may be that an object assumed to be an asteroid is in fact 
an alien probe. The entire database of asteroids should be 
examined under this hypothesis for anomalies such as an 
unexpected IR signature, albedo or trajectory that does 
not strictly obey the laws of gravity [21]. Unfortunately, 
this search strategy would currently apply only to either 
a large probe or a small probe that is in close proximity 
to Earth. The most sensitive asteroid detector, Atlas, can 
only detect a 10 m wide ET probe within ~ 0.04 AU, with 
sensitivity dropping dramatically when looking at twi -
light, i.e., at the Solar System within 1 AU [22]. However, 
the Vera Rubin Observatory (formerly, LSST), will soon 
commence its 10-year mission which will greatly increase 
the number of known main belt asteroids and near-Earth 
objects. Barring stealth technology, a detectably large ET 
probe will have a measurable albedo. The problem is how 
to distinguish this albedo from that of an asteroid. Aster-
oid albedos range from 0.03-0.5. Object size is deduced 
from the albedo. That part of the solar flux which is not 
reflected as albedo is absorbed and reradiated as IR. A 
probe, unless fully hibernating, will radiate an added IR 
waste heat signature due to its internal computations and 
other operations. However, since estimates of object size 
are always subject to wide error bars, and they are cor -
related with albedo and IR, the added IR effect would 
have to be quite pronounced to be judged anomalous (on 
the order of hundreds of MW). There may be other in -
dications that a putative asteroid may in fact be artificial, 
such as an anomalous shape or anomalous surface com -
position; or perhaps a group of anomalous objects share 
a discernable pattern in their relative motions [23].
 
3. It is possible that an alien probe is surveilling Earth, 
not from Earth orbit but from a lunar orbit or from the 
surface of the Moon [24]. There are advantages to be -
ing deployed on the surface of the Moon, as it would 
allow the probe access to raw materials for repair or the 
build out of capabilities, and to burrow into the rego -
lith for protection from radiation and micrometeorites. 
On the other hand, relative to an orbiting probe, a land -
ing probe would require additional hardware devoted 
to that purpose. The Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter’s 
(LRO) Narrow Angle Camera has been imaging large 
swaths of the Moon since 2009 at 0.5 m/pixel resolution. 
Davies and Wagner have suggested that this vast photo -
graphic library should be analyzed for traces of an alien 
probe, or any other alien object such as trash or struc -
tures constructed for purposes other than surveillance. 
The best way to do this might be through a large-scale 
citizen scientist program on the model of Galaxy Zoo 
where volunteers would examine successive photos for 
any sort of anomaly, including unusual colors, reflec -
tions or shapes. Although automated searches might be 
possible, since we do not know exactly what to look for, 
it is hard to write software to cover all contingencies, 
though machine learning techniques might be used to 
overcome this objection [25]. The moon may be less 
desirable as a landing spot relative to an asteroid, as its 
surface may have lower quality raw materials to work 
with. However, its great advantage relative to asteroids 
STRATEGIES FOR THE DETECTION OF ET PROBES Within Our Own Solar System
18 Vol 74 No.2 January 2021 JBIS
is its much closer proximity to the object of its surveil -
lance, Earth. From the point of view of SETI scientists, 
it would be vastly easier to examine the surface of the 
Moon for alien probes than almost any asteroid, the ex -
ception being those very few that have been visited and 
photographed by such spacecraft as Rosetta, Dawn, and 
Osiris-REx. Closeup photos of asteroids visited by space 
missions should be subjected to the same examination 
for anomalies as those of the Moon.
3.2. ET’s probe is not signaling Earth, but is in communication 
with a node, perhaps around nearby stars
1. A nodal interstellar communication system may achieve 
signal gain through the use of gravity lenses. One prob -
lem facing my own intergalactic nodal hypothesis has 
been that the local probe must possess a very powerful 
radio or laser transmitter, or the receiving node must 
possess a very large antenna or telescope, or both. How -
ever, there is a distance around every star from which 
a transmitter might achieve enormous gain by utilizing 
the gravity of the star to lens the signal in accord with 
Einstein’s Theory of General Relativity. The focal line of 
the solar gravitational lens (SGL) for our Sun begins at 
550 AU and extends outward from there [26]. Michael 
Hippke has suggested that an inner Solar System probe 
surveilling Earth might relay information to a node that 
resides on the SGL line and at a point that is in direct 
opposition to a node that is perhaps located in a near -
by star system. EM transmitters would achieve gains of 
order 109 over direct probe to probe transmissions, and 
increase data rates by order of 10 6 [27, 28]. These relay 
nodes cannot be in Keplerian orbits, or they would very 
quickly leave prime focus, They therefore must have 
some propulsion system to allow them to either hover 
or travel along the focal line. In effect, the intergalactic 
nodal system would be based upon pairs, with a surveil -
ling probe located within the inner solar system coupled 
to a communicating node located at the gravity lens fo -
cal line. We can calculate where a node(s) is located in 
our Solar System by calculating those points on the ce -
lestial sphere that are >550 AU from the Sun and form 
a direct line through the Sun to a nearby star. It follows 
that we might intercept a communication stream when 
the Earth happens to lie between a local probe and a lo -
cal node (i.e., local in the sense that it is within our Soalr 
System, albeit it at >550AU) or between a local node and 
the non-local node with which it is in communication 
that is associated with a nearby star system. In theory, 
this would entail observing those nearby stars where 
a straight line can be drawn from the SGL ’s focal line 
through the star to Sol and the Earth. This would only 
occur twice a year when the Earth passes through such a 
SGL line in its orbit. When the intended signal intercep -
tion is node-to-node, this observing strategy is agnostic 
as to the location of the surveilling probe, be it on an 
asteroid, in close solar orbit, in Earth orbit, or elsewhere 
in the Solar System. Unfortunately, this will not work 
for the simple reason that there are no nearby stars lying 
precisely on the ecliptic, the only area in which a star 
would form that line with the Earth and a Solar SGL. 
However, there are some nearby star systems that are 
close enough to the ecliptic that an ET observer locat -
ed within them will see Earth transit the Sun. 20 such 
K and G dwarf stars at distances of 7.4 – 143.5 parsecs 
from Earth have been observed for artificial radio EM 
in C-band (3.95-8.00 GHz.) by the GBT [29]. Neverthe -
less, space missions that traverse such points, perhaps 
piggybacking on an entirely different main mission, 
may be the best way to test the hypothesis, especially for 
narrow beam lasers. For example, the ESA Solar Orbiter 
might just as well have been placed into a solar orbit that 
traversed an SGL → Sol → nearby star line.
2. In section 3.4.1 below it is argued that a probe may reside 
in a close Solar orbit. Allowing for this possibility, the 
area around the Sun should be observed when nearby 
stars are in opposition to the Sun from Earth’s perspec -
tive. Observations should also be made of the star that is 
in opposition to the Sun. This would not seem to be nec -
essary if ET is transmitting a radio beacon from a nearby 
exoplanet to a probe located in the vicinity of the Sun, 
because its beam will have in any event widened to en -
compass the Earth by the time it arrives. But a laser signal 
from a nearby star would probably be sufficiently narrow 
such that it would illuminate only a small radius around 
the Sun if aimed directly at its center. For example, a 10 
m laser (i.e., Keck-class) from Alpha Centauri would cre-
ate a beam width around the Sun of only 0.013 AU (~2 
million km).
3. Observations might be made of the SGL lines in our So -
lar System that point to nearby stars, that is, at a point 
that is in direct opposition to each nearby star. We would 
not intercept messages between that SGL and the nearby 
star, since Earth would not be in that pathway. Howev -
er, we might intercept a message from the node located 
at one of these SGL lines to a probe in the inner Solar 
System. These SGLs should be especially observed when 
they are close to Solar opposition relative to the Earth as 
we might be able to eavesdrop on communications from 
the node in the SGL focal line and a local probe in close 
solar orbit. The area around the Sun can also be observed 
at these times to intercept the same train of communi -
cation, though of course it is easier to look away from 
the Sun than toward it [30]. The SGL lines residing in 
opposition to nearby stars have more importance yet. It 
is entirely possible that a node positioned in one of these 
is intentionally signaling directly to Earth rather than 
directing its communication through an inner Solar Sys-
tem probe. The node may be doing us a favor, as it would 
reason that an intelligent species will observe the SGL, 
whereas, as the rest of this paper demonstrates, we can 
have no such a priori certainty as to the coordinates of a 
local probe.
4. General observations in opposition to the ecliptic and 
particular observations of nearby stars when they are 
in opposition to the ecliptic might intercept sister node 
transmissions to a local probe residing on an asteroid, 
planet or moon.
3.3. ET is not yet signaling Earth, but will in the future with a 
transmitter that is very powerful relative to what might 
be expected from the flux of an interstellar beacon
In this event, if the transmission is a radio signal, Earth may 
already be fully prepared, as there are thousands of mid-size 
radio dishes all over the world tracking satellites and per -
forming other functions, and less sensitive commercial radio 
and TV antenna are ubiquitous. If the signal is an optical la -
ser, we can prepare for this eventuality by deploying all-sky-
JOHN GERTZ
JBIS Vol 74 No.2 January 2021 19
all-the-time capabilities, that is, systems with extremely wide 
fields of view (FOV), but presumably with correspondingly 
lower sensitivities. Two such efforts are underway to detect 
ET lasers pulses, and one is contemplated for wide FOV radio 
astronomy.
3.3.1. PanoSETI
Shelly Wright, et. al. [31] are in the advance stages of devel -
oping and deploying two privately funded Panoramic Opti -
cal and Near-Infrared SETI (PANOSETI) instruments at the 
Palomar and Lick observatories. Two geodesic domes will 
each house 100 modules comprised of a relatively inexpensive 
Fresnel lens coupled to an avalanche photodiode (APD) de -
tector. Each lens will have a FOV of 9 square degrees, with 
20 arcminute coverage per pixel in the optical and 82.5 arc -
minutes in the near IR. >8,500 square degrees instantaneous 
sky coverage will be achieved. Because stars are quite dim at 
nanosecond levels an alien pulsed laser <30 milliseconds will 
readily stick out. Although the system is not disadvantaged in 
the domain of sensitivity, the tradeoff for such a wide FOV 
is acuity. One dome can localize a putative signal to only 20 
arcminutes. However, when triangulated with a simultane -
ous hit in the second dome at 700 km distance, localization 
can be reduced to 2-3 arcseconds. Two additional domes are 
contemplated for the Southern Hemisphere to obtain all-sky 
capability.
3.3.2. Laser SETI 
The SETI Institute has deployed a novel camera system, called 
Laser SETI, for detecting transient signals over a very wide 
FOV . The first two systems have been deployed in Northern 
California, with the intention of deploying additional systems 
at other sites around the world. Each system is comprised of 
two 1.5 cm cameras, whose CCDs use Time-Delayed Integra -
tion (TDI) to smear out the sky, leaving transient laser signals 
to stand out [32].
3.3.3. Wide FOV radio SETI
In the event that directed radio beacons are both rare and 
transient, the most viable way to detect them is with an all-
sky-all-the-time telescope. There are quite a few transient ra -
dio phenomena for which the widest possible FOV is desira -
ble, including the largely unexplained FRBs. Wide FOV radio 
astronomy was pioneered by the Survey for Transient Radio 
Emission (STARE) and formed from crossed dipoles in cavi -
ty-type receivers located at three geographically removed sites. 
These dipoles are temporally aligned such that a simultaneous 
event recorded in each receiver would be regarded as of as -
tronomical origin [33]. An aperture array telescope has been 
proposed for SETI and other transient events. This Mid-Fre -
quency Aperture Array Transient and Intensity-Mapping Sys-
tem (MANTIS) would be built adjacent to the SKA-1 in South 
Africa. It would consist of many thousands of individual an -
tennas, each sensitive to almost the whole sky at L-band, and 
whose signals would be combined and beam formed in the 
back end [34]. 
3.4. An ET probe(s) is signaling Earth now but we have failed 
to make the detection 
These techniques are best deployed to detect an ET signal that 
is less than obvious, but nonetheless of a flux that is higher than 
what might be expected from an interstellar beacon:
1. One key question is what to target. Although some pos -
sible targets are suggested below, it must be admitted 
that an alien probe might be in any orbit around either 
the Earth or the Sun. Consequently, the most productive 
strategy might be to target the entire sky, but with more 
sensitivity than can be achieved with the all-sky-all-
the-time techniques reviewed in section 3.3 above. This 
would be nearly impossible were the most sensitive and 
powerful telescopes devoted to the task. For example, 
if the Keck telescope were to examine each point in the 
sky for alien lasers for a mere one minute each it would 
take hundreds of thousands of years to complete a sin -
gle duty cycle. The Arecibo radio telescope has a total 
beam size of about 0.002 square degrees at 1.5 GHz, so 
it would require, in principle, about 20M pointings to 
mosaic the entire sky (although in practice Arecibo can 
only image 31.7% of the sky). Allotting 10 minutes to 
each pointing gives a total duty cycle of about 380 years. 
However, if an ET probe is intentionally beaming a sig -
nal to Earth it can be safely presumed to be powerful 
enough to be reasonably bright. Breakthrough Listen, 
using the Green Bank Telescope, observed the recent -
ly-discovered interstellar object ‘Oumuamua while it 
transited our Solar System, down to a sensitivity of 0.08 
Watts [35]. ‘Oumuamua is an object of at least the size 
of an aircraft carrier. If ‘Oumuamua actually were an ET 
probe or worldship (i.e., populated by alien beings) of 
such a large size, one can only imagine that it would be 
able to muster enough onboard energy to transmit at a 
higher power than 0.08 Watts. 
2. It is therefore advised that such a search for a local probe 
intentionally transmitting to Earth can safely sacrifice 
sensitivity in favor of widening the FOV . The Allen Tel -
escope Array (ATA) is a far less sensitive radio telescope 
than the GBT, but it could nonetheless easily detect the 
23-Watt signal from Voyager at a distance of 106 AU, 
using just 10 of its 42 dishes. The ATA could mosaic the 
approximately 75% of the sky available to it in about 
100,500 pointings. If 10 minutes were allotted to each 
pointing, a duty cycle could be completed in a mere 729 
days. This may then be an ideal mission for the ATA.
3. VERITAS is a group of four 12 m. optical telescopes with 
a 12 m focal length, giving it the very wide FOV of 3 sq. 
degrees. Each telescope is equipped with 499 PMTs. Orig-
inally designed to detect Cherenkov light generated by 
gamma rays as they hit the atmosphere, VERITAS astron-
omers took advantage of its ability to detect nanosecond 
optical events to observe KIC 8462852 (Tabby’s star) for 
pulsed lasers [36]. Breakthrough Listen has now part -
nered with VERITAS to broaden its optical SETI capabil-
ities [37]. VERITAS’s large FOV recommends it to all-sky 
mosaicking.
4. Amateur class telescopes, equipped with either photo -
multiplying tubes (PMTs) or APDs might mosaic the sky 
in search of local alien lasers. This would require central 
coordination, and possibly financial subsidies for par -
ticipating amateurs from Breakthrough Listen or some 
other funding source. The telescopes might be grouped 
into cohorts of ten each, allowing that some will be un -
der cloudy skies, or otherwise not operating on a given 
night. Each telescope would be controlled by a principle 
investigator over the Internet, who would be able to slew 
them from FOV to FOV , perhaps with 10-minute dwell 
STRATEGIES FOR THE DETECTION OF ET PROBES Within Our Own Solar System
20 Vol 74 No.2 January 2021 JBIS
times. Multiple cohorts could observe different FOVs at 
the same time, such that the entire sky might be observed 
fairly quickly, depending on the total number of cohorts. 
Each telescope would be equipped with three PMTs or 
APDs; each telescope owner would be blind to the iden -
tity of the other members of the cohort; and each cohort 
would be observing the same coordinates at the same 
time. A single telescope recording simultaneous photon 
hits within each of its three PMTs or ARDs in any sin -
gle nano-second could be interpreted as the detection 
of a laser. Stronger evidence would entail the recording 
of simultaneous photon hits in multiple nano-second 
intervals. The strongest evidence would entail simulta -
neous hits by multiple cohort members. Indeed, a lack 
of confirmation from other observing telescopes would 
null the hypothesis of an alien detection.
5. Geoff Marcy is currently searching for local (or back -
ground) lasers in the ecliptic, the area within 60 degrees 
of the Sun (= 0.87 AU), as well as L5 at twilight, by taking 
successive spectra of large (2 degree square) tiles of the 
sky at quarter second intervals and analyzing them spec -
trographically for monochromatic points of light [29].
6. Lacki describes methods for detecting reflections from an 
ET mirror located within our Solar System that is point -
ed directly toward Earth [38]. Such a low-tech signaling 
method can make some sense, obviating the need for ET 
to maintain a fully operational radio or laser transmitter 
over potentially millions or billions of years. The probe 
might send a pulsed message by successively turning the 
mirror toward and away from Earth. However, it may be 
that the mirror is meant only to attract Earth’s attention, 
and that its informational payload may need to be physi-
cally retrieved by a space mission.
7. An alien probe entering our Solar System for the purpos-
es of extended surveillance, as opposed to a flyby mission, 
would need to decelerate into an orbit. A highly eccentric 
orbit would require the least amount of decelerant ener -
gy. A highly eccentric orbit would also allow the probe to 
surveil the largest amount of the Solar System, its possi -
ble preference. If such a probe is intentionally signaling 
Earth, and since the orbit could be on any inclination, 
the best place to detect it would be as it passes close to 
the Sun at perihelion, since that is the only small area 
of space through which we know some highly eccentric 
orbits must pass. However, such a probe in a highly ec -
centric orbit will spend only a very small fraction of its 
orbital periodicity at perihelion. Consequently, the only 
way we would likely detect such a probe (unless we per -
sistently observe the Sun) would be if there are very many 
such alien probes and thereby the chances of any one of 
them being near perihelion in a given moment propor -
tionally increased. The better reason to observe the area 
around the Sun is that an alien probe might assume a 
close Solar orbit. Such a close orbit would not only best 
allow it to harvest energy, it may allow the probe to be 
more easily located by a sister probe or node in another 
star system. The Sun at 1 AU is a strong radio source in 
itself. However, the signal to noise ratio increases rapidly 
with distance from it. For example, at 5 solar radii, cor -
responding to about 0.02 AU, the Green Bank Telescope 
would lose about 90% of its sensitivity to an ET signal. 
However, the remaining sensitivity would be adequate 
to detect anything but an extraordinarily faint signal, 
and since this is about 20 times closer to the Sun than 
Mercury’s orbit, it is hard to imagine that an ET probe 
would be that close, except when approaching transit or 
occultation. The alien nodal network protocol may re -
quire that all probes assume tight solar orbits in order to 
facilitate communication. The ESA Solar Orbiter orbits 
at 0.5 AU. Presumably, ET can devise materials (e.g., ad -
vanced ceramics) that can survive closer orbits yet. Sister 
probes then need merely transmit a laser beam at the di -
rect center of the star, that beam being just wide enough 
to illuminate the probe’s entire tight orbit. A local probe 
intentionally signaling Earth would presumably do so 
with an unmistakably loud or bright signal relative to a 
putative interstellar beacon. Unless such a signal is either 
highly intermittent or its inception quite recent, it might 
already have been observed in the foreground of SETI 
observations of more remote targets. However, a tight so-
lar orbit would be exempt from this truism since this is a 
parameter space that has been neglected in all previous 
SETI searches. 
8. In addition to the Moon, as discussed above, an alien 
probe might be located on any astronomical body within 
our Solar System. However, geologically active bodies may 
be less likely bases than geologically inactive bodies. Over 
deep time, a geologically active body presents risks such 
as burial in lava. Asteroids would be ideal bodies in that 
they are often materially rich, close enough to the Sun to 
utilize its energy, and, except for the largest among them, 
geologically inactive. Therefore, a program of observing 
all known asteroids in particular, or the entire ecliptic 
plane in general, is advised. It is hard to know what ma -
terials a probe would most want to exploit, and therefore, 
whether it would prioritize metals, carbon, or silicon for 
the purposes of self-repair, build-out capacities, or repli -
cation (i.e., create daughter von Neumann probes). That 
said, the asteroid Psyche should receive particular scruti-
ny, as this peculiar M-class asteroid is possibly the core of 
a would-be planet, and contains about one million times 
more metals than ever mined from the surface of the 
Earth. The protocol for mosaicking the ecliptic plane is 
no different in practice from a general mosaicking of the 
Solar System, except limited to a discrete band above and 
below the ecliptic plane. The ecliptic can be preferentially 
targeted where it crosses the plane of the Milky Way to 
maximize the chances of registering a serendipitous back-
ground detection. 
9. Benford has recommended targeting objects that are lo -
cated in several highly-stable near-Earth orbits, namely, 
co-orbital bodies, quasi-satellites, and a trojan asteroid 
[15]. Benford argues that these may be better objects to 
consider than main belt asteroids, because they would 
give an ET probe a nearby platform from which to sur -
veil Earth, would be closer to the Sun for more efficient 
energy harvesting, and would be rich in metals and vol -
atiles that a probe may require for repair or build-out. 
Alternatively, one or more of these objects may them -
selves be probes and not natural bodies. Earth’s only 
known trojan asteroid, the ~300 m. wide 2010TK7, 
located at Lagrange point L4, should be especially tar -
geted. 16 other “co-orbital” objects have been identified 
to date, and many more are presumably awaiting dis -
covery. The potentially greater value suggested by these 
special areas of space is that ET probes might assume 
orbits within them that remain stable over millions of 
JOHN GERTZ
JBIS Vol 74 No.2 January 2021 21
years with little or no energy expenditures required on 
their part. Consequently, the entirety of these co-orbital 
planes should be observed with wide FOV telescopes, 
and not just the specific co-orbital objects that have 
been discovered to date.
10. Earth would seem to be a poor ET probe landing site by 
the criteria mentioned above, as it is a relatively deep 
gravity well with a significant atmosphere, requiring 
that the probe have landing equipment and a heat shield 
suitable for the task. Also, Earth is geologically and bi -
ologically active, posing severe dangers over deep time 
during which a probe might be subducted, buried in 
lava, stepped on by a dinosaur, overgrown by a jungle, 
and so forth. Nonetheless, one must admit that it is the 
very closest spot from which to surveil Earth. The very 
possibility of a recent or distant past Earth landing rare -
ly appears in the reputable SETI literature for two main 
reasons. First, it smacks of highly-charged UFOism. 
Second, SETI, as a reputable scientific endeavor, cur -
rently lies wholly within the domain of astronomy, and 
not so far taken up by Earth sciences. But there is no 
law that says that archeologists and geologists cannot 
get into the hunt. In fact, the Air Force has recently up -
graded its investigation of UFOs with the August 4, 2020 
announcement of the establishment within the Penta -
gon of an Unidentified Aerial Phenomena Task Force 
created by Deputy Defense Secretary David Norquist. 
Purported sightings by air force pilots of objects that 
defy all known aerodynamics in their movements leads 
to the deduction that if the observed phenomena really 
are objects of alien derivation, they must be AI probes 
rather than “manned” by biological beings because the 
latter would presumably be crushed by the G-forces of 
their very large accelerations. 
11. On August 16, 1977 the Big Ear Radio Telescope at 
Ohio State University recorded a signal that looked very 
much like a putative interstellar beacon. Jerry Ehman, 
upon reading the printout of the signal wrote “Wow!” 
in the margins, and the signal has been known as the 
“Wow!” signal ever since. The Wow! was never seen 
again at the same coordinates by either the Big Ear or 
any other radio telescope (however, although the SETI 
literature seems to assume that there have been many 
re-observations, a detailed review indicates that this is 
not the case [39]). Although the Wow! is by far the most 
famous example, there have been quite a few other re -
corded signals that have evinced the presumed qualities 
of an alien signal save for the fact that they have not been 
re-observed at the same sidereal coordinates. These sig -
nals are known as “transients” in the SETI literature. 
However, all re-observations to date have worked under 
the presumption that the purported beacon is located 
in a distal star system, which would appear stationary 
on human timescales. However, if the transient derived 
from a probe within our own solar system it would be 
in apparent motion. A simple question should be asked 
of all historical transients: what local object might have 
been in the FOV at the time of original observation? If, 
for example, there was an asteroid in the FOV , then that 
asteroid should be observed in its now current location. 
Additionally, in the event that the transient was recog -
nized in near real time, the telescope might make suc -
cessive observations in an outward-moving spiral from 
the coordinates of the original observation.
4 LOCAL METI AS A STRATEGY AND AS A COMPROMISE 
There is a subset of SETI scientists and enthusiasts who postu-
late that it is incumbent upon humans to initiate contact with 
aliens [18]. In effect, they argue that the galactic-wide commu-
nication protocol might require that new civilizations who seek 
membership in the galactic club make the first request for con-
tact. However, since about 96% of stars are older than Sol, one 
of the few things we know for a fact about ET is that given that 
the first civilizations might have arisen at least five billion years 
ago, it is statistically almost an impossibility that the civilization 
that we first encounter will, like us, be only in its first century of 
being able to send or receive radio or optical signals. This leads 
to the surmise that their capabilities — including the capability 
to do us harm if they choose — are vastly in advance of our own. 
Opponents therefore argue that as the very newest technologi-
cal civilization in the galaxy it is better to listen and learn, rather 
than speak first and possibly be very sorry. Perhaps the most 
damning failure of the would-be METI enterprise is a lack of 
any strategy to receive a return message. The first METI effort 
was made by Frank Drake, when in 1974 he sent a radio signal 
from Arecibo to M13, a globular cluster located at a distance of 
approximately 22,000 light years from Earth. A return message 
would therefore be expected in about 44,000 years from now. 
Unfortunately, Drake failed to reserve the exclusive rights to the 
Arecibo receiver in or about the year 46,000 AD. Consequent-
ly, he encumbered future Earthlings with the risk that M13ians 
might be hostile, while making no provisions to receive their 
vast wisdom in the event that they are benign. All subsequent 
METI efforts to date have suffered from the same shortfalling. 
Even when their targets have been nearby stars, no planning 
whatsoever has been made to receive a return message in dou-
ble the time indicated by the target’s distance in light years. 
However, METI targeting of local Solar System objects may 
be an acceptable alternative for two reasons: 
• METI proponents have argued that it is acceptable to 
transmit messages to stars because ET must already know, 
by virtue of having detected our EM leakage, that we are 
here. However, our omnidirectional radio leakage (often 
referred to as “I Love Lucy” leakage) would damp down 
to incoherent noise by the time it reached even nearby 
stars unless an alien civilization was deploying gargantu-
an receivers and very long integration times. Therefore, 
not surprisingly, METIists propose to transmit a direct -
ed beam with a power that might be approximately 10 5 
greater than the omnidirectional leakage they claim ET 
can already decipher. On the other hand, local surveilling 
probes would presumably be able to detect the leakage 
and therefore know that we had attained obtained tech -
nological competence, so it really would be useless to try 
to conceal this fact from them.
• Local distances are measured in light minutes or hours, 
rather than light years. For example, even distant Pluto 
lies only approximately 280 light minutes (4.33 hours) 
away. It would be possible to send a message to Pluto early 
in the evening and receive a message in return by the next 
dawn. The largest asteroid, Ceres, is currently only about 
17 light minutes away.
It is therefore suggested that a reasonable compromise be -
tween the METI and anti-METI camps might allow for local 
METI, while banning interstellar METI. The word, “banning” 
is used intentionally to mean that the enterprise should be sub-
STRATEGIES FOR THE DETECTION OF ET PROBES Within Our Own Solar System
22 Vol 74 No.2 January 2021 JBIS
ject to government regulations [40]. For example, local METI 
would be allowed only below a certain intensity threshold (to 
diminish the chances that it might illuminate a background 
star with a decodable flux), would be banned during times 
when the local target occults nearby stars or the plane of the 
Milky Way, and would be permitted only when the METIists 
have demonstrated that they have access to an appropriate re -
ceiver at the time that a response might be anticipated. Since 
the METIists would be speaking on behalf of all humankind, 
the content of their message should be pre-approved by the UN 
Security Council and/or the UN General Assembly.
If one accepts the probability that ET is at least as likely to be 
detected locally as by interstellar beacon, then this seems like 
a more than reasonable compromise, and not too much to ask 
of METIists who currently feel empowered to transmit their 
messages to any target in the universe completely on their own 
authority. 
A compromise means that both parties give up something. 
Opponents to METI can argue with real justification that even 
local METI may be dangerous, even when allowing that the 
alien probe knows that a technological species has emerged 
on Earth. A probe’s reception of a directed transmission from 
Earth will indicate to it that it has been detected, an event that 
might “frighten it” (albeit, we are referring to an AI entity), 
causing it to lash out defensively. Consequently, even local 
METI should be undertaken with the consent of humankind as 
expressed through the U.N.
5 CONCLUSIONS
For the better part of 60 years, SETI scientists have assumed 
that an alien signal will derive from far distant interstellar coor-
dinates. Due to the inverse square law, that signal would likely 
be very weak and would therefore be best detected with a high-
ly sensitive telescope, which in turn would likely have a small 
FOV . A small FOV is desirable when the purported source is a 
star. Even then, in the radio spectrum, it is not expected that 
even our most sensitive telescopes will be able to detect more 
than an alien carrier wave. With either a large optical telescope 
or large radio dish, the only way that a large number of stars 
can be sampled at once is to point toward another galaxy, or 
to look deep within the plane of the Milky Way, stacking stars 
depth-wise. 
Testing the alien probe hypothesis requires a significant shift 
in strategy. Because a local signal will come from a distance that 
is many orders of magnitude closer to Earth than an interstel -
lar signal, even a modest local transmitter will vastly outshine 
an interstellar signal, unless the latter transmits at an almost 
unimaginable intrinsic flux. Consequently, the large aperture 
and small FOV of large telescopes are counter-productive to a 
local search.
It may be that there are multiple local nodes, each located on 
lines extending outward from 550 AU [26, 27] and each point-
ed towards different nearby stars, forming part of a very com -
plex galactic communication system. Because each leg of the 
communications network would be short, narrow beamed la -
sers would best suit the purpose. Because those beams are nar-
row and only connect the local nodes with nearby stars, they 
are under most circumstances invisible to Earth, giving the im-
pression that there is a “Great Silence, ” when in fact Earth may 
be embedded within a rich cacophony. 
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Geoff Marcy and Andrew Siemion for 
their help in reviewing this paper.
1. G. Cocconi and P . Morrison, “Searching for Interstellar 
Communications, ” Nature, Vol. 184, pp. 844-846, 1959.
2. F . Drake, “Project Ozma” , Physics Today, Vol. 14, pp.40-46, 1961.
3. R. N. Schwartz and C. Towne, “Interstellar and Interplanetary 
Communication by Optical Means, ” Nature, Vol. 190, pp. 205-208, 1961.
4. R. N. Bracewell, “Communications from Superior Galactic 
Communities, ” Nature, Vol. 186, pp., 670-671, 1960.
5. R. Bracewell, “The Opening Message from an Extraterrestrial Probe” , 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, Vol. 11, pp.58-60, 1973.
6. R. Freitas, “ A Self-Reproducing Interstellar Probe” , JBIS, Vol. 33, pp.251-
264, 1980.
7. R. Freitas, “Interstellar Probes: A New Approach to SETI” , JBIS Vol. 33, 
pp.103-109, 1980.
8. C. Rose and G. Wright, “Inscribed Matter as an Energy-Efficient Means 
of Communication with an Extraterrestrial Civilization” , Nature, Vol. 
431, pp.47-49, 2004.
9. J. Gertz, “E.T. Probes: Looking Here As Well As There, ” JBIS, Vol. 69, pp. 
88-91, 2016.
10. J. Gertz, “Nodes: A Proposed Solution to Fermi’s Paradox, ” JBIS, Vol. 70, 
pp. 454-457, 2017
11. J. Gertz, “ET Probes, Nodes, and Landbases: A Proposed Galactic 
Communications Architecture and Implied Search Strategies, ” JBIS, Vol. 
71, pp. 375-381, 2018.
12. J. Gertz, “‘Oumuamua and SETI Scout Probes, ” JBIS, Vol. 72, pp. 182-
185, 2019. 
13. D. Brin, Existence, NY: Tor Books, 2012.
14. D. Brin, “ An Open Letter to Alien Lurkers” , Invitation to ETI, http://
www.ieti.org/articles/brin.htm. (Last Accessed August 11, 2020).
15. J. Benford, “Looking for lurkers, ” The Astronomical Journal, Vol., 
158:150, pp. 1 – 5, 2019.
16. E.O. Wilson and B. Hölldobler, The Ants, Harvard University Press, 
1990.
17. A. Korbitz, “ Altruism, Metalaw, and Celegistics: an Extraterrestrial 
Perspective on Universal Law-making, ” in D. A. Vakoch (ed), 
Extraterrestrial Altruism, Springer, 2014, pp. 231-247. 26. 
18. www.meti.org (last accessed August 30, 2020).
19. J. Gertz, “Reviewing METI: A Critical Analysis of the Arguments” JBIS, 
Vol. 69, pp. 31-36, 2016.
20. M. Hippke, private communication.
21. V . Timmaraju and G. Djorgovski, “Identifying candidates for free-
floating artifacts in the solar system, ” https://www.essoar.org/doi/
abs/10.1002/essoar.10503862.1 (last accessed, August 12, 2020)
22. https://atlas.fallingstar.com/how_atlas_works.php (last accessed, August 
23, 2020)
23. A. Siemion, private communication.
24. A. V . Arkhipov and F . G. Graham, “Lunar SETI: a justification” SPIE, 
Vol. 2704, pp. 150-154, 1996.
25. P . C. W . Davies and R.V . Wagner, “Searching for alien artifacts on the 
moon, ” Acta Astronautica, Volume 89, p. 261-265.
26. C. Maccone, “ A new belt beyond Kuiper’s: A belt of focal spheres 
between 550 and 17,000 AU for SETI and science, ” Acta Astronautica, 
Volume 69, pp. 939-948, 2011.
27. M. Hippke, “Interstellar communication network. I. Overview and 
assumptions, ” https://arxiv.org/pdf/1912.02616.pdf
28. M. Hippke, “Interstellar communication network. II. Deep space nodes 
with gravitational lensing, ” arxiv.org/abs/2009.01866 
REFERENCES
JOHN GERTZ
JBIS Vol 74 No.2 January 2021 23
29. Sheik, S.Z., et. al., “The Breakthrough Listen search for intelligent life: 
A 3.95 – 8.00 GHz. Search for radio technosignatures in the restricted 
Earth transit zone, ” https://arxiv.org/2002.06162v1.pdf
30. G. Marcy, private communication.
31. S.A. Wright, et. al., “Panoramic optical and near-infrared 
SETI instrument: overall specifications and science program, ” 
arXiv:1808.05772v1 [astro-ph.IM] 17 Aug 2018.
32. https://www.centauri-dreams.org/2017/07/14/laser-seti-all-sky-all-the-
time/ (last accessed, August 25, 2020)
33. C.A. Katz, et. al., “ A survey for transient astronomical radio emission at 
611 MHz, ” https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0304260
34. M.A. Garret, et. al, “ All-sky radio SETI, ” https://arxiv.org/
abs/1709.01338
35. J.E. Enriquez, et. al., “Breakthrough Listen observations of 
1I/’Oumuamua with the GBT” , , arXiv:1801.02814. 2018.
36. A.U. Abeysekara, et. al., “ A search for brief optical flashes associated 
with the SETI target KIC 8462852, ” https://arxiv.org/pdf/1602.00987.pdf
37. https://breakthroughinitiatives.org/news/26 (last accessed September 1, 
2020).
38. B. C. Lacki, “ A shiny new method for SETI: specular reflections from 
interplanetary artifacts, ” Publications of the Astronomical Society of the 
Pacific, Volume 131, Issue 1002, pp. 084401, 2019. `
39. R. H. Grey, The Elusive WOW, Chicago: Palmer Square Press, 2012.
40. J. Gertz, “Post-Detection SETI protocols & METI: The time has come to 
regulate them both, ” JBIS, Vol. 69, pp. 263-270.
Received 6 September 2020 Approved 9 November 2020
STRATEGIES FOR THE DETECTION OF ET PROBES Within Our Own Solar System