arXiv:1111.1212v1 [physics.pop-ph] 4 Nov 2011
On the likelihood of non-terrestrial artifacts in the Solar
System
Jacob Haqq-Misra a,b,∗, Ravi Kumar Kopparapu c
aBlue Marble Space Institute of Science, PO Box 85561, Seattl e, WA 98145, USA
bRock Ethics Institute, Pennsylvania State University, 201 Willard Building, University
Park, PA 16802, USA
cDepartment of Geosciences, Pennsylvania State University , 443 Deike Building,
University Park, PA 16802, USA
Abstract
Extraterrestrial technology may exist in the Solar System without our knowl-
edge. This is because the vastness of space, combined with our limite d
searches to date, implies that any remote unpiloted exploratory pr obes of
extraterrestrial origin would likely remain unnoticed. Here we develo p a
probabilistic approach to quantify our certainty (or uncertainty) of the ex-
istence of such technology in the Solar System. We discuss some pos sible
strategies for improving this uncertainty that include analysis of mo on- and
Mars-orbiting satellite data as well as continued exploration of the S olar
System.
Keywords:
Solar System SETI, interstellar probes, extraterrestrial life
1. Introduction
If extraterrestrials exist in our galaxy, then might they try obser ving
us? This question was raised by Ronald Bracewell [1] shortly after Co cconi
and Morrison’s suggestion [2] to search for extraterrestrial bro adcasts. It
is certainly possible that extraterrestrials could be observing us re motely;
after all, near-future human technology includes the prospects o f observing
∗ Corresponding author
Email addresses: haqqmisra@psu.edu (Jacob Haqq-Misra), ravi@gravity.psu.edu
(Ravi Kumar Kopparapu)
Preprint accepted for publication by Acta Astronautica Nov ember 27, 2024
atmospheric spectra of extrasolar terrestrial planets [3] and ex ploring nearby
star systems with unpiloted remote exploratory probes [4, 5, 6]. O ne possible
scenario for human exploration of space begins with the discovery o f an
Earth-like planet around a nearby star, with an exploratory probe sent as
a follow-up mission. It is at least plausible that extraterrestrials migh t also
adopt a similar strategy [7, 8]. If so, then extraterrestrial techn ology could
be hiding in our own Solar System.
We have obviously not yet discovered any technology of extraterr estrial
origin, but how sure can we be that the Solar System contains none o f these
artifacts? In this paper we develop a probabilistic approach to this q ues-
tion. Certain regions of space have been searched suﬃciently to dis cover
such technology, if it exists, but much of the Solar System remains u nex-
plored. It is completely possible that extraterrestrial technology could be
actively observing us without our knowledge, while it is also possible tha t
defunct extraterrestrial technology exists on planetary surfa ces or interplan-
etary space. Therefore, it is of interest to calculate a likelihood tha t a given
region of space is in fact absent of extraterrestrial technology. We begin our
argument by ﬁrst clarifying the types of extraterrestrial techn ology we con-
sider. We then develop our probabilistic analysis and discuss its implicat ions
for future searches of the Solar System.
2. The Testable Zoo Hypothesis
The Fermi paradox [9], also known as the Great Silence [10], asks the
question: if intelligent life is common in the galaxy, then why have no tec h-
nological civilizations been observed yet? Many resolutions have bee n pro-
posed to this question [11, 12]. These solutions include the possibility t hat
life is rare in the galaxy [13] or that intelligent civilizations inevitably de-
stroy themselves [14, 15, 16]. However, the absence of extrater restrials could
simply be because long-lived technological civilizations expand too slow ly to
have yet arrived at Earth [17, 18, 19]. Still other resolutions to th e Fermi
paradox suppose that extraterrestrials are actually widespread but have pur-
posefully refrained from making contact [20, 21, 22, 23]. In both of these
cases, there is nothing to preclude the possibility that extraterre strials might
remotely explore our Solar System using unpiloted probes. We refer to such
technology as non-terrestrial Artifacts (NTAs) to indicate their extraterres-
trial origin but also to distinguish realistic remote exploratory probe s from
piloted ﬂying saucers in the realm of science ﬁction.
2
The zoo hypothesis [20] is a term describing the possibility that extrater-
restrials might be concealing themselves from us for one reason or a nother.
We often imagine that a benevolent extraterrestrial civilization migh t have
our best interests in mind and avoid interfering with our primitive cultu re
until we cross a certain threshold, such as the discovery of light-s peed travel
[20, 21] or our initiation of conversation with a nearby intelligent spac e probe
[24]. An even more omnipotent extraterrestrial civilization might eng ineer a
virtual planetarium that forces us to observe an empty universe [2 3], which
would give us almost no chance at discovering their presence until th ey choose
to reveal themselves to us. More mundane versions of the zoo hyp othesis
simply invoke the vastness of space to suggest that extraterres trials or ex-
traterrestrial technology could be hiding in the asteroid belt [25, 26 , 27, 28]
or other places in the Solar System [29, 30, 31] without us noticing. This
range of possibilities for the zoo hypothesis can be rather confusin g for SETI
(search for extraterrestrial intelligence) researchers becaus e some of these hy-
potheses are testable whereas others are not. We therefore su b-divide this zoo
hypothesis into two categories: the testable zoo hypothesis and the untestable
zoo hypothesis.
The untestable zoo hypothesis describes any attempt by an advan ced
extraterrestrial civilization to willfully conceal its presence from us . We typ-
ically assume that any extant extraterrestrial civilization is probab ly much
more technologically advanced than us [1, 2, 14, 15, 16, 32, 33], so t here could
be almost no limit to the ways in which superior extraterrestrials could keep
us in the dark. In this sense, the untestable zoo hypothesis is tant amount to
an unknowable faith-based system because we can ascribe to the e xtraterres-
trials any mechanism imaginable that maintains their unobservability. S uch
scenarios are popular in science ﬁction, perhaps in part because th ey allow
us to maintain belief in a Galactic Club [34] of extraterrestrial civilizat ions
that humanity might one day join. However, these solutions to the F ermi
paradox are completely untestable and therefore a distraction to the scientiﬁc
SETI discussion. (Recent calculations have even shown that the to tal hege-
mony supposedly required for a Galactic Club to maintain a zoo hypoth esis
policy would break down on a galaxy-wide scale [35].) We cannot rule out
the possibility that the untestable zoo hypothesis accounts for th e absence
of extraterrestrials, but any further quantitative analysis requ ires that we
set aside this possibility and limit our consideration to only the testable zoo
hypothesis.
It is within the realm of possibility for human civilization to send ex-
3
ploratory probes to other star systems, and a good deal of thou ght has been
already given to the associated engineering challenges [4]. It is there fore
plausible that extraterrestrials might attain similar technology and r emotely
explore nearby planetary systems. We refer to this set of possibilit ies as the
testable zoo hypothesis because in this case there is no willful attem pt at
concealment. It is unlikely that our search eﬀorts to date would hav e discov-
ered any NTAs in the galaxy because such interstellar probes would h ave a
limiting size of about 1 to 10 meters [7]. (Objects with a much larger sca le
of 1000 km would be comparable in size to a minor planet and exert appr e-
ciable gravitational force on its surroundings, while the energy req uirements
to transport such a vehicle may be impermissible for interstellar trav el. A
smaller probe could implement a large lightweight solar sail in order to tr avel
large distances using radiation pressure, but a massive solar sail wo uld be
diﬃcult to keep concealed.) Thus, extraterrestrial artifacts may exist in the
Solar System without our knowledge simply because we have not yet s earched
suﬃciently. As we continue to explore at improved spatial resolution , though,
we will increase our chances of discovering NTAs, if they exist, or els e we will
increase our conﬁdence that NTAs are absent. In either case, th is testable zoo
hypothesis describes possibilities that can be examined through obs ervation
and exploration, even if we believe the probability of ﬁnding a probe to be
low. In the next section, we develop a probabilistic framework for es timating
the probability that the Solar System is in fact absent of NTAs.
Extraterrestrial visitors to the Solar System could also leave signa tures
other than technological artifacts. For example, a civilization could establish
residence in the asteroid belt and take advantage of the abundanc e of min-
eral resources [25, 26, 27, 28]. Evidence of this type of visitation o n asteroids
or other rocky bodies could be inferred from the discovery of non- terrestrial
mining technology or industrial byproducts such as nuclear waste. Alterna-
tively, extraterrestrial life could be so diﬀerent from our own biolog y that it
has escaped our notice; perhaps extraterrestrial microbes eve n exist today
on Earth in a shadow biosphere parallel to our own [36, 37]! Signature s of
extraterrestrials such as these are certainly interesting and wor th keeping
in mind as Solar System exploration progresses. However, non-tec hnological
signatures require that extraterrestrials have physically visited t he Solar Sys-
tem, while the technological signature of an NTA could come from a dis tant
extraterrestrial civilization that has only gazed at Earth from afa r. Although
we cannot preclude the possibility that extraterrestrials have visit ed the So-
lar System, for the purposes of this analysis we will limit our considera tion
4
to signatures such as NTAs that could arise from remote exploratio n.
3. Probabilistic Analysis
So far no search of the Solar System has found unequivocal eviden ce of
NTAs, but few, if any, of these attempts would be capable of detec ting a
1 to 10 meter probe. If NTAs do exist in near-Earth orbit, on the mo on,
or other nearby locations, then they probably still remain undetec table by
humans. Because we cannot know if NTAs exist until we actually dete ct one,
it is therefore of interest to determine how sure we can be that we s hould
have already found any NTAs lurking in the Solar System. Or, to put it
another way: based on our searches to-date, how conﬁdent are we that the
Solar System is free of NTAs?
We approach this problem by considering a search for NTAs within a
volume V . We deﬁne the hypothesis H = “NTAs are present within a volume
V ” so that its logical complement is ¯H = “NTAs are not present within a
volume V ”. We also represent incomplete and partial searches of V with the
sub-sampled volume ¯VR = “A sub-sampling of V at spatial resolution R”
that ﬁnds no NTAs. Using these statements, we can describe the c onditional
probability p( ¯H| ¯VR) as the probability that no NTAs exist within V given a
null search ¯VR of any geometry. Following [38], we can expand this probability
using Bayes’ theorem:
p( ¯H| ¯VR) = 1 − p(H| ¯VR) (1)
= 1 − p( ¯VR|H) p(H)
p( ¯VR) (2)
= 1 − p( ¯VR|H) p(H)
p( ¯VR| ¯H)p( ¯H) + p( ¯VR|H)p(H) (3)
= 1 − p( ¯VR|H)
Θ( H)p( ¯VR| ¯H) + p( ¯VR|H) , (4)
where Θ( H) = p( ¯H)/p(H) is the prior odds ratio for our hypothesis. The
prior odds ratio represents a likelihood ratio of the probability of ¯H to the
probability of H and can be interpreted as our bias toward a galaxy teeming
with intelligence (low prior odds) or a galaxy in which life is rare (high prior
odds). Thus we see that our expression for p( ¯H| ¯VR) depends on both the
prior odds and the conditional probability p( ¯VR|H).
5
The term p( ¯VR|H) represents the probability that a search ¯VR returns
null results when in fact NTAs actually do exist within V . One case in which
this may occur is if the spatial resolution R (with dimensions of length)
in the search ¯VR is too coarse to resolve an NTA of diameter d; that is, if
R > d . Here we are guaranteed to miss any NTAs because their small size
eludes observation. On the other hand, if we somehow manage to co mpletely
survey our entire volume V so that ¯VR/V = 1, then we are guaranteed to
ﬁnd any NTAs that are present so long as R ≤ d. We can use these limiting
cases to write an equation for p( ¯VR|H) as
p( ¯VR|H) =
{
1 − ¯VR/V for R ≤ d
1.0 for R > d . (5)
This allows us to express our conditional probability p( ¯VR|H) in terms of the
relative volume searched ¯VR/V and the relative size of our search resolution
R to the NTA diameter d.
3.1. Equal Prior Odds
We can simplify our analysis by considering the case of equal prior odd s
such that Θ( H) = 1. We do not know values for the probabilities p(H)
and p( ¯H), so perhaps it is reasonable to assume that p(H) = p( ¯H) = 0 .5. In
other words, it is just as likely as not that NTAs are present within a v olume.
With this simplifying approximation, Eq. (4) reduces to
p( ¯H| ¯VR) = 1
1 + p( ¯VR|H), (6)
where we have used p( ¯VR| ¯H) = 1, which is true by deﬁnition (because a null
search is guaranteed if there are no NTAs within the volume). Combin ing
Eqs. (6) and (5), we ﬁnd that
p( ¯H| ¯VR) =
{
1
2− ¯VR/V for R ≤ d
0.5 for R > d
. (7)
In the case of equal prior odds, we ﬁnd that our search-based co nﬁdence
in the non-existence of NTAs is related to the ratio of sampled volume ¯VR
at suﬃcient resolution R ≤ d to the total volume V . Thus, as we improve
our search by increasing the amount of sampled volume ¯VR, we will steadily
increase the likelihood p( ¯H| ¯VR) that there are no NTAs within V — that is,
unless we happen to discover NTAs in the process.
6
3.2. Non-Equal Prior Odds
We can also consider the more general case where Θ( H) ̸= 1. Non-equal
prior odds means that we have some reason to prefer one of our hy potheses
over the other; that is, there is a bias one way or the other that NT As are
present within a volume. Substitution of (5) into (4) gives us
p( ¯H| ¯VR) =
{
1 − 1− ¯VR/V
Θ( H)+1− ¯VR/V for R ≤ d
1 − 1
Θ( H)+1 for R > d . (8)
This relationship is more complex than our assumption of equal prior o dds
but allows us to consider cases where p(H) > p ( ¯H), so that Θ( H) < 1 (i.e.
the probability of NTAs is high), or p(H) < p ( ¯H), so that Θ( H) > 1 (i.e.
the probability of NTAs is low). We calculate this likelihood p( ¯H| ¯VR) as a
function of both Θ( H) and the ratio ¯VR/V and show the results in Fig. 1.
Along the dashed horizontal line in Fig. 1 where Θ( H) = 1, we recover
the expression in Eq. 7 so that p( ¯H| ¯VR) = 0 .5 at ¯VR/V = 0 with a steady
increase as the search ¯VR/V improves. Below this line, as prior odds Θ( H)
decreases, we see that the likelihood p( ¯H| ¯VR) also decreases. This behavior
is expected because low prior odds implies a high probability of NTAs in th e
Solar System. Similarly, the likelihood p( ¯H| ¯VR) increases above the dashed
line as prior odds Θ( H) increases becuase higher prior odds correspond to a
low probability of NTAs. This likelihood p( ¯H| ¯VR) also increases as the search
ratio ¯VR/V increases, which again is consistent with our expectations that
a more comprehensive search should increase our conﬁdence that the Solar
System is absent of NTAs.
4. Discussion
Our probabilistic analysis illustrates the diﬃculty in asserting that the
Solar System is absent of NTAs. Indeed, to search the entire Solar System at
the required spatial resolution to discover a 1 to 10 meter probe wo uld be a
monumental task, analogous to ﬁnding a needle in a thousand-ton h aystack
(which is enough to cover an American football ﬁeld in a layer three fe et
deep). However, our volume V need not be restricted to the entire Solar
System and can represent any planet or volume in space. This allows u s to
use our probabilistic method to estimate our certainty that system s such as
Earth, the moon, or Mars are devoid of NTAs.
7
 0 
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1 
 1.2
 1.4
 1.6
 1.8
 2 
 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 
 0.9 0.8 
 0.7 
 0.6
 0.5
 0.4
 0.3
 0.2
0.1
search completeness VR / V 
prio
r odd
s 
Θ(H) 
↑ NTAs less likely 
↓ NTAs more likely 
Figure 1: The probability p( ¯H| ¯VR) that NTAs are absent within a volume as a function
of prior odds Θ( H) and the search completeness ratio ¯VR/V . The dashed horiziontal line
shows the case of equal prior odds Θ( H) = 1.
8
The surface of Earth is one of the few places in the Solar System tha t
has been almost completely examined at a spatial resolution of less th an
1 meter. This is mostly because humans have spread across most of the
surface of Earth and would therefore have noticed any NTAs that might exist.
(Remaining consistent with the testable zoo hypothesis discussed a bove, we
do not consider NTAs that have been camouﬂaged so that their det ection
is nearly impossible.) It may be a stretch to claim that the entire surfa ce
of Earth, including land and oceans, has really been searched at a su ﬃcient
resolution to discover NTAs; after all, certain caves, jungles, and deserts
as well as the complete surface of the ocean may not have been sco ured
well enough. Additionally, the subsurface of Earth has not been ex plored
anywhere near the resolution to discover such NTAs, if in fact they could
reside in the deep ocean or underground. However, nearby objec ts as small
as 1 meter with Earth-bound trajectories should be detectable by orbital
debris tracking systems. For the Earth volume, we can consider ou r search
ratio as being in the range V /¯VR ≈ 0.7 to 1 .0, which according to Fig. 1 may
correspond to a probability p( ¯H| ¯VR) ≳ 0.75 that Earth contains no NTAs —
at least where prior odds Θ( H) ≈ 1. This may be somewhat less than total
certainty, but Earth is still the best-searched volume in the Solar S ystem and
gives us the highest conﬁdence that NTAs have not yet arrived.
One possible location for NTAs is the surface of the moon [29, 30]. The
surface of the moon has been partially explored by human astronau ts and
lunar landers at a suﬃcient resolution to discover any NTAs, but this in-situ
survey is nowhere near complete. Other parts of the lunar surfac e have been
mapped by orbiting satellites, and the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbite r (LRO)
is currently mapping the surface of the moon at a resolution as low as 0.5
meters [39, 40]. We can therefore consider our search ratio for th e moon as
V /¯VR ≲ 0.5, which corresponds to a probability p( ¯H| ¯VR) ≲ 0.65 that the
moon is absent of NTAs. As the LRO mission continues, surface maps of
the moon will improve in resolution and further increase this probabilit y.
It is not necessarily obvious, though, that a high-resolution image o f the
lunar surface will automatically reveal any NTAs present; after all, a 10
meter satellite and a 10 meter boulder would appear similar in an LRO
image. However, it has been suggested that NTAs might be identiﬁed by their
emission of anomalous microwave or infrared radiation [8], so the disco very of
an unexpected temperature anomaly on the lunar surface could be a signature
worthy of further investigation. Likewise, the chemical compositio n of an
NTA would presumably be diﬀerent from the surrounding lunar regolit h,
9
so an anomalous spectral signature on the lunar surface could also be a
potential indicator of an NTA. This suggests a method by which surf ace
temperatures and mineralogies, such as those available from the LR O Diviner
Lunar Radiometer Experiment [41, 42, 43], could be examined for an omalies
that are consistent with the presence of an NTA. Such an analysis is worthy
of future investigation but is beyond the scope of the present stu dy.
Portions of the surface of Mars have been explored by the Mars Ex -
ploration Rover (MER) missions and other Martian landers at a suﬃcie nt
resolution, but much less so than the moon. Mars-orbiting satellites likewise
have improved our mapping of the planet’s surface, but this is only en ough
to slightly raise our conﬁdence that Mars is absent of NTAs. We can c onsider
our search ratio for Mars as V /¯VR ≲ 0.1, which corresponds to a probabil-
ity p( ¯H| ¯VR) of about 0 .5 or lower that Mars is absent of NTAs. Continued
Mars exploration by landers and rovers, as well as increased resolu tion on
Mars-orbiting satellites, will slowly increase our understanding of th e features
of Mars’ surface and will eventually permit a more quantitative analy sis to
search for spectroscopic or thermal anomalies as described abov e.
Other possible locations for NTAs within the Solar System include the
Earth-moon Lagrange points, the asteroid belt, and the Kuiper be lt. The
ﬁve Lagrange points between any two orbiting bodies describe equilib rium
gravitational positions where a satellite could in principle maintain an or bit
without additional energy expenditure. However, radiation press ure would
destabilize an orbit for a 1 to 10 meter object, so any active NTA wou ld
require some propulsion system in order to maintain a Lagrange point orbit.
The asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter also provides numerous hiding
places and mineral resources for NTAs, while the more distant Kuipe r belt
oﬀers a sparser distribution of rocky and icy bodies. At increasing d istances
from the Sun, none of these regions have been searched well enou gh to dis-
cover NTAs. In these cases, our search ratio would be at most V /¯VR ≲ 10− 3
or lower so that we have almost no conﬁdence that NTAs are absent in the
Solar System. Indeed, this point resonates with the basic message of our ar-
gument: searches to date of the vast Solar System are suﬃciently incomplete
that we cannot rule out the possibility that NTAs are present and ma y even
be observing us.
10
5. Conclusion
If other technological civilizations do in fact exist in the Milky Way, the n
we must acknowledge the possibility that they may have chosen to re motely
explore our Solar System using unpiloted probes. Such probes are b eing
considered for human exploration of nearby star systems and wou ld have a
limiting size of 1 to 10 meters. Although we may be able to rule out the
surface of Earth as a site that currently harbors these NTAs, th e rest of
the Solar System has not been explored at a suﬃcient resolution to d iscover
these probes, if in fact they do exist. Continued exploration of the lunar and
Martian surfaces will slowly increase our conﬁdence in the absence o f NTAs,
as will other Solar System missions that closely examine planetary bod ies
(e.g. the Huygens probe landing on Titan), gravitationally stable Lag range
points [44, 45], or asteroid debris belts [28]. Analysis of data from orb iting
satellites, such as the LRO, may also help to constrain this probability by
searching for thermal or compositional anomalies that are consist ent with the
presence of an NTA. Nevertheless, the vastness of space implies t hat it will
take some time before even nearby objects can be conclusively con sidered
devoid of NTAs.
In presenting this analysis, we do not intend to argue that the sear ch for
NTAs in our Solar System should be given any sort of preference in fa vor of
other, more conventional astronomical missions. Our intention is t o present
a framework by which we can estimate the completeness of our sear ch for
NTAs, which will inevitably increase as we continue to explore the moon ,
Mars, and other nearby regions of space. The discovery of extra terrestrial
technology would certainly be one of the most signiﬁcant ﬁndings in hu man
history; for even if this technology were non-functional, it would giv e us some
certainty that life — and intelligence — has developed elsewhere. With s o
many places for a such small observational probe to hide in our own b ackyard,
we may as well keep our eyes open.
Acknowledgments
We thank Michael Busch, Seth Baum, and an anonymous reviewer fo r
helpful suggestions that strengthened this paper. No funding wa s used for
this research.
11
References
[1] R. N. Bracewell, Communications from superior galactic communitie s,
Nature 186 (1960) 670–671.
[2] G. Cocconi, P. Morrison, Searching for interstellar communicatio ns,
Nature 184 (1959) 844–846.
[3] D. J. Des Marais, M. O. Harwit, K. W. Jucks, J. F. Kasting, D. N. C .
Lin, J. I. Lunine, J. Schneider, S. Seager, W. A. Traub, N. J. Woolf ,
Remote sensing of planetary properties and biosignatures on extr asolar
terrestrial planets, Astrobiology 2 (2002) 153–181.
[4] G. L. Matloﬀ, Deep-space probes, Springer, 2000.
[5] R. Bjork, Exploring the galaxy using space probes, Internation al Journal
of Astrobiology 6 (2007) 89–93.
[6] C. Cotta, A. Morales, A computational analysis of galactic explor ation
with space probes: Implications for the fermi paradox, Journal o f the
British Interplanetary Society 62 (2009) 82–88.
[7] R. A. Freitas, The search for extraterrestrial artifacts (se ta), Journal of
the British Interplanetary Society 36 (1983) 501–506.
[8] B. Cornet, S. L. Stride, Solar system seti using radio telescope arrays,
Contact in Context 1 (2003) v1i2/s3eti–ata.pdf.
[9] M. H. Hart, An explanation for the absence of extraterrestria ls on earth,
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society 16 (1975) 1 28–135.
[10] G. D. Brin, The great silence - the controversy concerning ext raterres-
trial intelligent life, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical S ociety
24 (1983) 283–309.
[11] S. Webb, If the Universe is Teeming with Aliens–where is Everybod y?:
Fifty Solutions to the Fermi Paradox and the Problem of Extraterr estrial
Life, Springer, 2002.
[12] M. M. Cirkovic, Fermi’s paradox-the last challenge for copernica nism?,
Serbian Astronomical Journal 178 (2009) 1–20.
12
[13] P. D. Ward, D. Brownlee, Rare Earth: Why Complex Life is Uncomm on
in the Universe, Springer, 2000.
[14] I. S. Shklovskii, C. Sagan, Intelligent Life in the Universe, Holden -Day,
1966.
[15] S. A. Kaplan, Extraterrestrial Civilizations: Problems of Inter stellar
Communication, Israel Program for Scientiﬁc Translations, Jerus alem,
1971.
[16] C. Sagan, Communication with Extraterrestrial Intelligence (C ETI),
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1973.
[17] S. von Hoerner, Population explosion and interstellar expansion , Journal
of the British Interplanetary Society 28 (1975) 691–712.
[18] W. I. Newman, C. Sagan, Galactic civilizations: Population dynamic s
and interstellar diﬀusion, Icarus 46 (1981) 293–327.
[19] J. D. Haqq-Misra, S. D. Baum, The sustainability solution to the f ermi
paradox, Journal of the British Interplanetary Society 62 (2009 ) 47–51.
[20] J. A. Ball, The zoo hypothesis, Icarus 19 (1973) 347–349.
[21] J. W. Deardorﬀ, Examination of the embargo hypothesis as an e xplana-
tion for the great silence, Journal of the British Interplanetary S ociety
40 (1987) 373–379.
[22] M. J. Fogg, Temporal aspects of the interaction among the ﬁr st galactic
civilizations: The ”interdict hypothesis”, Icarus 69 (1987) 370–38 4.
[23] S. Baxter, The planetarium hypothesis: A resolution of the fer mi para-
dox, Journal of the British Interplanetary Society 54 (2001) 210 –216.
[24] A. Tough, Small smart interstellar probes, Journal of the Brit ish Inter-
planetary Society 51 (1998) 167–174.
[25] M. D. Papagiannis, Are we all alone, or could they be in the astero id
belt, Quart. J. Roy. Astr. Soc 19 (1978) 277–281.
[26] C. Kecskes, The possibility of ﬁnding traces of extraterrestr ial intel-
ligence on asteroids, Journal of the British Interplanetary Societ y 51
(1998) 175–179.
13
[27] C. Kecskes, Scenarios which may lead to the rise of an asteroid- based
technical civilisation, Acta Astronautica 50 (2002) 569–577.
[28] D. H. Forgan, M. Elvis, Extrasolar asteroid mining as forensic ev idence
for extraterrestrial intelligence, International Journal of Ast robiology
(in press).
[29] A. V. Arkhipov, F. G. Graham, Lunar seti: a justiﬁcation, in: Th e
Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) in the Optical Sp ectrum
II, volume 2704 of Proc. SPIE , San Jose, CA, p. 150. Proceedings of
SPIE.
[30] A. V. Arkhipov, Earth-moon system as a collector of alien artef acts,
Journal of the British Interplanetary Society 51 (1998) 181–184 .
[31] R. Burke-Ward, Possible existence of extra-terrestrial tec hnology in the
solar system, Journal of the British Interplanetary Society 53 (2 000)
1–12.
[32] J. Tarter, The search for extraterrestrial intelligence (set i), Annual
Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 39 (2001) 511–548.
[33] S. D. Baum, J. D. Haqq-Misra, S. D. Domagal-Goldman, Would con tact
with extraterrestrials beneﬁt or harm humanity? a scenario analys is,
Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 2114–2129.
[34] R. N. Bracewell, The galactic club: Intelligent life in outer space, W H
Freeman and Co., San Francisco, CA, 1975.
[35] D. H. Forgan, Spatio-temporal constraints on the zoo hypot hesis, and
the breakdown of total hegemony, International Journal of As trobiology
(in press).
[36] P. C. W. Davies, S. A. Benner, C. E. Cleland, C. H. Lineweaver, C . P.
McKay, F. Wolfe-Simon, Signatures of a shadow biosphere, Astrob iology
9 (2009) 241–249.
[37] P. Davies, The Eerie Silence, Houghton Miﬄin Harcourt, New York ,
2010.
[38] M. H. P. Ambaum, Signiﬁcance tests in climate science, Journal o f
Climate 23 (2010) 5927–5932.
14
[39] G. Chin, S. Brylow, M. Foote, J. Garvin, J. Kasper, J. Keller, M. Lit-
vak, I. Mitrofanov, D. Paige, K. Raney, Lunar reconnaissance or biter
overview: The instrument suite and mission, Space Science Reviews 1 29
(2007) 391–419.
[40] M. Robinson, S. Brylow, M. Tschimmel, D. Humm, S. Lawrence,
P. Thomas, B. Denevi, E. Bowman-Cisneros, J. Zerr, M. Ravine,
M. Caplinger, F. Ghaemi, J. Schaﬀner, M. Malin, P. Mahanti, A. Bar-
tels, J. Anderson, T. Tran, E. Eliason, A. McEwen, E. Turtle, B. Jo lliﬀ,
H. Hiesinger, Lunar reconnaissance orbiter camera (lroc) instrum ent
overview, Space Science Reviews 150 (2010) 81–124.
[41] T. D. Glotch, P. G. Lucey, J. L. Bandﬁeld, B. T. Greenhagen, I . R.
Thomas, R. C. Elphic, N. Bowles, M. B. Wyatt, C. C. Allen, K. D.
Hanna, Highly silicic compositions on the moon, Science 329 (2010)
1510–1513.
[42] B. T. Greenhagen, P. G. Lucey, M. B. Wyatt, T. D. Glotch, C. C .
Allen, J. A. Arnold, J. L. Bandﬁeld, N. E. Bowles, K. L. D. Hanna,
P. O. Hayne, Global silicate mineralogy of the moon from the diviner
lunar radiometer, Science 329 (2010) 1507–1509.
[43] P. O. Hayne, B. T. Greenhagen, M. C. Foote, M. A. Siegler, A. R .
Vasavada, D. A. Paige, Diviner lunar radiometer observations of th e
lcross impact, Science 330 (2010) 477–479.
[44] R. A. Freitas, F. Valdes, A search for natural or artiﬁcial obj ects located
at the earth-moon libration points, Icarus 42 (1980) 442–447.
[45] F. Valdes, R. A. Freitas, A search for objects near the earth -moon
lagrangian points, Icarus 53 (1983) 453–457.
15