Draft version July 23, 2024
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX631
The Solar System Notification Alert Processing System (SNAPS): Asteroid Population Outlier
Detection
Michael Gowanlock
 ,1, 2 David E. Trilling
 ,2, 1 Daniel Kramer
 ,1, 2 Maria Chernyavskaya
 ,2 and
Andrew McNeill3
1School of Informatics, Computing, and Cyber Systems
Northern Arizona University
P.O. Box 5693
Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA
2Department of Astronomy and Planetary Science
Northern Arizona University
P.O. Box 6010
Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA
3Department of Physics
Lehigh University
16 Memorial Drive East
Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA
ABSTRACT
The Solar System Notification Alert Processing System (SNAPS) is a ZTF and Rubin Observatory
alert broker that will send alerts to the community regarding interesting events in the Solar System.
SNAPS is actively monitoring Solar System objects and one of its functions is to compare objects
(primarily main belt asteroids) to one another to find those that are outliers relative to the population.
In this paper, we use the SNAPShot1 dataset which contains 31,693 objects from ZTF and derive
outlier scores for each of these objects. SNAPS employs an unsupervised approach; consequently, to
derive outlier rankings for each object, we propose four different outlier metrics such that we can
explore variants of outlier scores and add confidence to outlier rankings. We also provide outlier scores
for each object in each permutation of 15 feature spaces, between 2 and 15 features, which yields 32,752
total feature spaces. We show that we can derive population outlier rankings each month at Rubin
Observatory scale using 4 ×Nvidia A100 GPUs, and present several avenues of scientific investigation
that can be explored using population outlier detection.
Keywords: Asteroids (72) — Small Solar System bodies (1469) — Sky surveys (1464) — Astroinfor-
matics (78) — GPU computing (1969)
1. INTRODUCTION
The Rubin Observatory’s Legacy Survey of Space and
Time (LSST; Ivezi´ c et al. 2019) will have an major im-
pact on time-domain astronomy. To prepare for this
large all-sky survey, many researchers have been de-
signing data processing pipelines (van Roestel et al.
2021; Coughlin et al. 2021) for precursor surveys, such
as the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF; Bellm et al.
Corresponding author: Michael Gowanlock
michael.gowanlock@nau.edu
2018). While ZTF generates roughly a tenth of the
LSST data volume, it and other LSST precursor sur-
veys such as the Asteroid Terrestrial-impact Last Alert
System (ATLAS; Tonry et al. 2018), Automated Sur-
vey for SuperNovae (ASAS-SN; Shappee et al. 2014),
and the Catalina Real-Time Transient Survey (CRTS;
Drake et al. 2014) are instrumental for ensuring that the
necessary preparations have been made to maximize the
scientific return of LSST. Several alert brokers are cur-
rently being developed to prepare for LSST including
Fink (M¨ oller et al. 2020), ALeRCE (F¨ orster et al. 2021;
arXiv:2405.20176v2 [astro-ph.EP] 21 Jul 2024
2 Gowanlock et al.
S´ anchez-S´ aez et al. 2021), ANTARES (Matheson et al.
2021), Lasair (Smith et al. 2019), among others 1.
Recent LSST preparation efforts have focused on clas-
sifying astrophysical sources (Soraisam et al. 2020). In
the context of Solar System science, the vast majority
of objects are asteroids, and so classification is less im-
portant in this context (e.g., classifying an asteroid vs.
comet is not very illuminating). Instead, a major focus
of the Solar System community is to detect interesting
transient events in addition to detecting asteroids that
are different relative to the population.
In this paper, we present our population outlier de-
tection software infrastructure for the Solar System No-
tification Alert Processing System ( SNAPS). Trilling
et al. (2023) presented the first SNAPS data release
(SNAPShot1), which contains 31,693 asteroids from ZTF.
Each asteroid has been observed at least 51 times and
has been assigned a rotation period and light curve am-
plitude among other derived properties. Beyond Solar
System science, ZTF has been similarly used for deriving
the rotation periods of fully convective stars (Lu et al.
2022). It is clear that the time-domain capabilities of
new observatories are revolutionizing our understanding
of the Solar System and beyond.
At present, SNAPS is operating as a downstream
broker from ANTARES (Matheson et al. 2021), and
will continue to do so in the LSST era (more detail on
SNAPS can be found in Trilling et al. 2023). Population
outlier detection refers to detecting asteroids that have
interesting properties relative to the other asteroids in
the database. Because we have few examples of outlying
objects in the Solar System, we use an unsupervised ma-
chine learning approach that detects interesting objects
without the use of binary classification labels (i.e., inlier
vs. outlier). Our approach ranks the objects by assign-
ing them an outlier score, and this will allow users of
SNAPS to customize the number of objects that they
may want to investigate further; for instance, a user may
find an interesting object and then use telescopic follow-
up observations for additional analysis. Furthermore,
we use an ensemble of algorithms and outlier detection
metrics to guide the search for outliers, as the methods
may disagree on which objects have the highest outlier
scores.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 de-
scribes the datasets used throughout the paper. Sec-
tion 3 presents the population outlier detection system.
Section 4 highlights key results by deriving population
1 For an update-to-date list of LSST alert brokers, see the following
URL: https://www.lsst.org/scientists/alert-brokers.
outlier scores for objects in our ZTF catalog, in addition
to showing system performance using this catalog, and
expected performance at LSST scale. Section 5 shows
example avenues of scientific investigation that can be
carried out using the system. Finally, Section 6 discusses
population outlier detection in the time-domain era of
astronomy and future work directions.
2. DATASETS
In this section, we describe the datasets used in our
evaluation, including SNAPShot1 (Trilling et al. 2023),
which is a ZTF dataset. We also outline a synthetic
dataset that is used to assess the performance of the
system at LSST scale.
2.1. SNAPShot1
The first SNAPS data release is SNAPShot1, and
a detailed description of this data release is outlined
in Trilling et al. (2023). This data release contains
|D| = 31 , 693 ZTF asteroids that have at least 51 ob-
servations, such that properties can be derived, includ-
ing light curve properties, such as rotation periods and
amplitudes. When we describe the data normalization
procedure in the next section, we will summarize the
properties of each asteroid.
SNAPShot1 includes data from the NEOWISE cata-
log (Mainzer et al. 2019), and we used theNEOWISE DIAM
and NEOWISE VALBEDO features as those properties may
be useful for detecting outliers. However, some of the
ZTF objects were not included in the NEOWISE cata-
log; consequently, in cases where values were undefined
(using NaN values), we replaced those values with the
mean of the distribution. This ensures that those ob-
jects with undefined values are considered typical, and
therefore, will not be ranked as an outlier based on the
NEOWISE DIAM and NEOWISE VALBEDO properties.
2.2. LSST Synthetic Dataset ( LSST5M)
The LSST catalog will contain roughly 5 million as-
teroids at the end of the 10 year survey. To examine the
performance of the system at LSST scale, we generate a
synthetic dataset with 5 million objects with the same
d = 15 dimensions used for SNAPShot1 described in Ta-
ble 1 and denote this dataset as LSST5M. We replicate
the features of each object in SNAPShot1 and then add
noise to the values of each feature. The noise added to
each feature is drawn from a Gaussian distribution us-
ing µ = 0 where the standard deviation, σ, is that of
each feature in SNAPShot1 (as shown in Table 1). While
we do not expect that this dataset will be exceedingly
AASTeX v6.3.1 Sample article 3
T able 1.Features used for outlier detection in SNAPShot1. The table shows each feature and description. The text describes that NEOWISE DIAM
and NEOWISE VALBEDO do not provide values for all ZTF objects; therefore, those objects that are missing values, are replaced by the mean of
the distribution of those features. The mean and standard deviation ( µ, σ) of the features before normalization are shown as they are used to
generate a synthetic dataset to assess population outlier detection at LSST scale.
Feature Description NaN to Mean Derived µ σ
G BR The Bowell G value in the r filter (Bowell et al. 1989) ✓ 0.226 0.234
H BR The absolute magnitude of the object, in the Bowell HG system, in the r filter ✓ 14.108 1.877
G BG The Bowell G value in the g filter ✓ 0.216 0.255
H BG The absolute magnitude of the object, in the Bowell HG system, in the g filter ✓ 14.685 1.902
LCAMP The amplitude of the light curve ✓ 0.322 0.300
ROTPER The rotation period (in hours) of the object ✓ 101.150 643.548
GRCOLOR The g − r color of the object ✓ 0.596 0.146
SIGGRCOLOR The 1σ error of the g − r color ✓ 0.008 0.006
PERIPOWER The normalized Lomb-Scargle Periodogram power of the rotation period ✓ 0.514 0.289
NEOWISE DIAM The diameter of the object calculated by the NEOWise Survey ✓ 8.263 15.675
NEOWISE V ALBEDO The albedo in the V-band, calculated by the NEOWise Survey ✓ 0.196 0.185
MPC A The object’s semi-major axis in AU 2.698 1.837
MPC E The object’s eccentricity 0.144 0.100
MPC I The object’s inclination in degrees 9.660 8.917
HA VG The object’s average absolute magnitude ✓ 14.045 1.830
representative of the LSST catalog, it is sufficient for
testing the performance of population outlier detection
with SNAPS at LSST scale (see Section 4.5).
3. FINDING OUTLYING ASTEROIDS: AN
UNSUPER VISED APPROACH
The two major categories of machine learning are su-
pervised and unsupervised learning (Zhou et al. 2017).
Supervised learning takes as input feature vectors with
class labels and attempts to learn the function that max-
imizes classifying objects with the correct class label. In
contrast, unsupervised learning does not use class labels
and instead attempts to identify patterns in data.
Other time-domain alert brokers will classify sources
outside of the Solar System, such as Fink (M¨ oller et al.
2020), ALeRCE (F¨ orster et al. 2021; S´ anchez-S´ aez et al.
2021), and ANTARES (Matheson et al. 2021). Regard-
ing the Solar System, the alert broker Fink (M¨ oller et al.
2020) has been used to identify new candidate Solar Sys-
tem objects (Le Montagner et al. 2023), and they also
design a new phase function model that corrects for the
geometric properties of asteroids, including spin coor-
dinates, to better characterize sparse photometry from
ZTF (Carry et al. 2024). Unlike much of the prior work,
source classification is not the target of our alert broker;
rather, we are interested in identifying objects exhibit-
ing interesting behavior either relative to its prior ob-
servational record, or as compared to the greater popu-
lation of objects. Here, we refer to the former as real-
time and the latter as population outlier detection, re-
spectively. Since there are very few known examples of
small bodies exhibiting interesting/transient behavior,
we are focused on unsupervised approaches to outlier
detection, as we do not have sufficient examples of out-
lier activity needed to train supervised approaches. Fur-
thermore, since LSST is expected to detect many new
objects which may exhibit exotic properties for which
we have no known examples, we do not want to inad-
vertently exclude these objects from being detected as
outliers, which may occur if a supervised approach is
used.
3.1. Terminology
Because this paper includes material from several
fields of computer science and astronomy, we outline ter-
minology that is used throughout the paper as follows.
• Feature vector/point: A feature vector is a set of
numerical attributes that define an object, e.g.,
an asteroid (example properties include color, ro-
tation period, and albedo). Because these feature
vectors occupy a position in a d dimensional fea-
ture space, they are also called points. Through-
out this paper, we refer to asteroid properties as
feature vectors and points.
• Dataset/database: A collection of feature vectors
denoted as D. The cardinality of the set (number
of objects/asteroids) is denoted as |D|.
• Feature space: The space encompassing all of the
feature vectors (or points) in the dataset, D.
4 Gowanlock et al.
• Dimensionality: The number of features included
in each feature vector ( d). We examine d ≤ 15.
• Self-join: Performing a search on all feature vec-
tors within a dataset ( D) as compared to each
other.
• Distance Similarity Search: This is also known as
a range query or a radius search, where a search
is conducted around a query point using a radius
ϵ and all neighbors that are found within ϵ are
returned. A distance similarity self-join performs
distance similarity searches on all points in the
dataset, D.
• k-Nearest Neighbor Search: Finding the closest k
points within the feature space from a given query
point. A kNN self-join performs k-nearest neigh-
bor searches on all points in a dataset, D.
• Multi-GPU Speedup: A performance measure that
describes the scalability of a GPU algorithm that
uses multiple GPUs. It is the ratio of the time to
compute on one GPU (T1) to TnGP U, where TnGP U
is the time to compute on nGP U GPUs. In this
paper we evaluate up to nGP U = 4 and so the
maximum possible speedup is 4 ×.
• Multi-GPU Parallel Efficiency: A performance
measure that describes how well a resource is uti-
lized (the GPU in this context). It is the multi-
GPU speedup above divided by nGP U, and the
maximum value is 1.0 (or 100%).
3.2. Background and GPU-Accelerated Outlier
Detection Algorithms
Many of the pioneering efforts on outlier detection use
an intuitive notion of an outlier, which defines an out-
lier as having a large fraction of the dataset exterior to
a search distance around a given point (Knorr & Ng
1997). Subsequent efforts have focused on the notion
of neighbors around a point, where the definition of an
outlier is a function of the properties of its closest neigh-
bors (Campos et al. 2016). This second class of algo-
rithms that use k nearest neighbors have been shown to
outperform other unsupervised learning methods (Cam-
pos et al. 2016). Given these two major approaches to
outlier detection, we select two methods as follows: (1)
the Distance Similarity Self-Join ( DSSJ), and (2) the
k-Nearest Neighbor Self-Join ( kNNSJ).
The DSSJ operation performs distance similarity
searches on all feature vectors (or points) within a
dataset. Each distance similarity search returns all
points within a search distance, ϵ, of a point. Thus, the
“self-join” refers to searching all points within a dataset
as compared to each other. The k-Nearest Neighbor
Self-Join ( kNNSJ) finds the k nearest neighbors of all
points in a dataset. Compared to DSSJ, which uses a
fixed search radius ϵ, the kNN algorithm employs vary-
ing search radii for each point in the dataset to find at
least k neighbors per point. For example, in a densely
populated region of the data space, the search radius
will be small such that it finds at least k neighbors,
whereas in a sparsely populated region, the search ra-
dius will need to be larger. An example of the DSSJ
and kNNSJ approaches is outlined in Figure 1.
The typical approach for selecting parameters for an
outlier detection algorithm (e.g., k in the kNNSJ ap-
proach) is to use the Receiver Operating Characteristic
(ROC) (Campos et al. 2016). However, ROC requires a
set of labels that define inliers and outliers. Because we
do not have a labeled set of outliers, we elect to use a
different approach. We select a search radius ϵ for DSSJ
and the number of neighbors k for kNNSJ by reaching
a trade-off between overfitting to the local data density
or underfitting to the global data density of each feature
space. While this computation adds additional complex-
ity to the detection of outliers across all of the feature
spaces, it ensures that we are not arbitrarily selecting
parameters ϵ or k.
3.3. Population Outlier Detection and Accelerating
Scientific Discovery
One facet of population outlier detection is the exami-
nation of multi-dimensional feature spaces. The features
must be normalized to ensure that some properties are
not given more weight than others. Otherwise, some
features may dominate the feature space, and obfuscate
other features from contributing to the degree that an
object is considered an outlier. Therefore, we normal-
ized all features to be in the range [0, 1]. We used all of
the SNAPShot1 features outlined in Table 1, where the
non-normalized mean and standard deviation values are
reported.
To address a wide range of science cases, and to accel-
erate the scientific discovery process, we assign objects
an outlier ranking across all permutations of the 15 fea-
ture spaces (Table 1 shows each feature), where the di-
mensionality d ≥ 2. In this context, population outlier
detection serves two purposes: (1) to filter those objects
that are likely to be outliers from the typical popula-
tion of asteroids; and, (2) to accelerate the scientific dis-
covery process by providing additional information that
may be of interest to a researcher.
Regarding (2) above, the notion of accelerating the
scientific discovery process by augmenting a human re-
AASTeX v6.3.1 Sample article 5
(a) (b)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Figure 1. Illustrative example of a d = 2 feature space comparing outlier detection approaches for (a) DSSJ with ϵ = 0.67; (b)
graph representation of kNNSJ with k = 3. (a) The points are shown as black dots, where a fixed radius is drawn around each
point. (b) The kNN graph is shown where a directed edge between two nodes denotes the k = 3 neighbors for each point. Since
k = 3 and there are 10 points, there are a total of 30 directed edges. Colors are used to improve readability in both subfigures.
The DSSJ and kNNSJ approaches will be described in greater detail in Sections 3.5–3.7.
searcher with machine support has been described in
other works which address providing multiple data vari-
ants to a user or guiding the scientific discovery pro-
cess through data prioritization (Wagstaff et al. 2013;
Pankratius et al. 2016). Population outlier detection
across numerous multidimensional feature spaces pro-
vides both data prioritization and variant exploration.
To enable the permutation approach described above,
SNAPS will provide information regarding each per-
mutation of the d = 15 features/dimensions where
d ≥ 2. Therefore, the total number of feature spaces
in SNAPShot1 is as follows:
15X
i=2
15
i

= 32, 752. (1)
Below we describe the methods used for outlier detec-
tion and how we rank each object within each feature
space.
3.4. Outlier Detection Methods and Object Ranking
We present two outlier detection methods each of
which have two different metrics, where each outputs
a ranked list of outlier objects. The ranked list method
allows us to compare the rankings between outlier de-
tection approaches. Because the different outlier detec-
tion methods are likely to return different rankings for
each object, this allows us to have several outlier de-
tection criteria that can be used to determine whether
a given object should be investigated in greater detail.
This may include telescopic follow-up to obtain addi-
tional information about an object. This approach al-
lows SNAPS users to determine their own thresholds
for decision making.
We let the list of ranked objects for a given method
be denoted as R where the rank of object i is denoted as
ri ∈ R where i = 1, . . . ,|D|. Object i with the minimum
ranking value ri ∈ R, argmin( ri ∈ R), has the greatest
probability of being an outlier, whereas the object with
the maximum value, argmax( ri ∈ R) is considered the
most typical object in the feature space. We highlight
that some of the outlier detection methods yield ties
between objects, where two or more objects may be as-
signed the same outlier score, whereas other methods
may not produce ties between object rankings.
3.5. Distance Similarity Self-Join (DSSJ)
The DSSJ method finds all points within a search
radius, ϵ, around each point in a dataset. Intuitively,
points having a significant number of points within ϵ
are considered typical, and those with few points within
ϵ will be considered outliers.
3.5.1. Ranking Metrics
We outline two ranking metrics for DSSJ as follows.
One metric is distance-oblivious where all points within
the search radius, ϵ, of a query point are considered
equal, and thus their distances to the query point are not
included in the ranking. The other metric is distance-
aware where the distances of points to the query point
within the search radius ϵ are considered in the ranking
6 Gowanlock et al.
calculation. These two metrics yield different rankings
for the DSSJ method.
1. Distance-oblivious: The ranking function, R, is
simply a ranking from the fewest to the great-
est number of neighbors each point has within the
search distance ϵ.
2. Distance-aware: The ranking function, R, is a
ranking from the largest mean distance between
an object and its points within ϵ and the smallest
mean distance. Intuitively, if a given point has its
neighbors at large distances, then this implies that
it is an outlier.
3.5.2. Overfitting vs. Underfitting: On The Selection of
The Search Radius ϵ
The selection of ϵ will directly impact the outlier rank-
ing of each object in the dataset. Consider two extremes:
(1) when ϵ ≈ 0, there will be few (if any) neighbors found
within ϵ around a given point/feature vector; and, (2)
as ϵ → ∞each feature vector will find all other feature
vectors in the feature space. Both of these cases are im-
practical for finding outliers. The search radius ϵ must
not be too small such that too few neighbors are found,
while not being too large such that too many neighbors
are found.
Considering the extreme cases above, a small value of
ϵ implies that the local density of a feature vector deter-
mines whether it is an outlier, whereas a large value of
ϵ implies that the global density makes this determina-
tion. Thus, in the former case, the data will be overfit to
the local density, and in the latter case, the data will be
underfit. Here, we provide a simple solution for select-
ing ϵ, which considers the pragmatic nature of finding
outlying objects in the context of large-scale astronomi-
cal surveys, by reaching a trade-off between underfitting
and overfitting.
Consider two ranked lists RA and RB, and n which
refers to some top fraction of the outliers in each list.
In this paper we set n = 0.01|D| (1% of the dataset). If
the top-n outlying objects in RA and RB are permuted
and a given object in RA has a similar position in RB,
then the object has been found to be an outlier in both
ranked lists. Likewise, objects that are not within the
top-n objects in both lists are inliers, and are thus typ-
ical objects in the dataset.
Given the above, we compare the similarity of two
ranked lists of outliers, RA and RB, by counting the to-
tal fraction, f ∈ [0, 1], of feature vectors belonging in the
top-n in both lists, or more formally their intersection:
f = |RA ∩ RB| ·n−1, (2)
where ri ∈ RA < nand ri ∈ RB < n.
To reach a trade-off between underfitting and overfit-
ting, we search a grid of evenly spacedϵ values, G, where
each value of ϵ is denoted as ϵj where j = 1, 2, . . . ,|G|,
and ϵj ∈ [ϵmin, ϵmax]. ϵmin and ϵmax refer to the
minimum and maximum values of ϵ searched respec-
tively, and their selection will be described later in Sec-
tion 3.5.3.
For each value of ϵj, we derive a corresponding rank-
ing of outliers, denoted as Rj, where R1 corresponds to
the ranking given by ϵmin and R|G| corresponds to the
ranking given by ϵmax.
ϵmin refers to a small search radius, and thus would
produce a ranked list that overfits the data. Likewise,
ϵmax refers to a large search radius that would underfit
the data. To find a good value of ϵj ∈ [ϵmin, ϵmax], we
compute the similarity (using Equation 2) between R1
and Rj, and the similarity between R|G| and Rj. These
two sets of similarity values, corresponding to those gen-
erated as compared to R1 and R|G| are denoted as U min
and U max, respectively, where |U min| = |U max| = |G|.
Finally, the selected value of ϵ is given by the value
of j that minimizes the difference in similarity values,
which is described below:
ϵselect = ϵargmin(|U min
j −U max
j |). (3)
Illustrative Example: To better illustrate these con-
cepts, consider the following concrete example that com-
putes U min and U max with |G| = 3 (i.e., for illustra-
tive purposes we only consider computing the fraction
of points that match for 3 values of ϵ). Here, |G| = 3 im-
plies that j = 1, 2, 3, and that ϵmin = ϵ1 and ϵmax = ϵ3.
The set of top- n outlying points found by ϵ1, ϵ2 and
ϵ3 are as follows, where we set n = 10. We color code
the points that are common between sets.
ϵ1 = ϵmin = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20}.
ϵ2 = {1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10, 100, 101, 102}.
ϵ3 = ϵmax = {1, 2, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15}.
Using Equation 2 we compute U min and U max which
compares the similarity between the top- n points found
by ϵmin and ϵmax, respectively. Specifically, U min is
computed by comparing ϵ1 to those found by ϵ1 (itself),
ϵ2, and ϵ3. U max is computed by comparing ϵ3 to ϵ1, ϵ2,
and ϵ3 (itself). We highlight that because we compare
the same set to itself, this guarantees that there is a 1.0
match fraction in U min and U max.
Using the example values above and Equation 2 we
compute U min and U max as follows:
U min = {10/10, 4/10, 2/10} = {1.0, 0.4, 0.2}.
U max = {2/10, 5/10, 10/10} = {0.2, 0.5, 1.0}.
Observe that because we compare the smallest value
of ϵ to increasingly larger values of ϵ, the match fraction
AASTeX v6.3.1 Sample article 7
declines. And similarly because we compare the largest
value of ϵ to increasingly larger values of ϵ, the match
fraction increases. This produces an intermediate value
of ϵ that will be selected that reaches a trade-off between
the smallest and largest ϵ values.
Figure 2 shows a plot of this selection procedure on
one of the feature spaces, where (a) shows the number
of neighbors metric, and (b) shows the mean distance
metric (as defined in Section 3.5.1). The plot shows
how similar the rankings are between the ϵ value on
the horizontal axis as compared to the smallest ( U min)
and largest ( U max) ϵ values, which are those that are
expected to overfit and underfit the data. Thus, as ϵ in-
creases, the fraction match for U min decreases, whereas
it increases for U max. A trade-off for ϵselect is reached
where ϵmin < ϵselect < ϵmax. Note that ϵ is evenly sam-
pled on the horizontal axis, which is somewhat mislead-
ing. While the axis shows linear increases in ϵ, this leads
to a non-linear increase in the search volume which is a
function of the data dimensionality. Thus, it is similar
to a logarithmic sampling of the search volume on the
horizontal axis. However, fine-grained sampling is un-
necessary at high values of ϵ, as a large value of ϵselect
is unlikely to minimize the difference between U min
j and
U max
j (Equation 3). We will examine this in more detail
when we show the distribution of ϵselect values across all
feature spaces in Section 4.2.
In this section, we omitted how ϵmin and ϵmax are
selected. In what follows, we describe how we select
these values.
3.5.3. Selection and Computation of the ϵ Search Grid
A major challenge of using DSSJ for outlier detection
is that the values of ϵmin and ϵmax vary for each fea-
ture space. For instance, with lower dimensional data,
the search radius needed to find an average number of
neighbors per point is smaller than for high dimensional
data, as the total volume of the feature space increases
exponentially with the number of dimensions. Further-
more, since the data in the feature spaces are unlikely to
follow any well-defined data distributions, the values of
ϵ need to be found numerically as they cannot be found
analytically.
To address this, we define selectivity which is the mean
number of neighbors within ϵ found in a dataset for
DSSJ (Gallet & Gowanlock 2021). The definition is as
follows: s = (|A| − |D|) · |D|−1 where |D| is the number
of feature vectors and |A| is the total result set size (the
total number of pairs of points within ϵ of each other)
of the self-join operation. Thus, it computes the mean
number of neighbors within ϵ in a dataset, excluding
a point/feature vector finding itself. When processing
0.0360 0.0630 0.0899 0.1168 0.1438 0.1707
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction Match (Number of Neighbors)
Umin : = 0.0360
Umax : = 0.1707
select: 0.1256
(a)
0.0360 0.0630 0.0899 0.1168 0.1438 0.1707
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction Match (Mean Distance)
Umin : = 0.0360
Umax : = 0.1707
select: 0.0716
(b)
Figure 2. Example plots showing computing the best value
of ϵ on an example d = 5 feature space, which are the first
five features in Table 1. U min (U max) refers to the fraction
(f ) of the top- n objects that are in both ranked lists for
ϵ = 0 .0360 ( ϵ = 0 .1707) and the ϵ values on the horizontal
axis. The value of ϵselect is shown as the vertical dotted line
for (a) the number of neighbors metric (distance-oblivious),
and (b) the mean distance metric (distance-aware).
SNAPShot1, we set smin ≈ 0.001|D| and smax ≈ 0.15|D|,
corresponding to a minimum and maximum selectivity
of 0.1% and 15% of the dataset. The results of DSSJ us-
ing these two selectivity values will overfit and underfit
the data respectively.
To find the values ofϵmin and ϵmax that yield the min-
imum and maximum selectivity values described above,
we use the method outlined in Gowanlock (2021) which
was utilized to select a search distanceϵ that finds on av-
erage at least k neighbors for each point in a dataset for
the k-nearest neighbor self-join algorithm. The method
is lightweight as it samples the dataset to first estimate
the mean distance between points in a dataset ( ϵmean),
which is used as the upper bound on a practical search
8 Gowanlock et al.
q ϵ1 ϵ2 ϵ3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Figure 3. Illustration of several result sets for query point
q in a d = 2 feature space, where data points are shown as
black dots and q is shown as the red dot. Three evenly spaced
search distances are shown ( ϵ1, ϵ2, ϵ3), which are illustrated
as circles centered on query point q. The result sets ( A)
are as follows: A(ϵ1) = {2, 3, 6}; A(ϵ2) = {1, 4, 5} ∪A(ϵ1);
A(ϵ3) = {7, 8}∪ A(ϵ1)∪A(ϵ2). Points 9 and 10 are not within
any of the result sets. Thus, the result sets for ϵ1 and ϵ2 can
be directly derived from that of ϵ3.
radius to find ϵmax (or ϵmin). Then, the distances be-
tween a sample of points and points within the dataset
are computed to create a histogram of distances between
points. Using this histogram, a cumulative distance dis-
tribution histogram is computed which yields the re-
lationship between a search distance and the average
number of neighbors that will be found per point in the
dataset. We use this histogram to select the search radii
ϵmin and ϵmax. We refer the reader to Gowanlock (2021)
for further detail.
After ϵmin and ϵmax are found, the ϵ grid G is com-
puted, which is used to derive the rankings for all feature
vectors in the feature space and a value of ϵ is selected
that reaches a trade-off between overfitting and underfit-
ting (Section 3.5.2). We use a computationally efficient
approach to compute the result sets (A) for each ϵj ∈ G.
Consider that the result set A for ϵmax contains all of
the neighbors for lower values of ϵ as well. Thus, we
execute DSSJ once for ϵmax and use this result set to
derive the result sets for all ϵj ∈ G. Figure 3 shows an
example of three search radii (ϵ1, ϵ2, ϵ3), where ϵ1 = ϵmin
and ϵ3 = ϵmax. The figure shows that all result sets for
ϵj < ϵmax can be derived from ϵmax. Thus, indepen-
dently executing DSSJ for all ϵj ∈ G is unnecessary
(and would be very computationally expensive), as the
result set for ϵmax can be filtered to compute the result
sets for smaller search distances.
3.6. k-Nearest Neighbor Self-Join
Intuitively, the kNNSJ algorithm can be employed
for unsupervised outlier detection where an outlier is
characterized as having a significant number of its kNN
located at large distances.
3.6.1. Ranking Metrics
Similarly to DSSJ, the kNNSJ algorithm has two
ranking metrics outlined as follows, where one metric
is distance-oblivious and one is distance-aware. This
yields two different rankings for the kNNSJ method.
1. Distance-oblivious: The ranking function R is sim-
ply an in-degree ranking of the kNN graph (Hau-
tamaki et al. 2004), which is also known as its
reverse nearest neighbors. The in-degree refers to
the number of occurrences that a point is found
within another point’s set of kNN. The fewer the
number of occurrences, the more likely the point
is an outlier.
2. Distance-aware: The ranking function is a ranking
of mean distances between a point and its kNN.
Intuitively, if a given point has its k neighbors at
large distances, then this implies that it is an out-
lier.
3.6.2. On The Selection of k and the kNN Search Grid
For brevity we briefly provide an overview of the pro-
cedure for kNNSJ because the method is analogous to
that of DSSJ. We highlight similarities and key differ-
ences between outlier detection with kNNSJ compared
to DSSJ.
Similarly to DSSJ, the detection of outliers with the
kNNSJ algorithm is dependent on the value of k. Un-
like the DSSJ algorithm, it is more straightforward to
detect outliers with the kNNSJ algorithm because we
do not need to perform a search to find ϵmin and ϵmax.
A low value of k will overfit the data and a large value
of k will underfit the data. We reach a trade-off using
an analogous method to DSSJ which searches a grid
of k values where similarity is measured as compared
to kmin and kmax, and the value of k which reaches
a trade-off between under- and overfitting is selected.
Likewise, we use a computationally efficient approach to
compute the grid of k values, denoted as kj ∈ G where
j = 1, 2, . . . ,|G|. For each value of kj, we compute the
k neighbors for kmax, which contain the neighbors for
all kj < kmax. When processing SNAPShot1, we set
kmin = 2 and kmax = 4096.
Figure 4 shows a plot of this selection procedure on
one of the feature spaces, where (a) shows the in-degree
metric, and (b) shows the mean distance metric (as de-
fined in Section 3.6.1). The plot shows how similar
AASTeX v6.3.1 Sample article 9
the rankings are between the k value on the horizon-
tal axis as compared to the smallest and largest values
of k (kmin = 2 and kmax = 4096), which are those that
are expected to overfit and underfit the data. Thus,
as k increases, the fraction match for U min decreases,
whereas it increases for U max. A trade-off for kselect is
reached where kmin < kselect < kmax. Note that k is
unevenly sampled on the horizontal axis. This is be-
cause it is unlikely that kselect will be large, so we do
not perform a fine-grained sampling at larger values of
k. Furthermore, we find that kselect is typically bound
to a particular range of k values for the in-degree and
mean distance metrics, and so we finely sample those
regions. We will show the distribution of kselect across
all feature spaces in Section 4.2.
3.7. Summary: Comparison of Outlier Approaches
The DSSJ and kNNSJ methods each have two met-
rics which yield four total outlier detection rankings for
each object (Sections 3.5.1 and 3.6.1). We briefly com-
pare and contrast these methods; however, their charac-
teristics will be better understood with an example on
real-world data that we will show in Section 4.4.
Figure 1 shows an illustrative example of (a) DSSJ
and (b) kNNSJ, where the positions of the points are
identical in both subfigures. Table 2 shows the corre-
sponding metric values and the resulting rankings for
each. Observe that the rankings for each method vary.
Only point 10 has the same rank (0) across the four
methods, because it has no neighbors within ϵ and it
has an in-degree value of 0. Furthermore, the DSSJ
number of neighbors metric and the kNNSJ in-degree
metric have numerous rankings that are the same be-
tween points because the values are non-negative inte-
gers. In contrast, the DSSJ mean distance and kNN
mean distance to k neighbors metrics are real numbers
so the probability that two values are the same is low,
and therefore it is unlikely that two points will share the
same rank. The only exception is when no neighbors are
found within the search radius ϵ for the DSSJ mean dis-
tance metric (e.g., point 10 in Figure 1), in which case
it will be assigned a rank of 0. From this example it
appears that there is little consensus among the outlier
detection techniques; however, this is primarily because
there are only 10 points in the example. On real-world
data there is much more consensus between the four
rankings, and this will be discussed in greater detail in
Section 4.4.
2 820 1639 2458 3277 4096
k
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction Match (In-Degree)
Umin
Umax
kselect = 640
(a)
2 820 1639 2458 3277 4096
k
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction Match (Mean Distance)
 Umin
Umax
kselect = 192
(b)
Figure 4. Example plots showing the computation of the
best value of k using kmin = 2 and kmax = 4096 on the same
feature space shown in Figure 2. U min (U max) refers to the
fraction (f ) of the top-n objects that are in both ranked lists
for k = 2 ( k = 4096) and the k values on the horizontal
axis. The value of kselect is shown as the vertical dotted line
for (a) the in-degree metric (distance-oblivious), and (b) the
mean distance to each point’s k neighbors (distance-aware).
3.8. High-Level Population Outlier Detection System
Description and Optimizations
In the prior sections, we discussed the outlier detec-
tion methods. Here, we describe the GPU-accelerated
implementations that are used in the system, and the
integration of the constituent components of the sys-
tem. The implementation uses shared libraries written
in C/C++/CUDA using Python (NumPy) interfaces.
3.8.1. GPU-Accelerated Implementations
We employ two state-of-the-art DSSJ and kNNSJ al-
gorithms both of which use GPU acceleration. Gowan-
lock & Karsin (2019) proposed a DSSJ algorithm for
moderate to high-dimensional data. To enable search-
10 Gowanlock et al.
T able 2.The metric values (rankings) for the example shown in Figure 1. A ranking of 0 indicates the
most outlying object.
Point DSSJ Num. Neighbors DSSJ Mean Distance kNN In-Degree kNN Mean Distance to k Neighbors
1 2 (2) 0.6185 (1) 5 (4) 0.7197 (5)
2 2 (2) 0.6117 (3) 6 (5) 0.6435 (7)
3 4 (3) 0.5541 (5) 6 (5) 0.5254 (8)
4 2 (2) 0.5196 (7) 3 (3) 0.6537 (6)
5 2 (2) 0.5224 (6) 2 (2) 0.7209 (4)
6 2 (2) 0.3864 (9) 3 (3) 0.4933 (9)
7 2 (2) 0.6149 (2) 2 (2) 0.7768 (3)
8 1 (1) 0.4562 (8) 2 (2) 0.9133 (2)
9 1 (1) 0.5758 (4) 1 (1) 1.0334 (1)
10 0 (0) 0.0000 (0) 0 (0) 1.4839 (0)
ing in high dimensional feature spaces and avoid the
curse of dimensionality problem2 where index searches
become increasingly exhaustive, Gowanlock & Karsin
(2019) proposed indexing the data in c dimensions,
where c < d. Thus, a representation of the data in c
dimensions avoids exhaustive index searches in high di-
mensions. We configure our software to index in c = d
dimensions when d ≤ 6, and c = 6 when d > 6. For
example, when we process the feature space with the
greatest dimensionality ( d = 15), we only index c = 6
dimensions.
Several optimizations were subsequently made to the
algorithm outlined in Gowanlock & Karsin (2019),
including exploiting instruction level parallelism and
changing the order in which query points are processed
to decrease load imbalance in the GPU kernel as outlined
by Gowanlock et al. (2023). This optimized algorithm
is employed in our software 3.
Gowanlock (2021) describes a hybrid CPU+GPU
kNNSJ algorithm for low-dimensional data, where d ≲
8. The algorithm distributes query points to either the
CPU or GPU based on the expected amount of work
required of each query point. In short, query points in
low density regions are assigned to the CPU and those in
high density regions are assigned to the GPU. Because
query points in high density regions require a significant
number of distance calculations to refine the candidate
set (those points returned by an index but that need
to be refined using distance calculations), it is prefer-
able to assign these queries to the GPU instead of the
CPU because the former architecture has much higher
throughput for this operation. The other facet of dis-
2 See Zimek et al. (2012) for an overview of the curse of dimen-
sionality problem.
3 https://github.com/mgowanlock/gpu self join
tance calculation complexity is the data dimensionality,
d. For moderate to high dimensional data, the GPU sig-
nificantly outperforms the CPU, and so there are cases
where the CPU+GPU algorithm yields an insignificant
performance gain over a GPU-only approach. Conse-
quently, because the data we are using has d = 15 di-
mensions, it is preferable to use the GPU-only version
of the algorithm proposed by Gowanlock (2021). While
not shown in that paper, the same method described for
the DSSJ above is employed which indexes the data in
c < ddimensions to allow for kNN searches in high di-
mensions. We use the publicly available source code of
this algorithm4.
3.8.2. Computational Optimizations
We describe several optimizations that are used to im-
prove the performance of the system. These methods are
presented independently from the results, but they will
be of particular interest when interpreting the results.
Thus, the reader may wish to read Section 4 and then
return to this section later.
Multiprocessing Each F eature Space:As described
in Section 3.3, there are 32,752 total feature spaces
across d = 2 − 15 dimensions. We use the multipro-
cessing library in Python to offload the processing of
each of these feature spaces. Thus, each feature space
is computed independently and concurrently with the
others.
Oversubscription of GPU Resources: It is well
known that there is overhead when communicating be-
tween the host (which contains the CPU and main mem-
ory) and the GPU (Capodieci et al. 2017). For instance,
the kNNSJ and DSSJ methods will need to transfer
4 https://github.com/mgowanlock/hybrid k nearest neighbor
self join
AASTeX v6.3.1 Sample article 11
their respective result sets from the GPU back to main
memory. During this time, the GPU will not have any-
thing to compute and so the resource will be under-
utilized. Underutilizing the GPU will significantly in-
crease the total time needed to compute all of the feature
spaces.
To address the underutilization problem, we oversub-
scribe the GPU and assign a maximum of o processes to
the GPU at a given time. Therefore, when one processes
finishes computing its task (a GPU kernel invocation)
and starts transferring its results back to the host, an-
other process can start executing its GPU kernel. The
oversubscription value, o, cannot be too large, other-
wise GPU global memory capacity will be exceeded, and
on our platform the global memory of a single GPU is
40 GiB. This will be described in greater detail in Sec-
tion 4.3.
Multi-GPU Scalability: Because the feature spaces
are independent, it is straightforward to assign a feature
space to a given GPU, where either theDSSJ or kNNSJ
algorithms are executed on the feature space. Thus, our
system exploits the four GPUs on our hardware plat-
form (the platform is described in additional detail in
Section 4.1). Because the feature spaces are of varying
dimensionality, the amount of work needed to compute
each feature space varies. We schedule the computation
of feature spaces to GPUs using dynamic scheduling,
where the least loaded GPU is assigned the next feature
space. This yields good load balancing across the four
GPUs. We describe multi-GPU scalability in greater
detail Section 4.3.
Nested Parallelism of T asks Across the CPU and
GPU: Recall from Sections 3.5.3 and 3.6.2 that we re-
quire finding a good value of ϵ and k for DSSJ and
kNNSJ, respectively, such that we do not arbitrarily
select a value for these parameters that underfits or over-
fits the data. We use the result set for ϵmax and kmax
to derive all result sets for lower values of ϵj and kj,
respectively. The GPU computes these result sets, and
transfers them back to the host, where we then com-
pute the result sets for the smaller values of ϵj < ϵmax
and kj < kmax in parallel on the CPU. This allows the
CPU to contribute to the overall computation instead
of simply orchestrating data transfers to/from the GPU
and performing other minor host-oriented tasks that are
required for GPU computation.
4. RESULTS
4.1. Experimental Methodology
Our platform consists of 2x Intel(R) Xeon(R) Plat-
inum 8358 CPUs (64 total physical cores) with a base
clock speed of 2.60 GHz and 512 GiB of main mem-
ory. The platform is equipped with 4 × Nvidia A100
GPUs, each of which has 40 GiB of global memory. The
source code uses the following programming languages:
Python, C/C++, and CUDA. All host C/C++ code is
compiled with the O3 compiler optimization flag, and
all CUDA code was compiled with CUDA v11.7. The
C/C++ and CUDA code uses 32-bit floating point pre-
cision. All performance related experiments use an av-
erage of three time trials; however, the variance in the
time measurements is insignificant, and error bars on
these plots would be too small to observe so we do not
report this information.
The platform is located within our institution’s com-
puter cluster, Monsoon, and we ensure that our exper-
iments are carried out without interference from other
users running on the node. The population outlier de-
tection pipeline requires storing output (i.e., writing the
rankings for each feature space to disk and diagnostic
plots), and this occurs over the network where files are
written to a parallel filesystem. We include this and all
other overheads in the end-to-end response time such
that we accurately capture the performance of the sys-
tem.
For convenience, Table 3 summarizes the parameters
used throughout the evaluation, which were defined in
prior sections. Some parameters will be varied in the sec-
tions that evaluate the performance of the algorithms.
4.2. Distribution of the Selected Values of ϵ and k
We begin by examining the selected values of ϵ for
the DSSJ algorithm. Figure 2 showed selecting a good
value of ϵ on a single feature space by reaching a trade-off
between underfitting and overfitting the data. Here, we
present the distribution of ϵselect values across all 32,752
feature spaces for the number of neighbors and mean
distance metrics. In other words, we show the resulting
ϵselect values from an analogous analysis to that shown
in Figure 2, but summarized across all feature spaces.
Note that it is not possible to show the distribution
using the ϵselect values because the range [ ϵmin, ϵmax]
varies across each individual feature space. Thus, we
show the index j of the selected value of ϵj ∈ G, denoted
as arg( ϵselect). For example, in Figure 2(a), instead of
reporting ϵselect = 0.1256, we report arg( ϵselect)= 15.
Figures 5 and 6 plot arg( ϵselect) as a function of the
dimensionality of the feature spaces for the number
of neighbors and mean distance metrics, respectively.
Across all feature spaces, we find thatϵselect is not found
towards the extremes of the distribution of ϵselect values
12 Gowanlock et al.
T able 3.Parameters used throughout the evaluation. The values of the parameters are given in parentheses where applicable.
Parameter Description
n (0.01|D|) The number of points considered when computing the similarity between two ranked lists.
1% of the dataset is used as we are interested in selecting those objects that are outliers.
G The grid of ϵ or k values that are searched for DSSJ and kNNSJ, respectively.
smin(≈ 0.001|D|) The minimum selectivity used when defining the ϵ grid.
smax(≈ 0.15|D|) The maximum selectivity used when defining the ϵ grid.
ϵselect The selected value of ϵ that reaches a trade-off between underfitting and overfitting a feature space.
kmin(2) The minimum value of k used when defining the grid of k values.
kmax(4096) The maximum value of k used when defining the grid of k values.
kselect The selected value of k that reaches a trade-off between underfitting and overfitting a feature space.
o The oversubscription factor, which is the maximum number of processes that are assigned to one GPU at a time.
for either metric, indicating that the range of selectiv-
ity parameters given by smin and smax do not need to
be expanded to find a suitable ϵselect for each feature
space. Comparing Figures 5 and 6, on average, the for-
mer requires selecting a larger ϵselect than the latter. We
attribute this to the difference in ranking functions. The
ranking function for the number of neighbors metric al-
lows two or more points to share the same rank if they
have the same number of neighbors within ϵ. Thus a
larger ϵ allows for the rankings to be more differentiated
(i.e., fewer points have the same rank asϵ increases), and
so the under/overfitting trade-off is reached at a larger
value of ϵ. In contrast, the mean distance metric will
not have two (or more) points with the same rank, as
the probability of two points having the same mean dis-
tance to its neighbors is unlikely. This also explains why
the distribution of arg( ϵselect) is clustered in Figure 5,
whereas the distribution is more diffuse in Figure 6.
We examine the distribution of the selected values of
k for the kNNSJ algorithm. Figures 7 and 8 plot kselect
as a function of the dimensionality of the feature spaces
for the in-degree and mean distance metrics, respec-
tively. The range of k values considered using the un-
der/overfitting methodology is given by kmin and kmax,
which yields the range [2, 4096]. For both metrics, the
selected values of k are well below kmax = 4096, and at
most kselect is found within the first ∼ 25% of the dis-
tribution at kselect ≲ 1000. We observe similar trends
between the in-degree metric (Figure 7) and the number
of neighbors metric for DSSJ (Figure 5) where the dis-
tribution of kselect is clustered, and this is due to points
having the same rank if they have the same in-degree.
4.3. Performance Results
We report the performance of the system by exam-
ining two metrics: (1) how performance varies as a
function of oversubscription (Section 3.8.2), and (2)
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Dimensionality (d)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20arg(ϵselect): Num. Neighbors
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Counts
Figure 5. The distribution of ϵselect values for the num-
ber of neighbors metric across all 32,752 feature spaces (Sec-
tion 3.3). Because the ϵ values can vary significantly between
feature spaces, where ϵ tends to increase with dimensionality,
we show the index j of the selected value of ϵj ∈ G, denoted
as arg(ϵselect).
how performance varies as a function of the number of
GPUs (Section 3.8.2). As outlined in Table 3, we use
smax ≈ 0.15|D| for DSSJ and kmax = 4096 for kNNSJ.
These values largely dictate the amount of work com-
puted, and these values constitute a large fraction of
the size of the SNAPShot1 datasets, which only contains
|D| = 31, 693 objects. Thus, we selected these parame-
ters conservatively to show the worst-case performance
of the system, as it is clear from Figures 5–8 that ϵselect
and kselect are found well below ϵmax and kmax, respec-
tively.
AASTeX v6.3.1 Sample article 13
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Dimensionality (d)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20arg(ϵselect): Mean Distance
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400
Counts
Figure 6. The same as Figure 5, but for the mean distance
metric.
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Dimensionality (d)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900kselect: In-Degree
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Counts
Figure 7.The distribution of kselect values for the in-degree
metric across all 32,752 feature spaces (Section 3.3). To im-
prove readability, the vertical axis is truncated and does not
show all kselect values which are mostly zeros. The plot shows
99.5% of the kselect values across all feature spaces.
Recall that the oversubscription factor refers to the
maximum number of processes that can be assigned to
one GPU at a time. Because using the GPU requires
data transfers between the host, and other host-side
tasks be performed before and after the main GPU ker-
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Dimensionality (d)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900kselect: Mean Distance to k Neighbors
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
Counts
Figure 8. The same as Figure 7, but for the mean distance
to k neighbors metric. The plot shows 98.5% of the kselect
values across all feature spaces.
1 2 4 8 12 16
Oversubscription Factor (o)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14Time (h)
Figure 9. The response time (h) to compute ϵselect and the
corresponding rankings for both DSSJ metrics as a function
of the oversubscription (o) factor using 1 GPU. This includes
the total time to find ϵselect for both outlier detection met-
rics, and compute the rankings for all |D| = 32, 752 feature
spaces.
nels are executed, it is beneficial to allow multiple pro-
cesses concurrently access the GPU (and associated host
side functionality). For instance, this allows PCIe data
transfers to be overlapped with GPU computation, thus
mitigating this data transfer cost.
14 Gowanlock et al.
Figure 9 plots the response time (h) using 1 GPU as
a function of the oversubcription factor (o) to find ϵ and
compute the outlier rankings for DSSJ. From the figure
we find that with o = 1 (a maximum of a single process
concurrently accessing the GPU), the response time is
12.65 h. However, if we use o = 8 the response time is
2.64 h, which is 379% faster than when no oversubscrip-
tion is used ( o = 1). This demonstrates that the GPU
is underutilized when o = 1. Furthermore, we find that
selecting o = 8 − 12 achieves similar performance, but
when o = 16 the response time begins to increase.
We find that using more than one GPU forDSSJ does
not improve performance. This is because there are sig-
nificant host-side (CPU/main memory) tasks that are
computed before the GPU kernel is executed and af-
ter the GPU returns the results to the host. Thus,
the limiting factor for computing DSSJ is not insuffi-
cient GPU resources, rather it is due to memory pres-
sure and contention, which delays the execution of GPU
kernels. This is largely a result of using Python as the
“glue” programming language, where the bottleneck is
not computation, but processing minor tasks in Python
that require formatting the data needed for the C/C++
libraries and transferring results back to Python for fur-
ther analysis.
We present the performance results for kNNSJ. The
kNNSJ algorithm is more computationally expensive
than DSSJ, as the search radius needed to find at least
k neighbors will vary for each point in the dataset. For
this reason, compared to DSSJ the kNNSJ algorithm
achieves performance gains when multiple GPUs are
used.
Figure 10(a) plots the response time (h) for kNNSJ
as a function of the oversubcription factor ( o) using 4
GPUs. For the kNNSJ algorithm, we find that over-
subscription significantly improves performance over not
using oversubscription where using o = 5 is 83% faster
than not using oversubscription ( o = 1).
Figure 10(b) shows the response time (h) as a function
of the number of GPUs where we set o = 5 (the value of
o that achieved the best performance in panel (a)). The
speedup for 2–4 GPUs is as follows: 1.81 ×, 2.25×, and
2.47×. We find that multi-GPU scalability is limited: a
respectable performance gain is observed with 2 GPUs,
but poor scalability is observed with 3 and 4 GPUs. This
is due to the same reasons described above for DSSJ
where host-side tasks limit multi-GPU scalability.
As we will show in Section 4.5, multi-GPU perfor-
mance is much better when examining the much larger
LSST5M dataset.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Oversubscription Factor (o)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6Time (h)
(a)
1 2 3 4
Number of GPUs
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8Time (h)
(b)
Figure 10. Performance results for kNNSJ showing the to-
tal time to find kselect for both outlier detection metrics, and
compute the rankings for all |D| = 32 , 752 feature spaces.
(a) The response time (h) to compute kselect and the cor-
responding rankings for both kNNSJ metrics as a function
of the oversubscription ( o) factor with 4 GPUs. (b) The
response time as a function of the number of GPUs, demon-
strating the scalability when o = 5.
4.4. Visualization and Comparison of Outlier
Detection Methods
In this section, we show example visualizations of fea-
ture spaces and the detection of outliers. The visualiza-
tions illustrate the importance of using an ensemble of
algorithms for outlier detection, as they all yield differ-
ent outlier rankings which make some methods more or
AASTeX v6.3.1 Sample article 15
less suitable for a given scientific investigation. Because
it is difficult to visualize feature spaces in more than 3
dimensions, we limit the visualizations to d ≤ 3.
Figure 11 shows a d = 2 feature space (rotation period
vs. g − r color) for the DSSJ method in panels (a)–(b)
and the kNNSJ method in (c)–(d). In the figure, we ar-
bitrarily denote 1% of the points as outliers; in practice
a user can select any percentage of points to be outliers.
Furthermore, Figure 12 shows histograms of the metric
values that are used to compute the outlier rankings for
the corresponding plots in Figure 11. This information
is helpful for understanding why outliers are selected in
each case. We make the following observations.
• Figure 11(a) ( DSSJ: number of neighbors met-
ric) clearly finds points in the underdense regions
of the feature space, but they are interspersed
with other points that are considered inliers in
this space. Had a larger outlier threshold been se-
lected, more points in the sparse regions would be
selected as outliers. This is because the method
allows for two or more points to share the same
rank. In this case, > 1% of the points have a rank
of 0 (they have no neighbors), but only the first
1% of these points are considered outliers. Fig-
ure 12(a) shows this more clearly, where there are
a large number of points ( > 1% of the total frac-
tion of points) that do not have any neighbors, but
not all of these points are classified as outliers. An
example point of this type can be clearly observed
at (x, y) ≈(0, 0) in Figure 11(a).
• Figure 11(b) (DSSJ: mean distance metric) is very
similar to that of Figure 11(a), except that some
points tend to swap outlier/inlier classifications.
• Figure 11(c) (kNNSJ: in-degree metric) clearly se-
lects outliers that are clustered together as shown
at a rotation period ≲ 500 h. This is expected
as points located in a similar region of a feature
space are likely to have a similar in-degree number
(recall that the in-degree, or reverse nearest neigh-
bors refers to the number of instances that a point
is considered a neighbor of another point in its set
of kNN). Counterintuitively, the outliers selected
by this metric are clustered at a rotation period
≲ 500 h, and thus appear to be inliers. However,
the reason they are not inliers is because the inly-
ing points in this region have few of these outlying
points in their set of k nearest neighbors. Inter-
estingly, this metric finds outliers that are largely
different than both of the DSSJ methods in Fig-
ure 11(a)–(b).
• Figure 11(d) ( kNNSJ: mean distance to k neigh-
bors metric) is interesting to compare with the
two DSSJ methods in Figure 11(a)–(b). With this
method, the outlying points at a rotation period
≳2200 h and ≲4500 h are all outliers, and are not
interspersed with inliers as shown in Figure 11(a)–
(b). The reason the outliers are all selected in
this region is because the kNN algorithm requires
each point to find k neighbors which decreases the
stochastic variance in this set of k points. There-
fore, the outliers will be selected in regions where
there are similarly low densities. In contrast the
DSSJ methods do not require finding a minimum
number of neighbors and so the set of neighbors
found within ϵ of each point will have greater vari-
ation compared to each other, and therefore DSSJ
is more susceptible to stochastic variation in local
density.
In summary, each of the outlier detection methods se-
lects outliers based on different criteria. Thus, it may
be useful for the user to select the outlier method that
best suits their science case; for instance, from Figure 11
a user may want to find asteroids that are fast rotators
(short rotation periods) that have an unusual color. In
this case, the kNN algorithm with the in-degree metric
would be best. Another option is to limit outliers to
those that have low rankings in multiple outlier detec-
tion methods which can be computed by averaging the
outlier scores across methods.
Figure 13 shows a scatter plot of outliers detected in
a d = 3 feature space (light curve amplitude, rotation
period, and g − r color). Many observations are simi-
lar to that of Figure 11 as described above. To better
understand the assigned outlier labels in Figure 13, for
the interested reader, Appendix A presents a compari-
son of rankings for this feature space. It is informative
for understanding the nuances of the four outlier detec-
tion metrics, and illustrates why using an ensemble of
methods/metrics are needed to identify outliers. With
a single method, we may inadvertently omit detecting
interesting Solar System objects, and our approach mit-
igates this potential drawback.
4.5. Viability of Population Outlier Detection at LSST
Scale
LSST will observe roughly 5 million asteroids over the
10 year survey; therefore, the response time and scala-
bility measurements reported in the prior sections will
not directly reflect the expected performance of the sys-
tem when it is deployed on the LSST data stream. In
16 Gowanlock et al.
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Rotation Period (h)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
g-r Color
Inliers
Outliers
(a) DSSJ: Number of Neighbors Metric
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Rotation Period (h)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
g-r Color
Inliers
Outliers (b) DSSJ: Mean Distance Metric
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Rotation Period (h)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
g-r Color
Inliers
Outliers
(c) kNNSJ: In-Degree Metric
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Rotation Period (h)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
g-r Color
Inliers
Outliers (d) kNNSJ: Mean Distance to k Neighbors Metric
Figure 11. Comparison of the four outlier detection methods on an example d = 2 feature space, showing the rotation period
as a function of g − r color. (a)–(b) show the two metrics for DSSJ, and (c)–(d) show the two metrics for kNNSJ. The points
that fall within the top 1% of the ranked list of outliers are shown as solid red points in each plot. The inliers (99%) are shown
as the translucent blue points.
this section, we report the performance of SNAPS pop-
ulation outlier detection on the LSST5M dataset which is
representative of the LSST dataset at the end of the 10
year survey (Section 2.2).
In this experiment, for DSSJ we set smin = 32 and
smax = 256 and for kNNSJ we set kmin = 2 and
kmax = 256. These maximum values are significantly
lower than those used for SNAPShot1; recall that in Sec-
tion 4.3, we selected large values of smax and kmax using
SNAPShot1 to report the conservative (worst-case) per-
formance. SNAPShot1 has significant variations in the
data densities of each feature space because it only con-
tains 31,693 objects and therefore, the feature spaces
are poorly sampled. The 5 million objects detected by
LSST will reduce the degree of sparsity in the feature
spaces which will reduce the variance in the feature space
data densities. This implies that smaller smax values for
DSSJ and kmax neighbors for kNNSJ will be needed
to adequately sample the feature spaces when operat-
ing SNAPS at LSST scale. Furthermore, as observed
in Figures 5–8, ϵselect and kselect are generally closer to
smaller values of ϵ and k rather than larger values, so us-
ing smaller ϵselect and kselect parameter values at LSST
scale should still yield good sets of outlier rankings.
Due to the excessive execution times required of this
experiment, we only report the time to compute the first
5% of the 32,752 feature spaces and then extrapolate
this time to the expected response time when comput-
ing all of the feature spaces. These results are reported
in Table 4. We achieve a multi-GPU speedup (using
AASTeX v6.3.1 Sample article 17
0 500 1000 1500 2000
Number of Neighbors
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000Counts
(a) DSSJ: Number of Neighbors Metric
0.000 0.002 0.004 0.006
Mean Distance
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000Counts (b) DSSJ: Mean Distance Metric
0 200 400 600 800 1000
In-Degree
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160Counts
(c) kNNSJ: In-degree Metric
0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04
Mean Distance to k Neighbors
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000Counts (d) kNNSJ: Mean Distance to k Neighbors Metric
Figure 12. Histograms of the distribution of metric values for the corresponding plots in Figure 11. The red shaded regions
are illustrative examples of where outliers are found in the respective distributions. The the mean distance metric for DSSJ (b)
yields two regions where outliers are found. Points with no neighbors within their search radius will yield a mean distance of 0
and so all points that do not have any neighbors are assigned a rank of 0. And those points that have large mean distances to
their neighbors will also be outliers.
4 GPUs over 1 GPU) of 3.68 × and 3.95 × on DSSJ
and kNNSJ, respectively. Consequently, we achieve a
very high ≥ 92% parallel efficiency, where the paral-
lel efficiency is the speedup divided by the number of
GPUs. Recall that on SNAPShot1 (Section 4.3), multi-
GPU performance was poor because the ratio of GPU to
CPU (host-side) work was low. However, with 5 million
data points, there is significantly more work to com-
pute on the GPU and so the abovementioned ratio is
much higher, leading to greater multi-GPU scalability.
Extrapolating the results in Table 4 to all 32,752 fea-
ture spaces, we can compute population outliers for both
DSSJ and kNNSJ at LSST scale in roughly 12 days us-
ing 4 GPUs. This will allow SNAPS to provide users
updated population outlier detection rankings once per
month over the 10 year survey.
We highlight several caveats to this analysis. This
level of performance is an estimate, as we only computed
5% of the feature spaces, estimated selectivity and k
nearest neighbor parameter values, estimated the total
number of asteroids detected by LSST at the end of the
survey, and used a synthetic ZTF-like dataset which may
not be representative of the LSST catalog. Furthermore,
we anticipate that the GPUs SNAPS will use to compute
population outlier scores will be upgraded over the next
∼10 years, which will decrease the computation time
needed for this task. Despite these estimates, we believe
that SNAPS population outlier detection will scale to
18 Gowanlock et al.
Amplitude
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Rotation Period (h)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
g-r Color
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Inliers
Outliers
(a) DSSJ: Number of Neighbors Metric
Amplitude
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Rotation Period (h)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
g-r Color
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Inliers
Outliers (b) DSSJ: Mean Distance Metric
Amplitude
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Rotation Period (h)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
g-r Color
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Inliers
Outliers
(c) kNNSJ: In-Degree Metric
Amplitude
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Rotation Period (h)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
g-r Color
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Inliers
Outliers (d) kNNSJ: Mean Distance to k Neighbors Metric
Figure 13. The same as Figure 11, but for a d = 3 feature space (light curve amplitude, rotation period, and g − r color).
LSST data volumes even if some of these assumptions
change during the 10 year survey.
5. EXAMPLE A VENUES OF SCIENTIFIC
INVESTIGATION
One of the science goals of SNAPS is to map “edge
cases” within the asteroid population that reveal un-
usual physical properties that in turn suggest constraints
on the origin and evolution of our Solar System. In this
section, we suggest various scientific investigations that
can be carried out using population outlier detection
and multi-dimensional feature space exploration.
5.1. Outliers in a Single Dimension
The simplest outlier detection scheme is one that ex-
amines just a single dimension. (1) There are five objects
in SNAPShot1 with H <5, which corresponds to diam-
eters larger than around 300 km. These rare objects —
some 0.02% of SNAPShot1— turn out to be dwarf plan-
ets and large trans-Neptunian objects in the outer So-
lar System, and not main belt asteroids. These objects
have different compositions and histories and therefore
require different analysis than the rest of the sample.
(2) Some objects in SNAPShot1 have a derived rota-
tion period of exactly 5000 hours, which is the max-
imum period searched. These solutions are likely in-
correct, and probably represent objects with very low
lightcurve amplitudes where no true periodic signal can
be identified. Leaving these likely-false solutions aside,
there are 550 objects (1.7% of SNAPShot1) with peri-
ods >1000 hours and <5000 hours. This population was
AASTeX v6.3.1 Sample article 19
T able 4. The response time and multi-GPU speedup for DSSJ and kNNSJ on
LSST5M. The same permutations of the SNAPShot1 d = 15 feature space are employed.
The response times refer to computing 5% of the 32,752 feature spaces for both 1 and
4 GPUs. The speedup of using 4 GPUs over 1 GPU is reported. The oversubscription
factor for DSSJ and kNNSJ is o = 5.
Algorithm Response Time (h) 1xGPU Response Time (h) 4xGPUs GPU Speedup
DSSJ 10.83 2.94 3.68
kNNSJ 45.58 11.55 3.95
Total Time 56.41 14.49
first identified in Erasmus et al. (2021), who identified
YORP, which alters the rotation state of an asymmetric
object due to thermal torques (Rubincam 2000; Bot-
tke et al. 2006), as the most likely origin mechanism
for these very long periods. This serves as an existence
proof for YORP creating slow rotation rates, and puts
strong constraints on the initial distribution of rotation
rates in the asteroid belt, and the collision rate in the
main belt. These constraints in turn constrain impor-
tant details about the formation and evolution of the
Solar System.
The amplitude of a lightcurve indicates the shape of
the asteroid, through ∆mag = 2 .5 log a
b , where a and b
are the major and minor axis lengths of the ellipsoidal
asteroid shape. There are 160 objects in SNAPShot1
that have lightcurve amplitudes >1 magnitude, which
implies very elongated asteroids where the long side is
at least 2.5 × longer than the small side. Elongated as-
teroids are interesting because they may require internal
strength (McNeill et al. 2018). The existence of these
very elongated objects — present at the level of 0.5% in
SNAPShot1— demands that asteroid evolution models
explain the creation and persistence of such objects.
5.2. Outliers in Multiple Dimensions
Figure 11 shows outlier sets for our four methods, in
two dimensions. Most of the outlying points clearly have
either the most extreme rotation periods or colors, which
could be identified through a one-dimensional search.
However, there are some objects that are neither ex-
treme in period nor color — for example, objects near
{500,0.38} — that are identified in all four methods as
outliers. Neither this period or color is extreme, but
this combination of properties places these objects in
the outermost envelope of the distribution of objects in
period-color space. Thus, outliers can help define de-
tails of the multi-dimensional distributions. The exis-
tence of objects near {500, 0.38 } may indicate some-
thing about the internal structure and strength of those
objects. Figure 13 adds amplitude to create a three-
dimensional space, again helping to define the envelope
of the distributions of these properties.
Figures 14 and 15 show outliers in the parameter space
of lightcurve amplitude, rotation period, and HA VG (a
proxy for size). We then separate S- and C-type as-
teroids using g − r = 0 .563 as the boundary between
the two taxonomic types (the boundary can be ob-
served in Figure 4 in Trilling et al. 2023). The out-
liers are roughly equally divided between C- and S-type
asteroids, suggesting that, to the degree that composi-
tion and internal properties correspond to asteroid color,
unusual properties in this multi-dimensional space are
not biased in favor of a particular asteroid composition.
These figures show a group of objects that are particu-
larly unusual, with very long periods (2000–4000 h) and
relatively small amplitudes (0.2 mag) and unremarkable
H magnitudes (around 15, so a few km in diameter).
This three-dimensional outlier detection scheme reveals
this population of very slowly rotating asteroids that
are nearly round (low amplitude) and have sizes around
3 km, more or less. Asteroid dynamical models must
include a mechanism for the existence of these bodies.
Figure 16 shows this same parameter space (ampli-
tude, rotation period, HA VG), though with a differ-
ent color coding to emphasize a particular subset of
outliers: objects with amplitudes ≥1 mag and periods
≥500 hours. These are objects that are quite elongated
and slowly rotating, in both cases showing unusual prop-
erties. In general, the maximum amplitude that a single
elongated body can have is around 0.9 mag (Strauss
et al. 2023). Amplitudes greater than this probably
indicate binary or contact binary systems. Our pop-
ulation outlier detection approaches may be detecting
binary asteroids in the main belt — and, intriguingly,
slowly rotating binaries, which implies a relatively small
amount of angular momentum. The origin and evolu-
tion of these bodies is an interesting question and may
provide further clues to the overall evolutionary history
of the asteroid belt. Furthermore, within this group, the
ratio of C:S asteroids is 12:5, which may not be statisti-
20 Gowanlock et al.
Amplitude (mag)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
1.4
Rotation Period (h)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
HA VG (mag)
0
5
10
15
20
Inliers: g-r color ≤ 0.563
Inliers: g-r color > 0.563
Outliers: g-r color ≤ 0.563
Outliers: g-r color > 0.563
Figure 14. Outliers detected using the kNNSJ: Mean Dis-
tance to k Neighbors Metric rankings in the light curve am-
plitude, rotation period, and HA VG feature space. The in-
liers (99% of the objects) are plotted as translucent circles
and the outliers with “x” markers (1% of the objects). Red
and blue markers denote C-type ( g − r color ≤ 0.563) and
S-type (g − r color > 0.563) asteroids, respectively. Two di-
mensional slices through this space are shown in Figure 15.
cally significant but is at least suggestive that the mech-
anism of creating such unusual asteroids may depend on
composition. The sizes are 1–10 km (H is estimated to
be 12.5–17.5), potentially a key clue to the evolution of
these bodies.
There are many other examples of multi-dimensional
investigations that can probe the properties of aster-
oids. As an example of another extended science case,
our team is identifying outliers in minimum required
strength in a space that is defined by a number of aster-
oid physical properties (Chernyavskaya et al., in prep.).
In summary, the various techniques presented here to
characterize large datasets are powerful tools that pro-
vide evidence that would not otherwise be available and
allow us to carry out experiments about the formation
and evolution of the Solar System.
6. DISCUSSION & CONCLUSIONS
This paper has presented the population outlier de-
tection functionality of the SNAPS alert broker. We
summarize our contributions as follows:
• We have constructed an asteroid outlier detection
system that is demonstrated on the first SNAPS
data release, SNAPShot1, which employs state-of-
the-art GPU algorithms. We showed that the sys-
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Amplitude (mag)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Rotation Period (h)
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Amplitude (mag)
0
5
10
15
20
HA VG (mag)
Outliers: g-r color ≤ 0.563
Outliers: g-r color > 0.563
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Rotation Period (h)
0
5
10
15
20
HA VG (mag)
Figure 15. The same as Figure 14, except that only the
outliers are shown. The panels ordered from top to bottom
are as follows: rotation period as a function of amplitude,
HA VG as a function of amplitude, and HA VG as a function
of rotation period. Outliers in this space are equally divided
between C-type and S-type asteroids, indicating that com-
position is not a significant driver of unusual behaviors in
these three dimensions.
AASTeX v6.3.1 Sample article 21
Amplitude (mag)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
Rotation Period (h)0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
HA VG (mag)
0
5
10
15
20
Inliers
Outliers
Amp. ≥ 1.0 mag
and Period ≥ 500 h
Figure 16. Outliers detected using the DSSJ: Number of Neighbors Metric in the light curve amplitude, rotation period, and
HA VG feature space. The inliers (99% of the objects) are plotted as translucent circles and the outliers are plotted with “x”
markers (1% of the objects). We highlight with cyan diamond markers objects with a lightcurve amplitude ≥ 1 mag and rotation
period of ≥ 500 h. There are only 14 objects with these properties and our method is able to detect all of these as outliers
denoted by the 14 diamond markers imposed behind the “x” markers.
tem provides outlier detection capabilities in addi-
tion to feature space exploration and data prioriti-
zation which will help researchers rapidly identify
objects of interest that may warrant further inves-
tigation.
• We utilize a feature space permutation approach
that allows users to select objects of interest based
on ZTF measurements, adjacent catalogs, and de-
rived properties. We show that this approach can
assist in data exploration, prioritization, and visu-
alization activities to accelerate the scientific dis-
covery process.
• We demonstrate that the outlier detection system
is currently able to scale to the ZTF data rate.
Through measurements on a synthetic dataset, we
expect that the system will be able to derive pop-
22 Gowanlock et al.
ulation outliers at LSST scale and will be able
to provide outlier detection rankings roughly once
per month. The monthly data will be archived and
made publicly available on our website to enable
tracking how objects evolve over time relative to
the population of objects.
• We highlight several preliminary scientific results,
and example avenues of scientific investigation
that will be enabled by SNAPS population outlier
detection capabilities.
We demonstrate the grasp of these approaches with a
few example science cases, of the countless investigations
that are possible. As described above, our calculated
outlier lists will be published on our SNAPS web page
and updated monthly, allowing all users to pursue their
own experiments with our large and growing catalog.
It is clear that deriving outlier rankings across all fea-
ture spaces is computationally expensive. There are sev-
eral methods that could be employed to reduce this com-
putational cost. For example, while we derived outliers
for 15 features in SNAPShot1, we are aware that some
of these features are redundant or correlated, and so we
could reduce the total number of feature spaces that we
provide to users by eliminating some of these feature
spaces. However, the SNAPS team will aim to provide
outlier rankings for at least all permutations of d = 15
features; however, these features will change slightly
when we begin receiving data from the Rubin Obser-
vatory. At present, we believe that providing d = 15
features should provide a reasonable level outlier detec-
tion and data space exploration for the community.
We showed that population outlier detection with
SNAPS is expected to scale to LSST data volumes as-
suming that the current functionality is sufficient for the
LSST era. We predict that the community will desire
additional functionality, such as providing binary clas-
sification labels (inlier vs. outlier) instead of only using
ranked lists of objects. The SNAPS team intends to
add this functionality to the system in the future.
A distinct but complimentary service that SNAPS
could provide to the community is clustering each of
the feature spaces. This task is similar to the outlier de-
tection methods described here, as clustering typically
relies on similarity searches (finding nearby points in a
feature space). This would allow for the automated de-
tection of groups of objects that may be of interest. A
canonical example would be to derive asteroid families as
a function of orbital elements (Parker et al. 2008) while
also examining additional features/dimensions that may
be less obvious to explore.
We identified that one bottleneck in the system is us-
ing Python to invoke the GPU algorithms for each fea-
ture space. Since we process multiple feature spaces con-
currently, this yields non-negligible memory pressure,
which impacts the rate at which we can process a given
feature space on a GPU. Thus, future work includes run-
ning a single process that executes all of the feature
spaces on the GPU for DSSJ and kNNSJ. By under-
taking this research direction, we anticipate that there
will be interesting opportunities for data reuse, such as
providing the set of k nearest neighbors from kNNSJ
to DSSJ for its computation, thus potentially eliminat-
ing a significant fraction of the total DSSJ cost. An-
other direction that can be undertaken to improve per-
formance is to leverage the tensor cores on many modern
GPUs to perform Euclidean distance calculations (Gal-
let & Gowanlock 2022). These and other algorithmic
advances are critical for reaching LSST scale while ex-
panding the services offered by SNAPS, as many of the
computational bottlenecks identified in this paper can-
not be solved by hardware advances alone over the next
≳10 years.
At present, other alert broker teams are preparing for
LSST by developing software infrastructure to classify
objects. We welcome collaboration with other teams
that anticipate requiring the population outlier detec-
tion methods described here for their respective science
domains.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the anonymous referee for a very thorough
review of the manuscript which significantly strength-
ened the paper. MG is supported by the National Sci-
ence Foundation under Grant No. 2042155. DET, MG,
and MC are supported by the National Science Founda-
tion under Grant No. 2206796. This work is supported
by the Arizona Board of Regents and the Technology Re-
search Initiative Research Fund (TRIF) Small Research
Equipment Acquisition Program (SREAP).
ZTF is a public-private partnership, with equal sup-
port from the ZTF Partnership and from the U.S. Na-
tional Science Foundation through the Mid-Scale In-
novations Program (MSIP). The ZTF partnership is a
consortium of the following universities and institutions
(listed in descending longitude): TANGO Consortium
of Taiwan; Weizmann Institute of Sciences, Israel; Oskar
Klein Center, Stockholm University, Sweden; Deutsches
Elektronen-Synchrotron & Humboldt University, Ger-
many; Ruhr University, Germany; Institut national de
physique nucl´ eaire et de physique des particules, France;
University of Warwick, UK; Trinity College, Dublin,
Ireland; University of Maryland, College Park, USA;
AASTeX v6.3.1 Sample article 23
Northwestern University, Evanston, USA; University of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, USA; Lawrence Livermore Na-
tional Laboratory, USA; IPAC, Caltech, USA; Caltech,
USA.
Software: NumPy (Harris et al. 2020) and pan-
das (pandas development team 2020).
REFERENCES
Bellm, E. C., Kulkarni, S. R., Graham, M. J., et al. 2018,
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific,
131, 018002, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aaecbe
Bottke, William F., J., Vokrouhlick´ y, D., Rubincam, D. P.,
& Nesvorn´ y, D. 2006, Annual Review of Earth and
Planetary Sciences, 34, 157,
doi: 10.1146/annurev.earth.34.031405.125154
Bowell, E., Hapke, B., Domingue, D., et al. 1989, Asteroids
II, 524
Campos, G. O., Zimek, A., Sander, J., et al. 2016, Data
mining and knowledge discovery, 30, 891,
doi: 10.1007/s10618-015-0444-8
Capodieci, N., Cavicchioli, R., Valente, P., & Bertogna, M.
2017, in Proceedings of the 25th International Conference
on Real-Time Networks and Systems, 48–57,
doi: 10.1145/3139258.3139270
Carry, B., Peloton, J., Le Montagner, R., et al. 2024,
Astronomy & Astrophysics, 687, A38.
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202449789
Coughlin, M. W., Burdge, K., Duev, D. A., et al. 2021,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 505,
2954, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab1502
Drake, A. J., Graham, M. J., Djorgovski, S. G., et al. 2014,
The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 213, 9,
doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/213/1/9
Erasmus, N., Kramer, D., McNeill, A., et al. 2021,
MNRAS, 506, 3872, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab1888
F¨ orster, F., Cabrera-Vives, G., Castillo-Navarrete, E., et al.
2021, The Astronomical Journal, 161, 242,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abe9bc
Gallet, B., & Gowanlock, M. 2021, Data Science and
Engineering, 6, 39,
doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s41019-020-00145-x
Gallet, B., & Gowanlock, M. 2022, in 2022 IEEE 29th
International Conference on High Performance
Computing, Data, and Analytics (HiPC), IEEE, 135–144,
doi: 10.1109/HiPC56025.2022.00029
Gowanlock, M. 2021, Journal of Parallel and Distributed
Computing, 149, 119,
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.2020.11.004
Gowanlock, M., Gallet, B., & Donnelly, B. 2023, in
Computational Science – ICCS 2023, ed. J. Mikyˇ ska,
C. de Mulatier, M. Paszynski, V. V. Krzhizhanovskaya,
J. J. Dongarra, & P. M. Sloot (Cham: Springer Nature
Switzerland), 357–364
Gowanlock, M., & Karsin, B. 2019, in Proceedings of the
15th International Workshop on Data Management on
New Hardware, DaMoN’19 (Association for Computing
Machinery), doi: 10.1145/3329785.3329920
Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., et al.
2020, Nature, 585, 357, doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2
Hautamaki, V., Karkkainen, I., & Franti, P. 2004, in
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on
Pattern Recognition, 2004. ICPR 2004., Vol. 3, IEEE,
430–433, doi: 10.1109/ICPR.2004.1334558
Ivezi´ c,ˇZ., Kahn, S. M., Tyson, J. A., et al. 2019, The
Astrophysical Journal, 873, 111,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab042c
Knorr, E. M., & Ng, R. T. 1997, in KDD, Vol. 97, 219–222
Le Montagner, R., Peloton, J., Carry, B., et al. 2023,
Astronomy & Astrophysics, 680, A17.
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202346905
Lu, Y. L., Curtis, J. L., Angus, R., David, T. J., & Hattori,
S. 2022, The Astronomical Journal, 164, 251,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac9bee
Mainzer, A., Bauer, J., Cutri, R., et al. 2019, NEOWISE
Diameters and Albedos V2.0, Tech. rep.,
doi: 10.26033/18S3-2Z54
Matheson, T., Stubens, C., Wolf, N., et al. 2021, The
Astronomical Journal, 161, 107,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abd703
McNeill, A., Fitzsimmons, A., Jedicke, R., et al. 2018, The
Astronomical Journal, 156, 282,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aaeb8c
M¨ oller, A., Peloton, J., Ishida, E. E. O., et al. 2020,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 501,
3272, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa3602
pandas development team, T. 2020, pandas-dev/pandas:
Pandas, latest, Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3509134
Pankratius, V., Li, J., Gowanlock, M., et al. 2016, IEEE
Intelligent Systems, 31, 3, doi: 10.1109/MIS.2016.60
Parker, A., Ivezi´ c,ˇZ., Juri´ c, M., et al. 2008, Icarus, 198,
138, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2008.07.002
24 Gowanlock et al.
Rubincam, D. P. 2000, Icarus, 148, 2,
doi: 10.1006/icar.2000.6485
S´ anchez-S´ aez, P., Reyes, I., Valenzuela, C., et al. 2021, AJ,
161, 141, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abd5c1
Shappee, B. J., Prieto, J. L., Grupe, D., et al. 2014, The
Astrophysical Journal, 788, 48,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/788/1/48
Smith, K. W., Williams, R. D., Young, D. R., et al. 2019,
Research Notes of the AAS, 3, 26,
doi: 10.3847/2515-5172/ab020f
Soraisam, M. D., Saha, A., Matheson, T., et al. 2020, The
Astrophysical Journal, 892, 112,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab7b61
Strauss, R., Trilling, D. E., Bernardinelli, P. H., et al. 2023,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2309.04034,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2309.04034
Tonry, J. L., Denneau, L., Heinze, A. N., et al. 2018,
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific,
130, 064505, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aabadf
Trilling, D. E., Gowanlock, M., Kramer, D., et al. 2023,
The Astronomical Journal, 165, 111,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/acac7f
van Roestel, J., Duev, D. A., Mahabal, A. A., et al. 2021,
The Astronomical Journal, 161, 267,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abe853
Wagstaff, K. L., Lanza, N. L., Thompson, D. R., Dietterich,
T. G., & Gilmore, M. S. 2013, in Twenty-Seventh AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
doi: 10.1609/aaai.v27i1.8561
Zhou, L., Pan, S., Wang, J., & Vasilakos, A. V. 2017,
Neurocomputing, 237, 350,
doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2017.01.026
Zimek, A., Schubert, E., & Kriegel, H.-P. 2012, Statistical
Analysis and Data Mining: The ASA Data Science
Journal, 5, 363, doi: 10.1002/sam.11161
AASTeX v6.3.1 Sample article 25
APPENDIX
A. COMPARISON OF RANKINGS BETWEEN OUTLIER DETECTION METHODS
From Figure 13 we observed that there may be minimal overlap between those points that are selected as outliers
between the outlier detection metrics. Figure 17 shows another perspective on the comparison of rankings that were
shown in Figure 13, where we plot the rankings for each object as a scatterplot. Figure 17 shows the following subplots:
(a) shows a ranking comparison for the two DSSJ metrics, (b) shows a comparison for the two kNNSJ metrics, (c)
shows a comparison of the two distance-oblivious metrics, and (d) shows a comparison between the two distance-aware
metrics. Recall that in all figures, the outliers are those with a low rank value.
Figure 17(a) shows a comparison of DSSJ metrics where we observe that many of the points that have few neighbors
(with a rank ≳ 0) have a large range of possible ranks using the mean distance metric. This shows that a large mean
distance to neighboring points may be achieved when there are few or many points within the search radius ϵ of a
given point.
Figure 17(b) shows a comparison of kNNSJ metrics. Here we find that there are consistencies between outlier scores
for both metrics when the rankings are ≳ 0. Interestingly, there is an overabundance of in-degree rankings with values
between ∼ 500 − 700, although these points will not be considered outliers in this feature space.
Figure 17(c) compares the rankings derived by the distance-oblivious metrics for DSSJ and kNNSJ. We find that
there is little correlation between these the rankings of these two methods. This is because it is possible to have a low
in-degree value in the kNN graph, but yet have several neighbors found within the search radius ϵ. Despite this, there
are still numerous points that have ranks near 0 in both metrics which would indicate that they are outliers using both
metrics.
Figure 17(d) compares the rankings derived by the distance-aware metrics for DSSJ and kNNSJ. We clearly observe
that there is a deficit of points assigned a low mean distance rank and a high ( ≳ 10000) mean distance to k neighbors
rank. Compared to the other plots, the rankings appear to be the most correlated, although there are still major
differences in the assigned rankings.
26 Gowanlock et al.
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
DSSJ: Ranking Num. Neighbors
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000DSSJ: Ranking Mean Distance
(a) DSSJ: Ranking Comparison
0 200 400 600 800 1000
KNNSJ: Ranking In-Degree
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000KNNSJ: Ranking Mean Distance to k Neighbors (b) kNNSJ: Ranking Comparison
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
DSSJ: Ranking Num. Neighbors
0
200
400
600
800
1000KNNSJ: Ranking In-Degree
(c) DSSJ vs. kNNSJ: Distance-Oblivious Comparison
0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000
DSSJ: Ranking Mean Distance
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000KNNSJ: Ranking Mean Distance to k Neighbors (d) DSSJ vs. kNNSJ: Distance-Aware Comparison
Figure 17. Scatterplots showing a comparison of rankings for the same d = 3 feature space shown in Figure 13. (a) Ranking
comparison for the two DSSJ metrics. (b) Ranking comparison for the two kNNSJ metrics. (c) Comparison of the two distance-
oblivious metrics. (d) Comparison of the two distance-aware metrics. Note that across all figures, the distance-oblivious metrics
(DSSJ: Number of Neighbors and kNNSJ: In-degree) have numerous points that share the same rank, and so they have a smaller
range of possible rank values compared to the distance-aware metrics ( DSSJ: Mean Distance and kNNSJ: Mean Distance to k
Neighbors).