JBIS Vol 71 No.10 October 2018 375
ET PROBES, NODES, AND LANDBASES: a Proposed Galactic 
Communications Architecture and Implied Search Strategies 
JOHN GERTZ Foundation for Investing in Research on SETI Science and Technology (FIRSST). Correspondence: Zorro Productions, 
125 University Avenue, Suite 101, Berkeley, CA, 94710. Tel: (510) 548-8700 USA
email jgertz@firsst.org 
Land-based beacons, information laden probes sent into our solar system, and more distal communication nodes have 
each been proposed as the most likely means by which we might be contacted by ET . Each method, considered in isolation 
from ET’s point of view, has limitations and flaws. An overarching galactic communication architecture that tethers together 
probes, nodes, and land bases is proposed as a better overall solution. From this more efficient construct flows several 
conclusions: (a) Earth has been thoroughly surveilled, (b) Earth will be contacted in due course, (c) seti beyond half the 
distance that Earth’s EM has reached (~35-50 L Y) is futile, and (d) the very quiescence of the galaxy paradoxically implies 
that that Drake’s N = many, and that there is a system of galactic governance. Search strategies are proposed to detect the 
described probe-node-land based communications network. 
 
Keywords: SETI, ET, Nodes, Probes, Lurkers, Fermi’s Paradox
1 INTRODUCTION 
ET might be motivated to communicate with Earth in order to 
trade information; or ET might wish to disseminate its values, 
beliefs, history, art, religion, and so forth, without regard to re-
ceiving anything in return; or ET’s main purpose might be to 
enlist us into a galactic alliance for the wellbeing of all member 
civilizations, i.e., law and order may be ET’s prime imperative. 
Any or all of these goals might be achieved by direct civiliza-
tion-to-civilization communication by means of, for example, 
laser or radio transmissions. Such civilization-to-civilization 
transmissions are sometimes referred to in the literature as 
“beacons, ” and the search for them (including the search for 
signals not intended for us, but acquired by us through eaves -
dropping) constitutes the classic and still most common seti 
research protocol [1, 2]. However, there are many reasons why 
ET might not choose to communicate with beacons. For exam-
ple, a civilization must simultaneously deploy many beacons, 
each directed at a likely target star for eons in order to happen 
upon a receiver that might eventually turn to it. Alternatively, 
if ET’s transmitter sequentially targets thousands of stars, while 
Earth’s receiver sequentially targets thousands of stars then the 
chances of them aligning in time are nearly impossible unless 
they are targeting the exact same set of stars (why would they?), 
and even then the chances of alignment are tiny during any 
one duty cycle. Additionally, there is the immense problem of 
receiving a return message. ET must either have an all-sky-all-
the-time system or have a receiver dedicated to each and every 
star on its target list, since it will have no a priori idea which 
star might harbor a listening civilization or in which duty cycle 
its signal might be received, or how long the receiving civili -
zation might take to decode the message and decide upon its 
response. However, this is only the start of the sending civiliza-
tion’s problems. The two civilizations must be able to commu-
JBIS VOLUME 71 2018 PAGES 375-381
nicate in some fundamental way. If one speaks in words, as we 
understand the term, but the other speaks in colors or bee-like 
waggle dances, the chance of communicating anything more 
than “we also exist” is small. If ET is vastly more advanced than 
us (a statistical likelihood, since what are the chances that, in 
the billions of years in which it might have evolved, they also 
are in their first century of electronic technology?), then com -
munication may be pointless from ET’s point of view. After all, 
would we feel the need to discuss literature or mathematics 
with Australopithecus aferensis? 
 
There is then the problem of the immense danger facing 
any civilization that decided to signal. Beacons are deadly dan-
gerous (do not try this at home). A beacon would give away 
ET’s exact location, as would Earth with its reply. Just in the 
signal strength and type, ET will give away much about its 
level of advancement. An embedded message may have very 
unintended consequences. For example, the Voyager plaque 
showing a naked man and woman with the man’s hand raised 
in a sign of peace, might convey that our species has no thorns, 
horns, shells or other obvious means of defense, and is there -
fore weak. Who knows but that a raised hand might have a 
similar meaning to ET as what a raised middle finger means 
in American culture. As good looking as we think we are, ET 
might find our visage repulsive, vaguely resembling some ver -
min on its planet. Our plaque sent in peace might actually in -
vite a pre-emptive attack. 
If the beacon is very bright and very complicated, the re -
ceiving civilization may fear to respond. If ET communicates 
with a flux that is a million times more powerful than our best 
transmitter, Arecibo, dare we respond with Arecibo and there-
by let ET know just how feeble we are? If we try to bluff ET into 
believing that we are a mighty species with awesome powers, 
but that we merely choose not to use our own gargantuan ra -
376 Vol 71 No.10 October 2018 JBIS
dio transmitter, do we perhaps invite the pre-emptive annihila-
tion we are trying to avert because they would fear us [3]? The 
dangers may be so profound that ET civilizations that employ 
beacons (i.e., engage in METI) may not achieve the longevity 
necessary for likely detection by Earth because they are soon 
exterminated by others.
These and many other problems can be solved if ET simply 
sends a message to us in a probe [4,5,6,7,8,9], which is defined 
here as ET-derivative objects sent to any solar system for the 
purposes of surveillance and/or communication with its resi -
dent technological species. Probes offer a variety of advantages 
over beacons. As AI machines they can hide their planet of or-
igin, or reveal it as judgment might warrant. For all but near -
by stars, the per bit cost of the information payload (e.g., con -
tained on something like a small thumb drive) is vastly cheaper 
than the cost to transmit the same information via continuous-
ly broadcasting beacons [10,11]. It is hard to be more specific 
than this, since an exact comparison would need to consider 
such unknown factors as the mass of the probe, its speed, the 
gravity of its launch site and minimum escape velocity from its 
solar system versus the width of the informationally compara-
ble beacon’s beam at the point of reception (determining the 
amount of wasted flux) and the length of time a beacon must 
continuously broadcast before being received. 
Probes would be able to surveil at close range, gathering data 
on their target solar systems even in the absence of communi -
cation with a technological species. Probes nullify the limiting 
effect of Drake’s L, the length of time that an intelligent civili -
zation transmits beacons, since probes might long survive their 
progenitor civilizations. However, these and other advantages 
of probes are for naught if ET wishes to receive a message in 
return. Probes might pile up uselessly, waiting for such time, as 
ever, as a technological society might evolve in the solar system 
of their presence. They could spend those eons doing surveil -
lance and research, but without a gargantuan transmitter they 
would not be able to relay their findings home. 
This author [12,13] has argued that the problems inherent in 
probes can be addressed by a system of nodes, defined as probes 
that are not necessarily located within our solar system but that 
are explicitly designed to communicate among themselves, 
as well as with technological civilizations within their area of 
service. The fact that beacons are so inherently dangerous that 
no truly intelligent species would dare to deploy them may ac-
tually have given rise to a system of communication beacons 
that are offset from the civilizations associated with them. Early 
ET civilizations may have sent beacons to orbit nearby stars, 
reasoning that if the respondent launches an attack it will be 
against a decoy. Likewise, the first civilizations that responded 
to those beacons would do so from their similarly offset trans-
mitters. As a result, a proto-nodal communication system may 
be of the same age as the very first ET-to-ET transmissions.
However, as this author has previously described them, 
nodes also have distinct drawbacks. They would have only a 
limited capacity to surveil Earth if the nearest one is located 
at an interstellar distance. At even close interstellar distances, 
Earth’s EM leakage damps down to incoherence from which 
not much useful information might be gleaned other than per-
haps that they are of artificial derivation [14]. 
Here it will be argued that the best solution may be a net -
work of ET probes, nodes, and land-based systems tethered to-
gether into a comprehensive communications architecture. In 
terms of hierarchical computing power, one might, by analogy 
only, imagine a probe as having the power of a laptop; a node as 
having the power of a supercomputer; while a land base might 
host a server farm and multiple quantum supercomputers. For 
conceptual purposes only, probes might orbit every star, and 
therefore be spaced at ~3-6 light years (LY) in our region of 
the galaxy; nodes might be positioned at 25 LY intervals, and 
land-based member civilizations might be located at an aver -
age distance of 250 LY from one another. It also might be that 
nodes orbit most or all stars for the purpose of repeating and 
amplifying signals. Perhaps most of these are sub-nodes in that, 
while being signal repeaters, they otherwise lack comprehen -
sive analytical abilities.
2 PROBES
2.1 Probes as Surveillance Systems
Flyby probes. In the first instance, nodes or land bases might 
send simple flyby probes through every stellar system for the 
purposes of surveilling them. Breakthrough Starshot (BTS) is 
designing just such a system to surveil nearby stars within the 
current century [15]. One of the greatest challenges facing BTS 
is in designing a robust communications system for sending 
information back to Earth. However, assuming that ET’s probe 
is travelling at a low enough speed, it might dispense with this 
complexity by simply recording data as it flies through a plane-
tary system on a trajectory that approaches its host star closely 
and accurately enough to be bent into a new trajectory aimed 
directly at any node of convenience, that not necessarily being 
the node that sent it. The flyby probe would simply upload its 
data as it approaches that next node. That node would in turn 
send that data on to adjacent nodes at the speed of light.
Speed is of the essence—i.e., slow speed. A major objection 
to the above is that by not transmitting the information it has 
gathered at the time of the flyby the probe has greatly length -
ened the time of its mission, sacrificing light speed for physical 
travel time. This, then, would be a good moment to digress to 
a consideration of the question of time. In order to understand 
the proposed galactic communications architecture, it is im -
portant to understand that probes and nodes would likely be 
AI machines, for which human time scales are almost mean -
ingless. Sol is not among the first generation of stars that might 
have borne technological life. There is no known reason why 
the first ET civilization in the galaxy might not have arisen 
more than five billion years ago (bya) [16]. ET’s entire library 
might contain data on hundreds of billions of stars, and have 
catalogued untold millions or billions of life-bearing planets. 
ET might have made contact with thousands or millions of 
technological societies and maintained the parochial libraries 
of those civilizations indefinitely, irrespective of whether any 
particular civilization persists or has perished. 
In deep time, the fact that a probe might take some addi -
tional tens of thousands of years to complete its mission may 
be of trivial concern. Initial flybys might have been sent past 
a molten Earth 4 bya and found it to be lifeless, but the same 
probe might have found life on Mars. As a consequence, per -
haps the node sent follow up probes at 100 million year in -
tervals, soon discovering that Mars had turned lifeless, while 
Earth blossomed with microbial life. It would not have been 
until about 2.2 – 2.5 bya that it might have detected atmospher-
ic molecular oxygen and then presumed that multicellular life 
might have arisen. On such a 100 million year time scale, the 
speed of any one flyby mission would not be a major consid -
JOHN GERTZ
JBIS Vol 71 No.10 October 2018 377
eration. In fact, slow speed would be much preferred, because 
(a) it would cost much less in energy to accelerate a probe to 
the desired speed; (b) the slower the speed, the less severe the 
damage from collisions with interstellar dust or micrometeor-
ites (though cosmic rays would remain a problem—but one 
that is soluble through shielding and/or self-correcting data 
redundancy); (c) less energy would be required to decelerate 
upon arrival at the target system using solar radiation and solar 
wind (it could use the same solar wind and radiation to reaccel-
erate out of our solar system); (d) at slower speeds the probe’s 
trajectory can be more easily bent as it approaches the star; and 
(e) more data might be gathered at slower flyby speeds.
Orbiting probes. Once Earth had been determined to have 
entered its multicellular life form phase, one or more perma -
nently orbiting probes might have been sent. If ET has a good 
idea of the average time between multicellularity and the emer-
gence of a technological species, it might time its probe launch-
es appropriately. Again, slow speed is of the essence to allow for 
the probe to be able to efficiently enter into an orbit without 
the need to bring immense amounts of fuel along for decel -
eration. Permanent probes would be outfitted with interstellar 
class communication receivers and transmitters. Given that the 
signal, be it radio or optical, would likely be monochromatic 
and of an exactly known frequency to the receiving node, it can 
be of relatively modest power. 
Just because we are being surveilled does not mean that 
we live in a zoo. The probes hypothesized here are compatible 
with, but different from, those hypothesized in the well-known 
“zoo hypothesis, ” in that probes might be here to study us, but 
they also are hypothesized to have the capacity to communicate 
with us at some point. We are not necessarily merely a nature 
preserve. Upon a probe’s detection of our EM leakage, it might 
require a significant amount of time for it to analyze those sig-
nals. Y et much more time would be required if the probe merely 
reformats and amplifies our leakage, focusing and transmitting 
it onwards to a node or land base for complete analysis and to 
communicate instructions. This process might take centuries 
or millennia. However, the net result is that when we do hear 
from our local probe(s) or node, it might be in fluent English, 
or some other terrestrial language.
2.2 Probes as “Lurkers”
David Brin has postulated that probes reside in our solar sys -
tem now, but actively decline to make their presence known 
[17]. He calls them “lurkers, ” in effect, spies. Brin offers a num-
ber of possible reasons for their refusal to make contact, among 
which are (a) that they have seen our nightly news and either 
fear or loathe us; (b) they are waiting for us to pass some devel-
opmental milestone by which we might prove our worthiness; 
(c) they follow a strict policy of non-interference (i.e., the zoo 
hypothesis); or (d) they have no need to trade information with 
us as they can simply steal it from our abundant EM communi-
cations streams, with no intention of reciprocating. 
However, there are other possibilities: 
• Probes are studying us in order to understand how best 
to make contact. Probes would only have had about a century 
to observe us through our EM leakage. We have studied dol -
phins and whales for decades and still cannot speak with them. 
It may simply take a lot of analysis to understand us. 
• The local probe(s) may not have the onboard capacity to 
accomplish a full analysis of our civilization, nor the authority 
to make contact. It may be passing information back to a node 
or land based command and control center for a final determi-
nation. In such an event, contact will be made in due course, 
but that contact may be a century or more into our future.
• The local probe(s) or node is signaling us now, but we 
simply have not yet made the detection, or, we may actually 
have made a detection, but thrown it out as a hard to interpret 
transient or as RFI (see below).
• A probe might appropriate all the knowledge it could 
want from our EM leakage. However, the current hypothesis 
may mean that Earth has a crucial role to play in the galactic 
communications architecture. In exchange for full member -
ship in the galactic club, Earth might be required to dedicate 
itself to building and launching nodes and probes. In effect, 
Earth might assume responsibility for the maintenance of the 
local communication network. This, of course, would also be in 
Earth’s own interest.
 
2.3 Where are they? 
If our solar system contains many probes, in the spirit of Fermi, 
it should be asked why we cannot readily see evidence of them. 
The very simple answer is that probes are probably fairly small, 
possibly no larger than an automobile, and perhaps as small as 
a tennis ball or smaller. In our vast solar system, they would re-
main unnoticed were their discovery solely reliant upon seren-
dipity. We might only find them if they are actively signaling to 
Earth, or if we catch them in the act of signaling to a node [18]. 
3 NODES
3.1 What’s the rush? 
As with probes, high speed is counterproductive. If nodes are 
launched into free orbit around the center of the Milky Way 
(MW), they would seem to be most functional when travelling 
at about the same orbital speed as the star systems they serve. 
If nodes orbit stars (including possibly our own), then, as with 
probes, a slower entry speed into our solar system is necessary 
in order facilitate deceleration, and thereafter maneuver into 
an orbit. Moreover, a node that moves too quickly will be flung 
out of the MW .
3.2 The Features of Nodes
This author has elsewhere envisioned nodes as having com -
monalities with cell phone towers, the Internet, an escrow 
service that ensures fair information exchange among civiliza-
tions, and a lending library [12].
3.3 Nodes as a Dating App
To the above, this author would now add that nodes may pro-
vide the physical backbone for software that may be most akin 
to a dating app. There has been the tacit assumption among 
seti researchers that ET will transmit to us a uniform body of 
knowledge. However, nodes may no more represent a homog-
enous galactic civilization than does the Internet. There may, 
in fact, be no Encyclopedia Galactica (EG) embodying a sin -
gle galactic culture. Nodes might instead resemble a dating site 
that marries together civilizations with enough in common to 
intelligibly communicate. Our local node might recommend 
specific civilizations to us. EG might actually be a collection of 
 ET PROBES, NODES, AND LANDBASES: a Proposed Galactic Communications Architecture and Implied Search Strategies
378 Vol 71 No.10 October 2018 JBIS
parochial encyclopedias. If nodes help determine, for example, 
that a given civilization might have enough in common with 
Earth, it would send them our Wikipedia or Encyclopedia Bri-
tannica, and send us their equivalent. It might also translate 
from one language to another, or give us the Rosetta stone tools 
to enable us to do this ourselves. Then if mutually desired, it 
could put each of us in direct communication with the other 
through the galactic node system, masking the exact location 
of each. This feature of the galactic communication network 
might allow for the following features:
• We would be free to adopt the religion or art of one civili-
zation, while rejecting that of another civilization.
• Instead of relying on the node’s judgment, we might be 
free to examine ET profiles, choosing for ourselves which civ -
ilizations we wish to further study. Our node might offer only 
a thumbnail at first, and then would download on request as 
much as we wanted from that civilization, subject perhaps to 
the rule that the node nearest that civilization would be au -
thorized to download our full set of information as well (albeit, 
much later as limited by the speed of light). There might be no 
point in putting us in contact with a cuttlefish-like color com -
municating civilization, or one that is a billion years in advance 
of us. By digging into our node’s databank, we would, in effect, 
have a virtual conversation with any ET civilization of interest. 
The actual civilization could be quite remote, say, 50,000 LY 
away. It might also be the case that some, or even all, of the civ-
ilizations of most interest to us are no longer extant, or that we 
have made virtual contact with a civilization much earlier in its 
history, and that the same civilization is currently too advanced 
for meaningful direct communication. 
• Crucially, the proposed probe, node, and land base galactic 
architecture offers all involved anonymity, and therefore securi-
ty. Even if civilizations A and B decide to communicate in real 
time, limited only by light speed, they will never know each oth-
er’s locations. This is because their respective messages might go 
through dozens or hundreds of nodes, of whom only the first 
and last know the positions of the respective civilizations. Ano-
nymity may be a vital and intended feature of the system not just 
for the safety and security of individual civilizations, but also for 
the whole of the galaxy. Anonymity would serve as a break on 
would be attempts to form aggressive alliances or empires.
• The proposed architecture allows for multiple networks, 
just as many countries have competing cell phone systems or 
one might choose among various search engines.
4 LAND-BASED COMMAND AND CONTROL CENTERS
It may be that probes report to nodes, and nodes report to 
land-based command and control centers. Whereas probes and 
nodes are in all likelihood AI machines, the beings that inhabit 
the land bases may be life forms of recognizable organic chem-
istry, or they may be robotic AI beings, having been made by 
but then replaced their natural predecessors. Land bases within 
the proposed architecture would not be the capitals of empires 
any more than a server farm hosting an Internet cloud is an 
emperor. There may be no ruler anywhere in the galaxy, even 
though, as argued above, there must be rules. If simple enough, 
the rules can run on autopilot with rewards (membership in 
the galactic architecture) and punishments (complete annihi -
lation) that are simple to understand and administer.
Von Neumann replicators are interesting theoretical con -
structs [19], but they may not exist. In addition to possibly be-
ing galactically illegal, they may be too difficult to construct 
in practice. Imagine a replicator on an asteroid. It strains the 
imagination as to how it might fabricate computer chips in the 
absence of any manufacturing facility; or how it would mine 
all necessary materials, say, the lithium and cobalt that might 
be necessary for batteries. It might be far easier for land bases 
to be the mining and manufacturing hub for the probes and 
nodes that would be needed to service its local area. 
Land bases might also be the repository of the deepest store 
of knowledge, and have the greatest computing sophistication. 
Land bases should be considered broadly as having the natu -
ral resources to build probes, nodes, and supercomputers and 
endowed with the intelligence to organize this, be that intelli -
gence carbon based, AI or other. Small bodies, such as aster -
oids, or artificial bodies, such as space stations, are not pre -
cluded. If the proposed architecture is reliant upon land bases, 
then our participation in the galactic order is necessary. This 
will be Earth’s greatest bargaining chip. ET will not need us for 
our knowledge, and in fact may get annoyed or bored if we try 
to impress it with how many prime numbers we know. As for 
E=Mc2, they have heard that one too many times before also. 
They may be mildly interested in Beethoven or Jackson Pollack, 
but their real need is for us to assist in maintaining the galactic 
communications network in Earth’s immediate neighborhood. 
Consequently, ET probes will not “lurk” indefinitely. The ga -
lactic architecture needs us, and we are not therefore helplessly 
dependent upon ET’s merciful altruism.
5 THE GALACTIC COMMUNICATION ARCHECTECTURE AS 
LAWGIVER AND POLICE FORCE
Tipler has argued that we are alone, at least in the MW if not 
in the entire visible universe, because if we were not alone, an 
earlier aggressive civilization would surely have created a von 
Neumann replicator, and that one solitary machine would pro-
ceed to exponentially recreate itself ad nauseum until it had 
gobbled up all matter in the galaxy [20]. Alternatively, had even 
one ordinary carbon-based life form set out to colonize the gal-
axy, due to its exponential growth, it too would have acted like 
a horde of locusts, per the classic interpretation of Fermi’s Par-
adox. Either way, the result is a tragedy of the common. Since, 
obviously, this has not happened, it is deduced that we must be 
alone. However, there are at least two other possible solutions 
to the conundrum. It may be that Drake’s N does not = 1 (us), 
but that N = 2; us plus one other, a “berserker” civilization, that, 
like the first queen bee that emerges from her cell and immedi-
ately kills all other queens that would otherwise have hatched 
after her, this berserker civilization (or its AI creations) will de-
stroy us as soon as it detects our EM leakage [21]. 
There is, though, a third possibility, namely that the appar -
ent quietude of the galaxy paradoxically leads to the deduction 
that N = at least a few and perhaps many, because a lack of col-
onization must mean that there is a system of galactic govern -
ance in place, regulated by probes, nodes, and land bases, that 
vigilantly guards against the type of tragedy of the common 
implied by Tipler or the berserker hypothesis. In practice, seti 
research is based on the premise that N = many, and therefore 
it presupposes a system of governance.
Haley, inventing the term “metalaw, ” proposed a galactic 
rule book governing relations among its technological civiliza-
tions [22]. Others either elaborated upon or criticized the pu -
JOHN GERTZ
JBIS Vol 71 No.10 October 2018 379
tative corpus of laws [23,24,25]. Proponents argue in favor of 
a universal principle of “do unto others, ” and “equality, ” while 
opponents tend to criticize on grounds that metalaw is anthro-
pomorphic with scant application to beings far more advanced 
or far different from humans, much less robotic life. In this 
author’s view, laws must exist, but they must be equally appli -
cable to AI as well as naturally evolved life. This set of rules 
might include: (a) severe limitations to colonization, perhaps 
limited to a civilization’s immediate non-biological neighbor -
hood, or even to one nearby star, and only then when neces -
sitated by the imminent death of one’s own star; (b) outlawing 
of von Neumann replicators; and (c) outlawing of aggression 
against other civilizations, probes, nodes, and land bases. One 
might dispense with all the bodies of law that might govern 
non-aggressive behavior, brotherhood, equality and the like, 
since under the proposed architecture, no civilization knows 
the whereabouts of any other, and therefore can do it no harm. 
Since colonization is forbidden, there would be no border dis-
putes. The galaxy’s entire rule book may consist of two words 
variously translatable as: “stay still” or “keep away. ” 
The penalty for noncompliance would presumably be plan-
etary destruction. It is speculated that the probes/nodes/land 
bases would have the means of disposing of aggressive civi -
lizations as automatically as our immune system deals with 
pathogens, without the need for judge or jury, as we would un-
derstand those terms. This should not surprise us, as we our -
selves are only a few years away from deploying autonomous 
automobiles and battlefield weapons whose algorithms will be 
fully empowered to make life and death ethical decisions. That 
said, probes could act as an early warning system that would 
presumably be able to determine far in advance whether a civi-
lization is likely to go rogue, and might be able to take deterring 
actions short of annihilation.
Alternatively, and bleakly, probes might be currently sur -
veilling us with the intent of deciding whether to engage with 
us—or to destroy us. They may now be analyzing the data (e.g., 
violent newscasts versus feel-good movies like Forrest Gump). 
The local probe(s) may be streaming data back to a local node, 
which in turn is passing it back to a command and control land 
base, all in a grand determination of whether the galaxy should 
welcome us, leave us alone for the moment while more data is 
gathered, perhaps over the next several millennia, or destroy 
Earth forthwith. An algorithm that is as incapable of caring or 
mercy as we are when we pull a weed from our garden may 
even now be determining Earth’s fate. It may be that a local 
probe, placed within the Solar System eons ago, is laced with 
a self-replicating toxin or nano-grey-goo that can be instruct -
ed from afar to destroy life on Earth. If Judgment Day is well 
neigh, it will be by act of computer code rather than of a god.
6 SEARCH STRATEGIES
 
The proposed probe/node/land base galactic communications 
architecture hypothesis leads to a set of recommended search 
strategies. Most of these assume that one or more probes or 
nodes are transmitting to Earth now, but there might also be vi-
able strategies by which communications between an intra-so-
lar system probe or node and a more remote node might be 
intercepted. 
6.1 Emphasize Nearby Stars
Targeted star searches are recommended for nearby stars 
that have had time to receive our EM leakage and to have re -
sponded, i.e., stars ~<35 – 50 LY . Our local node may be in 
orbit around any of them. Reasonable solutions to the Drake 
Equation when applied to biologically based and transmitting 
civilizations yield a distance to the nearest such civilization as 
being much further than this. However, it is very reasonable 
to assume that nodes may be much closer than the nearest or -
ganic land based civilization, and that nearby stars are there -
fore prime candidates so long as they are closer than ~<35 – 50 
LY . Beyond that, it is recommended that the predominant seti 
search paradigm be reversed, whereby stars are explicitly tar -
geted and foreground probes or nodes would only be detect -
ed by serendipity. The new paradigm would search for local 
probes and nodes, but be fully able to detect, by serendipity, 
background and distant beacons, say by preferentially targeting 
local objects such as asteroids or the area around the sun, when 
they are transiting the plane of the MW . 
6.2 Trade High Sensitivity for Wider Field of View (FOV)
Targeted star searches generally use a narrow beam with a 
small FOV and high sensitivity, as the signal they would detect 
is presumed to be weak because it comes from a great inter -
stellar distance. The preferred strategy for detecting intra-solar 
system probes/nodes would be to employ a wide FOV , since 
an intra-solar system probe might be found in any direction. 
In exchange for this wide FOV , high sensitivity can be sacri -
ficed, since a probe in our own solar system is presumed to be 
transmitting at a power that any reasonably capable telescope 
might detect. Since telescopes generally have a fixed FOV , the 
effective recommendation is to use the existing FOV to mosaic 
areas of interest, sacrificing integration time, and with it sensi-
tivity, to do so.
6.3 Enlist Amateurs
Amateur radio and optical astronomers might be recruited. If 
the sought-after signal is local, and therefore robust, amateurs 
might be able to successfully detect it. Given the plethora of 
previous seti and non-seti sky surveys, it is unlikely that an am-
ateur would detect a persistent signal that had somehow been 
missed. However, if a probe or node broadcasts to Earth very 
intermittently, say once a decade, perhaps from the surface of 
an asteroid, and then only for a short period of time, then an 
all-hands-on-deck strategy may be necessary in order to detect 
its signal.
6.4 Where to Look within Our Own Solar System
A probe that is transmitting to Earth could be orbiting the sun 
in any plane, forcing us to survey 360 degrees of sky. However, 
we can make some reasonable surmises that would narrow the 
search:
• Preferentially target the asteroid belt between Mars and 
Jupiter [2]. A probe might have landed on an asteroid where it 
might dig in for protection against micrometeorites and radia-
tion. There would be abundant sunlight for PV generation and 
useful materials for self-repair and the build out of capabilities.
• Take a special look at Earth’s only known Trojan asteroid, 
the ~30 km. wide 2010TK, located at Lagrange point, L4.
• Use the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) to detect 
probes and nodes. When the LSST becomes fully operational 
in 2022 it will conduct the most thorough visible wavelength 
 ET PROBES, NODES, AND LANDBASES: a Proposed Galactic Communications Architecture and Implied Search Strategies
380 Vol 71 No.10 October 2018 JBIS
survey of the sky ever. It will have an exceptionally wide FOV , 
and is designed to repeatedly survey the entire sky visible to it. 
It will be ideally suited for optical seti (oseti) as traditionally 
conceived as detecting a laser beacon originating from a re -
mote star system. All that would be needed is a further set of 
algorithms capable of detecting a laser signal in non-sidereal 
motion as it moves through our own solar system, either in free 
orbit around the Sun or Earth, or in solar orbit astride an object 
such as an asteroid or moon. 
 
• Preferentially target Lagrange points, especially the more 
stable L4 and L5, including the Lagrange points around both 
Earth and the other planets, on the theory that probes would 
require less energy to maintain orbital stability.
• The best solution for a probe entering our solar system 
may be for it to enter into a highly eccentric orbit around our 
Sun (a node might prefer a tight circular orbit around the Sun, 
considered below). This would obviate the need for the addi -
tional gear necessary for it to land on an asteroid or moon, and 
it would require the least amount of energy relative to what 
would be needed to either land on a solar system object, such as 
a moon or asteroid, or enter into a planet mimicking near-cir-
cular orbit either around the Earth or the Sun. A simple probe, 
one with no landing gear, and with a small communications 
system capable of reaching only the nearest stars, might not 
require the materials for build out and self-repair afforded by 
asteroids. There would also be the added benefit to the probe 
of being able to store the Sun’s energy as it closely approaches 
the Sun. It might also assume an orbit that allows it to close -
ly fly by Earth (the one obviously biological planet) once or 
twice in each orbit for closer surveillance. This suggests that 
instead of searching the 360 x 360 = 129,600 square degrees of 
sky, we might restrict the search to a more manageable ~100 - 
200 square degrees of sky around the Sun, a region never yet 
explored. Radio searches can be accomplished any time during 
the day, while laser searches might be conducted just before 
sunrise and after sunset, as well as during solar eclipses. Re -
garding the latter, archival photos of total eclipses should be 
re-examined for lasers. It is possible that a laser was caught in 
the act but ignored as a lens or pixel malfunction. Were the very 
first attempt to look for radio signals near the Sun to succeed, 
it would either imply that probes in highly elliptical orbits must 
be legion, or that there is only one or a few probes, but they are 
in tight, almost circular, orbits around the Sun. A probe in a 
highly eccentric orbit would only travel a small fraction of its 
orbit within the 100 – 200 square degrees closest to the Sun. If 
probes are not legion, and the first observation fails, follow-up 
observations should be planned at regular intervals, certainly 
not less than once per year.
• If orbiting the Sun in a highly eccentric orbit, a probe 
might be found in any plane, necessitating a 360-degree search. 
However, the search area might be reduced somewhat by deem-
phasizing or ignoring altogether the ecliptic, reasoning that of 
all possible planes of orbit, the probe would be least likely to 
be found in the debris-strewn ecliptic plane, through which it 
might otherwise be making hundreds of thousands or millions 
of transits in the course of deep time. This strategy flies in the 
face of a strategy predicated on the hypothesis that local probes 
would choose to sit on asteroids. Astronomers might choose 
the paradigm they think more promising.
• Search for life within our own outer Solar System which 
closely resembles Earth based life. Obviously, this is already a 
major goal of NASA and other space agencies. If life on Ence -
ladus or Europa proves to be Earth-like this may be evidence 
for panspermia. Panspermia between the Earth and the outer 
Solar System, in turn, might be taken as prima facie evidence 
for the past or present existence of probes that seeded them in 
common. 
6.5 Probes and Nodes as Transients
Seti researchers should accept the possibility that ET signals 
may not be sidereally stationary. The greatest bane of seti re -
search is the transient, a signal that mimics what might be ex -
pected from an extra-terrestrial beacon, but, if found in real 
time, disappears before confirmation, or if found offline, is 
absent when researches return to the same fixed location. The 
1977 WOW signal is the most famous example, but there are 
many more. When a transient is recorded that is not obviously 
RFI, instead of assuming that it might have come from a star in 
the FOV , researchers should also examine the possibility that 
the source may be a foreground probe within our own solar 
system. They should determine whether an asteroid or moon 
was also in the FOV at the time of detection, and then observe 
at the then current position of that object. If no such object 
was in the FOV at the time of original observation, or if that 
confirmatory observation is negative, they should test to deter-
mine whether the source might have been a free orbiting probe. 
If the original detection was made in real time or not too long 
thereafter, the telescope should slowly slew in a spiral around 
the point of the detected transient.
6.6 Eavesdropping on Probe-to-Node or Node-to-Node 
Communications
If a probe is not communicating with Earth, but in commu -
nication with nodes in nearby star systems (i.e., it is currently 
in lurker mode), there may still be ways in which we might 
eavesdrop on its signals: 
• Whereas probes might be most efficiently placed in an ec-
centric solar orbit, nodes might be best placed in close, nearly 
circular solar orbits. Of course, there would be abundant en -
ergy available to it there. However, there may be more impor -
tant reasons for nodes to locate themselves in close solar orbits. 
This would allow a sister node orbiting a nearby star to easily 
locate the node and thereby allow for the use of a very narrow, 
probably laser and probably phase arrayed beam. For exam -
ple, a node in a solar orbit at 0.1 AU would unfailingly receive 
0.2 wide beamed communications from its sister if that beam 
is centered on the Sun. This saves transmitter energy, while 
having the added benefit of being undetectable by life bearing 
planets, except in the rare instances that the planet happens to 
transits that 0.2 AU space as seen from the perspective of the 
transmitting node. For that reason, both the Sun and nearby 
stars should be viewed at times when the Earth transits between 
them. However, the better way to detect such a node, unless it is 
intentionally transmitting to Earth, would be by placing one or 
more receivers in solar orbits, in the hope of catching a node in 
the act of transmitting. Because the probe or node may be ac -
tively avoiding detection, the preferred orbit of our spacecraft 
would be far away from the Earth, and would sample both the 
Sun and the direction exactly opposite the Sun. 
 
• It is recommended to observe at the meridian at and 
around midnight. A probe or node in a tight orbit around the 
Sun might be caught in the act of receiving a transmission from 
a node on the other side of Earth. This technique is particularly 
recommended when a nearby star is in that position.
JOHN GERTZ
JBIS Vol 71 No.10 October 2018 381
• We might observe in a direction that is roughly in exact 
opposition to nearby stars. If a lurking probe is located on one 
side of Earth and is signaling to a node on the other, we might 
succeed in eavesdropping. 
 
• Future space missions like LUCY , an upcoming NASA 
mission to several of Jupiter’s Trojan asteroids, as well as cur -
rently flying missions to asteroids, Hayabusa2 (Japanese) and 
Oris-Rex (NASA) should train their radio receivers on their 
targeted asteroids to intercept possible probe-node communi-
cations. The asteroids should be observed from all directions, 
not assuming that its probe’s signal is directed toward Earth. 
• Similarly, archival data from the Saturn probe, Cassini, 
as well as asteroid probes, Hayabusa1, Rosetta and Dawn, and 
Jupiter probe Galileo should be re-examined for evidence of 
unaccounted for transmissions from asteroids or moons. In the 
future, any NASA or other space agency probe to solar system 
objects should be outfitted with both radio and optical receiv -
ers designed to detect ET signals. 
7 CONCLUSIONS 
A comprehensive search of our own solar system for evidence 
of ET probes may have been stymied by a wholly unwarranted 
association with UFOs [26]. Probes and nodes may be distin -
guished from UFOs along a number of parameters. UFOs have 
been the subject of investigation for decades, but not one shred 
of credible evidence has emerged in support of their existence. 
To date, virtually no explicit search for probes or nodes has 
been undertaken. UFOs are often assumed to be piloted by liv-
ing beings, the so-called “little green men. ” Probes are hypoth-
esized to be artificial constructions impervious to the needs of 
carbon life forms, such as ourselves. Therefore, they would not 
require the type of massive life support systems that carbon 
beings would require for multi-generational interstellar flight. 
UFOs are presumed to have entered the atmosphere. Probes 
are presumed to surveil Earth from space, from where they can 
readily monitor our EM transmissions. No special expertise is 
required to study UFOs, only a video camera and a butterfly 
net to catch the little green men if they land. Being objects in 
outer space, the study of probes and nodes lies squarely within 
the purview of astronomy. 
Tens of thousands of individual stars have been surveyed 
for radio or laser signals of technological origin. Breakthrough 
Listen is in the process of surveying one million more [27]. 
Perhaps the time has come to acknowledge the possibility that 
ET may no more be using star-to-star communications (except 
where nodes or land bases are orbiting nearby stars) than to 
be using smoke signals. Instead, perhaps the time has come to 
devote significant resources toward the comprehensive search 
of our own solar system for ET communications. 
1. A. Zaitsev, “Sending and Searching for Interstellar Messages, ” Acta 
Astronautica, 63, pp. 614-617, 2008.
2. G. Benford, J. Benford, D. Benford, “Searching for Cost Optimized 
Interstellar Beacons” , Astrobiology, 10, pp.491-498, 2010.
3. P .M. Todd & G.F . Miller wrote “The Evolutionary Psychology of 
Extraterrestrial Intelligence: Are There Universal Adaptations in Search, 
Aversion, and Signaling?” Biological Theory, 12, 2017.
4. J. Gertz “E.T. Probes: Looking Here As Well As There” , JBIS, Vol. 69, pp. 
88-91, 2016.
5. R. N. Bracewell, The Galactic Club: Intelligent Life in Outer Space, W . W . 
Norton & Company, New Y ork, 1974.
6. R. Bracewell, “The Opening Message from an Extraterrestrial Probe” , 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, Vol. 11, pp.58-60, 1973.
7. R. Freitas, “ A Self-Reproducing Interstellar Probe” , JBIS, Vol. 33, pp.251-
264, 1980.
8. R. Freitas, “Interstellar Probes: A New Approach to SETI” , JBIS Vol. 33, 
pp.103-109, 1980.
9. R. Burke-Ward, “Possible Existence of Extra-Terrestrial technology in 
the Solar System, ” JBIS, Vol. 53, pp. 2-12, 2000. 
10. C. Rose, and G. Wright, “Inscribed Matter as an Energy-Efficient Means 
of Communication with an Extraterrestrial Civilization” , Nature, Vol. 
431, pp.47-49, 2004.
11. M. Hippke, P . Leyland, and J.G. Learned, “Benchmarking Inscribed 
Matter Probes, ” ArXiv:1712.10262v2, May 18, 2018,
12. J. Gertz, ”Nodes: A Proposed Solution to Fermi’s Paradox, ” JBIS, 70, 
2018, pp. 454-457.
13. B. McConnell, Beyond Contact, O’Reilly, 2001, pp. 375-379. 
14. D.H. Forgan, R.S. Nichol, “ A Failure of Serendipity: the Square 
Kilometer Array Will Struggle to Eavesdrop on Human-like ETI, ” 
International Journal of Astrobiology Vol.10, 2010, pp. 77-81.
15. A. Finkbeiner, “Near Light-speed Mission to Alpha Centuri, ” Scientific 
American, March, 2017, pp. 30-37.
16. T.W . Hair, “Temporal Dispersion of the Emergence of Intelligence: An 
Inter-arrival Time Analysis, ” International Journal of Astrobiology, 10(2), 
2011, pp. 131-135.
17. D. Brin, “ An Open Letter to Alien Lurkers, ” http://www.davidbrin.com/
nonfiction/setiletter.html last accessed May 12, 2018.
18. J. Haqq-Misra and R.K. Kopparapu, “On the Likelihood of Non-
terrestrial artifacts in the Solar System, ” ArXiv: 1111.1212v1, Nov. 4, 
2011.
19. J. von Neumann, Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata, University of 
Illinois Press, Urbana, 1966.
20. F .J. Tipler, “Extraterrestrial intelligent beings do not exist, ” Journal of the 
Royal Astronomical Society, 21, 1980, pp. 267-28.
21. S. Webb, Where is Everybody? Fifty Solutions to the Fermi Paradox and 
the Problem of Extraterrestrial Life, Springer, New Y ork, 2002. 
22. A.G. Haley, “Space Law and Metalaw—a Synoptic View, ” Harvard Law 
Record, November 8,1956.
23. E. Fasan, “Discovery of ETI: terrestrial and extraterrestrial legal 
implications, ” Acta Astronautica, 21(2), 131-135, 1990.
24. R.A. Freitas, “Metalaw and interstellar relations, ” Mercury, 6 (March-
April), pp. 15-17.
25. A. Korbitz, “ Altruism, Metalaw, and Celegistics: an Extraterrestrial 
Perspective on Universal Law-making, ” in D.A. Vakoch (e.d), 
Extraterrestrial Altruism, Springer, 2014, pp. 231-247.
26. A. Tough, “How to Achieve Contact: Five Promising Strategies, ” 
in When SETI Succeeds: The Impact of High-Information Contact, 
Foundation for the Future, Bellevue, W A, 2000, pp. 115-125.
27. Isaacson, A.P .V . Siemion, G,W , Marcy, M. Lebofsky, D.C. Price, D. 
MacMahon, S. Croft, D. Deboer, J. Hicksh, D. Werthimer, S. Sheik, G. 
Hellbourg, and J.E. Enriquez, “The Breakthrough Listen Search for 
Intelligent Life: Target Selection of Nearby Stars and Galaxies” PASP , 
129(5), 054501, May 2017.
REFERENCES
Received 12 June 2018 Approved 31 October 2018
 ET PROBES, NODES, AND LANDBASES: a Proposed Galactic Communications Architecture and Implied Search Strategies