1
ET Probes: Looking Here as Well as There
JBIS, Vol. 69, pp.?-?, 2016
ET PROBES: LOOKING HERE AS WELL AS THERE
* Foundation for Investing in Research on SETI Science and 
Technology (FIRSST), Berkeley, California.
JOHN GERTZ*
Zorro Productions, 125 University Avenue, Suite 101, Berkeley, CA 94710, USA.
Email: jgertz@firsst.org 
1. INTRODUCTION
 
Since Frank Drake’s first modern attempt to listen for artificial 
extra-terrestrial radio transmissions in 1960 [1], there have 
been many such searches [2, 3, 4]. Almost all have been 
attempts to detect electro-magnetic (EM) signals originating 
from interstellar space. Bracewell first proposed that ET might 
instead opt to send fully automated spacecraft, or probes, to our 
Solar System [5, 6], a theme further developed by Freitas [7, 8]. 
Rose and Wright [9] calculated the relative efficiency of probes 
when measured in cost per byte of information conveyed across 
the cosmos. Apart from some thinking on the subject in science 
fiction [10] not much more has been written on the subject, and, 
crucially, no serious, much less systematic search for probes 
has ever been conducted. However, were probes broadcasting 
to Earth from solar or terrestrial orbits, or from the surface 
of asteroids or moons, they might well have been detected 
serendipitously were they to have come within the same field of 
view of targeted SETI star searches, or they might have shown 
up as unexplained “noise” in various radio telescope surveys, 
Project SERENDIP [11], or the Deep Space Network [12].
 Nonetheless, all prior SETI searches have been explicitly 
designed to either intercept inter- or intra-civilization 
communication streams, or to detect signals that are 
intentionally beamed at Earth, so called beacons. However, 
ET may actually prefer to send information physically via 
probes.
2. WHY SEND PROBES?
2.1 Reasons
 • Cost: Probes are a much cheaper way to transmit 
cultural values and knowledge, provided that ET values 
time, labor, raw materials, and energy and the various 
overlaps among them in a manner similar to ourselves.
 • Time: Probes are launched once (one and done); 
EM beacons, to be effective, must be transmitted 
Almost all SETI searches to date have explicitly targeted stars in the hope of detecting artificial radio or optical transmissions. 
It is argued that extra-terrestrials (ET) might regard sending physical probes to our own Solar System as a more efficient means 
for sending large amounts of information to Earth. Probes are more efficient in terms of energy and time expenditures; may 
solve for the vexing problem of Drake’s L factor term, namely, that the civilization wishing to send information may not co-
exist temporally with the intended recipient; and they alleviate ET’s reasonable fear that the intended recipient might prove 
hostile. It is argued that probes may be numerous and easier to find than interstellar beacons.
Keywords: Probes, SETI, ET, Altruism, Asteroids 
continuously over millions or even billions of years.
 • Temporal efficiency: If Earth is the only biologically 
indicative planet within ET’s radius of interest, then their 
beacon might be pointed at Earth 24/7 over whatever 
time is required. However, if Earth is just one on a long 
list of targets of interest to ET, and ET’s home star is just 
one on a large list of targets for our telescopes, unless 
ET builds at least one very powerful transmitter for each 
target, a temporal alignment between its transmitters and 
our receivers will become more unlikely as the number 
of targets per transmitter increases. 
 • Labour: Small probes might be built on an assembly 
line at less overall expense than the build out and 
maintenance of one or more gargantuan transmitters.
 • Raw materials: With the same quantity of raw materials 
many probes might be built for each very large 
transmitter.
 • Energy: The energy required to accelerate to only 
relatively low speeds (see below) probably from the 
surface of a low gravity object (e.g., space station, small 
moon or asteroid) of even very many probes would still 
be orders of magnitude less expensive than the energy 
needed to power transmissions over millions or billions 
of years.
2.2 Speed
There would be no need for speed in the event ET sent 
a probe as a response to its first detection of Earth’s 
biologically indicative atmosphere. ET would correctly 
reason that Earth’s bio-signature would precede the 
evolution of technologically competent intelligence by 
hundreds of millions or billions of years. Therefore, a probe 
could take an arbitrarily long time to arrive, and hence the 
energy requirements and cost of launch would be relatively 
small. In the grand scheme of things, it would not matter at 
all if a probe took even millions of years to arrive. A slower 
probe is actually preferred in terms of the energy required 
to decelerate it, as well as to reduce damage due to kinetic 
impacts with small dust particles en route. 
2
John Gertz
2.3 Energetics
The exact comparison of economics and energetics between a 
probe and EM transmissions cannot now be calculated because 
it will depend on the as yet unknown mass of the probe, the 
speed to which it is accelerated, and the gravity at its site of 
launching, as compared to the signal strength, dwell time and 
duration of the beacon transmission. However, any reasonable 
estimate will greatly favor probes [13, 14, 9] such that the 
energy required to transmit ET’s knowledge and culture by 
means of ET’s equivalent of a hard drive delivered by probe 
should be vastly less than the energy required to transmit 
the same knowledge and culture using EM signals broadcast 
continuously over potentially billions of years.
 Instead of broadcasting a beacon from ET’s home planet 
using immense energy merely to attract our attention, a beacon 
from an orbiting probe (a) might be initiated only after it detects 
Earth’s artificial EM leakage; (b) might require only a few 
watts of energy to broadcast its beacon; and (c) the intended 
recipients might receive the information bundle as soon as it has 
the technology to retrieve the probe, or, in the event the probe 
broadcasts its full message, to aim an appropriate receiver at it, 
rather than having to wait for potentially thousands of years for 
messages to travel back and forth across the Galaxy.
 The current generation of radio telescopes can detect ET’s 
interstellar radio beacons, but will not likely be able to extract 
a message that might be imbedded within it. To detect anything 
more than ET’s carrier wave either we must build vastly larger 
radio telescopes, or ET must use a transmitter whose power 
vastly exceeds our current technology. Either way, a small 
probe is much more efficient, either because ET values its 
own expenditures or correctly anticipates the limitations of our 
receiving technology. 
2.4 The L Factor
Probes solve for the problem of the L factor in the Drake 
equation, namely the length of time that a civilization broadcasts 
to the stars. If ET stops broadcasting in a short amount of time, 
either because it has lost interest, has self-destructed or has 
otherwise gone extinct, we would be very unlikely to receive 
its transmissions, simply because our civilization and theirs 
would not temporally co-exist. However, if ET communicates 
via probes, it need not have to live long enough to coincide 
temporally with mankind in order to transmit its desired 
information bundle to our younger civilization. By sending 
probes, ET might seek to insure that its knowledge and culture 
will survive its own demise.
2.5 It is Safer for ET to Send Probes
Probes avoid ET’s reasonable fear that the recipient civilization 
(or an eavesdropper in the same communication pathway) may 
turn out to be hostile. If lacking such confidence, ET’s probe 
need not reveal its position of origin. By definition, interstellar 
beacons do reveal their location. An intelligent probe might 
be capable of making its own determination as to whether the 
receiving civilization might be hostile, and be authorized to 
give out its return address only in the event that a threat is not 
perceived. 
2.6 Probes as Life Forms
It is an oft-stated thesis of SETI scientists that ET is much more 
likely to broadcast than to visit. Interstellar space travel may be 
simply too onerous for muti-cellular carbon based life forms. 
For mankind, employing any technology we can currently 
envision, a trip to even the nearest stars would entail very many 
generations of whom all but the first and last would be born, live 
their lives and die en route. However, another oft-repeated thesis 
of SETI scientists is that the first life we encounter may actually 
be silicon rather than carbon based [15]. In effect, a biological 
life form would invent AI and upload its consciousness to it. 
That AI might self-replicate and very rapidly evolve in a non-
Darwinian fashion. Such silicon beings would surely be better 
able to endure long space journeys than carbon based biology 
as we know it. Consequently, probes might not be simply ET’s 
artifact, but its life form, fully able to pass the Turing test. 
3. WHERE TO LOOK
The author believes that the most likely place in the Solar 
System to find probes is on the surface of asteroids. However, 
let us examine other possibilities first.
3.1 Earth
Earth would be a poor choice to look for a probe, since any 
that were sent here long ago would have by now been buried 
in sediment, subducted, inundated, covered by lava or glaciers, 
or stepped on by a dinosaur. Even whole cities that are a mere 
few thousands of years old are already buried deep in the dust. 
A probe sent to Earth millions or billions of years ago would 
probably never be found, but if they were to become the object 
of search, it should be by geologists or archeologists, and not 
by astronomers. Additionally, the machinery needed to affect 
a soft landing on a relatively large gravity, thick atmosphere 
object such as the Earth might add deleteriously to the size and 
complexity of the probe. 
 
3.2 Lagrange Points
Lagrange points expose probes to sustained radiation, and 
would require a propulsion system built to last for eons in order 
to maintain orbital stability. A probe might require a propulsion 
system capable of decelerating and landing on a moon or 
asteroid, but that system need be engineered to be used just 
once.
3.3 Moons
 
A probe could bury itself on Earth’s Moon to protect against 
radiation, but there are fewer useful raw materials, assuming 
that the probe is capable of self-repair or build out, and more 
energy would be required to decelerate on landing. Other moons 
in the Solar System may have a better assortment of useful 
materials near their surfaces, but many have active geologies 
(e.g., Io) or tectonic-like ice layers (e.g., Europa), that may 
bury or subduct probes over time, and relatively large gravities 
and atmospheres making landing more difficult and hazardous. 
3.4 Oort Cloud and Kuiper Belt
Comets in the Oort cloud are too distant from the sun for the 
purposes of efficient PV energy generation. Also, ET’s beacon 
would have to be much more powerful to be detected from 
Earth, and there would be trillions of targets for SETI scientists 
to sift through distributed in a full sphere. ET would hopefully 
have more sense than to sit on an Oort cloud object. Kuiper 
objects would suffer from similar, though lesser, limitations.
3
ET Probes: Looking Here as Well as There
3.5 Asteroids
Inner Solar System asteroids are rich in raw materials and close 
enough to the sun for practical PV energy generation. They are 
typically much lower gravity objects than major moons, and 
devoid of atmospheres and active geology. Hence they are easier 
to land on, and probes would not be subjected to the subduction, 
inundation or other vicissitudes that would result from an active 
geology. Since they are largely restricted to the ecliptic they offer 
a smaller search area than the Oort cloud. There are also far fewer 
asteroids than Oort or Kuiper objects, making such a search easier. 
A probe could burrow into an asteroid for long term refuge from 
radiation, emerging very briefly, for example, only once a century, 
to monitor for artificial EM leakage, which would, if detected, 
trigger its beaconing behavior. Therefore, the author believes that 
asteroids are the best candidates for probe searches. 
4. WHAT TO LOOK FOR
As pure speculation, the author would look for a low power 
(e.g., <10W) radio beacon. At some frequency or frequencies, 
the probe might, in effect, simply “beep! beep! beep!”. In order 
to download the probe’s useful information it would have to be 
physically retrieved. In theory, ET probes could transmit using 
optical lasers. However, with so many amateur and professional 
telescopes trained on the sky every night, it would seem that 
ET lasers should have serendipitously shown up on some CCD 
outputs by now.
 The probe itself would likely be small but much larger than 
its payload alone, that payload being its information storage 
device, equivalent to a hard drive. However, the probe would 
also require shielding, a guidance system, sensors, deceleration 
and landing capability, transmitter, and fabrication capability 
akin to a 3-D printer to repair itself and/or build out new 
capabilities or even to replicate in situ. As pure speculation, this 
author imagines that probes might be larger than a basketball, 
but smaller than an automobile.
 
5. PROBES MAY BE PLENTIFUL
If extant, probes may be far more plentiful than interstellar 
beacons. There are three possible pathways by which the Solar 
System might be rich in probes: 
5.1 Multiple Civilizations
Probes may have been sent by multiple civilizations, many or 
most of whom could well be currently extinct. Unless L is quite 
large, this by itself might mean that probes would be far more 
numerous than interstellar beacons.
 
5.2 Sequential Versions
Some or all ET civilizations might have sent multiple probes 
sequentially, as versions 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, etc., each informing us of 
the latest developments in their arts, history, philosophy, science, 
or whatever they wish to share. If we ourselves had sent probes, 
say, 200 years ago, informing our galactic neighbors of the great 
achievements of Newton, Rembrandt and Beethoven, then a 
mere 200 years later we would probably feel impelled to send 
out new probes, now featuring Einstein, Tarantino and Elvis.
5.3 Replication upon Arrival
Some or all of the probes might be von Neumann replicators 
[16], that is, they may duplicate themselves upon arrival using 
the raw materials they find here.
6. IF PLENTIFUL, WOULD PROBES 
BE EASY TO FIND?
A crucial feature of probes used as beacons is that they are, 
by definition, and unlike their interstellar counterparts, always 
pointed at Earth. Logically, they should have a target set of 
one. By contrast, interstellar beacons may cycle sequentially 
through a list encompassing hundreds, thousands or millions 
of targets. 
 Over possibly a billion years or more, probes might really 
pile up, such that there may be very many of them in the 
ecliptic, possibly designed to be easily detectable. Testing 
the probe hypothesis might not require our most powerful 
telescopes. Even small radio telescopes might be able to easily 
detect broadcasting probes.
 However, this line of reasoning can be completely turned 
around. Given that no probe has heretofore been discovered by 
serendipity, this might only mean that (a) probes are not plentiful; 
or (b) most probes do not continuously transmit to Earth. Maybe 
they are plentiful, but do not broadcast unless first awakened 
by our own transmissions, perhaps by radar. Priority might 
therefore be given to turning radio telescopes toward asteroids 
that have previously been probed by radar. Perhaps probes 
transmit very intermittently, for example, only once per century. 
Probes might be plentiful but most or all do not broadcast. 
Rather, they might have to be physically encountered. In such 
event, their discovery will have to await a time when spacecraft 
routinely visit asteroids, presumably on mining missions. More 
cynically, as Brin has argued [17], perhaps probes are “lurkers,” 
intentionally remaining silent for purposes of their own, such 
as to “steal” our science and culture while giving nothing in 
return. Such spy probes might be intentionally designed to avoid 
detection, making their discovery by any current technology 
very unlikely. Ominously, it has also been suggested that ET 
probes may be in our Solar System now, however, neither for 
the purpose of communicating with us nor to spy on us. Rather, 
their mission is to destroy Earth at their first detection of 
technologically generated EM. They might, therefore, already 
be at their nefarious work of redirecting the orbits of comets or 
asteroids to impact our planet [18].
7. WHAT’S IN IT FOR ET?
The main drawback that ET might consider in sending probes 
is that it will assume, a priori, that either there will never be 
a response, or a response will be delayed by many millions 
of years. What’s in it for ET under these circumstances? 
The probable galactic currency is knowledge. Using EM 
transmissions, there can be commerce, albeit, delayed by the 
speed of light. With commerce as a motivation, trade might look 
something like this: ET might transmit an abridged version of 
its knowledge and culture as a loss leader. When Earth transmits 
in return, say, some Mozart, Maxwell’s equations, Spielberg’s 
Close Encounters of the Third Kind, and information on a few 
hundred species, ET will send more information. If we next send 
Beethoven, Bach, the Beatles, Einstein’s equations, Monet, and 
the human genome, ET will send more. Finally, once trust has 
been established, and we give them everything (the Internet, 
Library of Congress, all of our music, etc.), then ET will send 
its unabridged version of Encyclopedia Galactica (EG). Using 
radio or optical transmissions, even if an ET at 500 LY distance 
4
John Gertz
must wait 1000 years for a response, at least there will be one. 
A fairly complete exchange, involving practices of fair trade, 
might take less than 10,000 years. So why would ET choose to 
send information laden probes if they understand, a priori, that 
the best they can hope for is a first response hundreds of millions 
or billions of years into their future, when allowing for the lag 
time between their first detection of our biological atmosphere 
and the development of radio and optical transmitters by that 
biology? Possibly, there will not be much beyond the altruistic 
joy of spreading its culture and knowledge. Or perhaps there 
would be a larger payoff. For example, ET could transmit its 
genomic sequence with a request that we resurrect it in our 
Solar System. In fact, they could demand this in exchange for 
the password to their probe’s information payload. 
 Would ET send EG altruistically? Perhaps. Frank Drake 
and Carl Sagan spent time, energy, raw materials and labor 
constructing their famous V oyager plaques for a slow one way 
mission to nowhere in particular. Missionaries have gone to the 
far reaches of the Earth, and in great discomfort, to transmit their 
culture and religion. Moreover, an ET civilization need not be 
infinitely altruistic to send probes. It would take just one of their 
“billionaires” or “potentates” in just one of their generations to 
do it just once. Unlike radio or optical transmissions, probes do 
not require a sustained millions or billions of year’s dedication 
to the enterprise. Finally, L may be the great motivator. Any 
civilization facing its own mortality might send probes as a way 
to perpetuate its achievements. Would we not also send such a 
message in a bottle were we facing our certain doom? Would 
we allow all that we have achieved to just vanish?
8. CONCLUSIONS
The most optimistic case for probes is unlikely to be true, 
1. F. Drake, “Project Ozma”, Physics Today, 14, pp.40-46, 1961.
2. S. Shostak “Confessions of an Alien Hunter: A Scientist’ s Search for 
Extraterrestrial Intelligence”, National Geographic, 2009.
3. M. Michaud, “Contact with Alien Civilizations: Our Hopes and Fears 
about Encountering Extraterrestrials”, Copernicus/Springer, 2007.
4. S. Shostak and A. Barnett, “Cosmic Company: The Search for Life in the 
Universe”, Cambridge University Press, 2003.
5. R.N. Bracewell, “The Galactic Club: Intelligent Life in Outer Space”, 
W.W. Norton & Company, New York, 1974.
6. R. Bracewell, “The Opening Message from an Extraterrestrial Probe”, 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 11, pp.58-60, 1973.
7. R. Freitas, “A Self-Reproducing Interstellar Probe”, JBIS, 33, pp.251-
264, 1980.
8. R. Freitas, “Interstellar Probes: A New Approach to SETI”, JBIS, 33, 
pp.103-109, 1980.
9. C. Rose and G. Wright, “Inscribed Matter as an Energy-Efficient Means 
of Communication with an Extraterrestrial Civilization”, Nature, 431, 
namely, that vast numbers of probes are in the asteroid belt 
constantly beaming beacons towards Earth in order to attract 
our attention. In such an event, by serendipity, a detection 
would likely have occurred by now. Nevertheless, since 
targeted SETI searches have almost always been aimed at 
stars, with a foreground intra-Solar System probe detection 
possible only by serendipity, the author recommends that some 
search time be allotted to asteroids. Such a search would, per 
force, still target stars, namely those that happened to be in 
the background, and far more still if the selected asteroids 
were located within the plane of the Milky Way. However, in 
that case it would be the interstellar ET signal that would be 
detected by serendipity.
 Regarding asteroids as potential targets will require 
some additional shifts in search strategies. Signal detection 
algorithms would need to account for a drift across the field of 
view beyond the sidereal stellar rate. If ET’s beam is narrow 
and not fixed on a single Earth coordinate, it will appear to 
blink off as the asteroid rotates. It will also blink off in any 
SETI search that slews siderally with the fixed stars as the 
asteroid passes through the telescope’s field of view. The 
famous 1977 WOW signal blinked off after 72 seconds and 
was not observed again in the same location. Crucially, when 
astronomers record a transient signal in their data that cannot 
be dismissed as RFI, they should not only return for follow 
up observations to the static coordinates, as though the signal 
derived from a star, but also determine what asteroid(s) was 
in the field of view at the time of the detection, and observe at 
the coordinates of the asteroid’s then current location. Such 
follow up observation should dwell on the asteroid for at 
least one of its rotations, if the rate is known, or, otherwise, 
at least for the duration of the average rotation rate of similar 
objects.
(Received 19 May 2016; Accepted 14 June 2016)
* * *
REFERENCES
pp.47-49, 2004.
10. D. Brin, “Existence”, Tor Books, New York, 2012.
11. Berkeley SETI, seti.berkeley.edu. (Last Accessed 10 May 2016)
12. G. Marcy, “Re: Let it drift” Message to J. Gertz, 29 April 2016, E-mail.
13. G. Benford, J. Benford and D. Benford, “Searching for Cost Optimized 
Interstellar Beacons”, Astrobiology, 10, pp.491-498, 2010.
14. J. Benford, G. Benford, D. Benford, “Messaging with Cost Optimized 
Interstellar Beacons”, Astrobiology, 10, pp.475-490, 2010.
15. S. Shostak, “Confessions of an Alien Hunter”, National Geographic, pp. 
242-243, 265-272, 2009.
16. J. von Neumann, “Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata”, University of 
Illinois Press, Urbana, 1966.
17. D. Brin, “An Open Letter to Alien Lurkers”, Invitation to ETI, http://
www.ieti.org/articles.brin.htm. (Last Accessed 17 May 2016)
18. D. Brin, “The ‘Great Silence’: the Controversy Concerning Extraterrestrial 
Life”, A. Jl R. astr. Soc., 24, pp.283-309, 1983.