Draft version May 21, 2026
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX7

The Search for Technosignatures:
a Review of Possibilities

arXiv:2605.21093v1 [astro-ph.EP] 20 May 2026

Clément Vidal ,1, 2 Benji L. Fields ,2 Damian R. Sowinski ,3, 4 Mark Elowitz ,5 Stuart Bartlett ,3
Richard J. Terrile ,6 Alex Ellery ,7 Daliah Bibas ,1, ∗ Armando M. Mastrogiovanni ,8, ∗
Niklas Döbler ,9 Manika Singla ,10, 11 Julia DeMarines ,12 Theresa Fisher ,13 Yuri Uno ,14
Jake D. Turner ,15 Evan L. Sneed ,16 Advait Huggahalli ,12 Megan Grace Li ,17 Zhuofu (Chester) Li ,18
Macy Huston 12, † And Ramiro Saide 3, 19
1 Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium
2 Blue Marble Space Institute, Seattle, WA, USA
3 S.E.T.I. Institute, Mountain View, CA, USA
4 University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA
5 Eureka Scientific, Oakland, CA, USA
6 Jet Propulsion Laboratory, retired, La Cañada Flintridge, CA, USA
7 Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada
8 Baruch College, City University of New York, New York, NY, USA
9 University of Bamberg, Bamberg, Germany
10 Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad, India
11 Institute for Basic Science, Daejeon, South Korea
12 University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA
13 University of Arizona, Tuscon, AZ, USA
14 National Chung Hsing University, Taichung City, Taiwan
15 Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
16 University of California, Riverside, CA, USA
17 University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
18 University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
19 University of Mauritius, Moka, Mauritius

ABSTRACT
This paper aims to review the diverse range of technosignatures that have been proposed in the
literature. We organize the review by scales, starting carefully from Earth, then zooming out to
Earth’s orbit, the solar system, including the Moon, the Earth-Moon Lagrange points, the inner
solar system, the asteroid belt, interstellar objects, the outer solar system, the Kuiper belt, the solar
gravitational lens region, and the Oort cloud. We then introduce the Kardashev and Barrow scale
before exploring exoplanetary technosignatures, from surface, atmospheric to orbital sources. We next
consider stellar technosignatures that may involve massive energy utilization, stellar modification or
stellar pollution, and end with a section about compact objects. We then review attempts to detect
interstellar communication, and discuss many dimensions of the search space from first principles. Then
we consider interstellar travel technosignatures, and end with galactic, extragalactic and universal
signatures. We end with a discussion about synergies between biosignatures and technosignatures
searches, anomaly detection, multimodal strategies, instruments for detecting technosignatures, how
to evaluate and prioritize the search, as well as epistemological issues.

Keywords: Technosignatures (2128) — Astrobiology (74)

0 Correspondence:

contact@clemvidal.com,
bnfields72@gmail.com,
drsowinski@gmail.com,
elowitzm@gmail.com, sjbart@caltech.edu, rich@terrile.com

∗ SETI Post-Detection Hub, St. Andrews, UK
† PSETI

2
Contents
1. Introduction

3

2. Earth Technosignatures
2.1. Searching for Past Visitation
2.2. Unidentified Aerial Phenomena
2.3. Earth Orbit

6
6
8
11

3. Solar System Technosignatures
3.1. The Moon
3.2. Earth-Moon Lagrange Points
3.3. Inner Solar System
3.4. Asteroid Belt
3.5. Interstellar Objects
3.6. Outer Solar System
3.7. Kuiper Belt
3.8. Solar Gravitational Lens
3.9. Oort Cloud

13
13
15
16
17
17
17
17
17
18

4. Exoplanetary Technosignatures
4.1. Classification Schemes for Advanced
Civilizations
4.2. Surface Technosignatures
4.3. Atmospheric Technosignatures
4.4. Orbital Technosignatures
4.5. Exoplanetary System Technosignatures
4.6. Multiplanetary Systems and
Terraforming

19

5. Stellar Technosignatures
5.1. Stellar Megastructures
5.2. Energy Utilization
5.3. Modification
5.4. Stellar Pollution
5.5. Compact Objects

27
27
27
28
28
29

19
20
22
25
26
26

6. Interstellar Technosignatures
31
6.1. Communication theory
31
6.2. Should we attempt to Message ETI?
31
6.3. First principles and fundamental
constraints for interstellar
communication
32
6.4. Limitations with modern SETI
34
6.5. Where should we look?
34
6.6. When should we look?
37
6.7. At what electromagnetic frequency?
39
6.8. How to deal with anthropogenic
interferences?
42
6.9. What are the non-EM information carrier
42
options?
6.10. What signal modulation scheme?
45
6.11. What is the communication transmission
mode and purpose?
46
6.12. A cosmic haystack
47

7. Travel Technosignatures
7.1. Motivations
7.2. Energy sources for propulsion
7.3. Light sails
7.4. Ramjet
7.5. Planet engines
7.6. Stellar engines
7.7. Newtonian gravitation for propulsion
7.8. Spacetime manipulation for propulsion
7.9. Fundamental forces for interstellar
travel

50
50
51
51
52
52
52
53
54

8. Galactic and beyond
8.1. Galactic
8.2. Extragalactic
8.3. Universal
8.4. The Simulation Hypothesis

57
57
57
58
60

9. Discussion
9.1. Biosignatures and technosignatures
9.2. Anomaly detection and agnostic
searches
9.3. Instruments for detecting
technosignatures
9.4. Evaluation & Prioritization
9.5. Epistemological issues

62
62

10. Conclusion

69

11. References

70

12. Appendices
12.1. Technosignature Science Traceability
Matrix
12.2. Abbreviations
12.3. Scientific Prefixes

105

56

63
66
66
66

105
115
118

3
Leave no stone unturned.
Euripides, Heraclidæ lyrics 983-1017 (c 428 BC).
1. INTRODUCTION

The question of the existence of life beyond Earth has
fascinated minds from antiquity to the present (Dick
1982; Crowe 1986, 2008; Dick 1996). Astrobiology
has taken off as a science (Ćirković 2012). While the
existence of exoplanets was an unwarranted speculation
just a few decades ago, today we have discovered
over 6000 of them. The hopes and likelihood to find
traces of life are high, helped with highly sensitive
space telescopes such as the James Webb Space
Telescope (JWST) that has recently found strong
candidate biosignature gases (Madhusudhan et al.
2025). In strong analogy to the debate surrounding the
putative detection of Phosphine on Venus (Vidal and
Bibas 2025), scientists have claimed that the similarly
putative discovery of Dimethyl sulfide (DMS), serves as
suggestive evidence of life on exoplanet K2-18b. In this
case, the presence of life is highly speculative because
on Earth, while DMS overwhelmingly comes from
marine biology via dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP)
produced by phytoplankton, potential abiotic synthetic
pathways have also been suggested (Reed et al. 2024). A
dual-site follow-up for communicative technosignatures
did not lead to good candidates (Tremblay et al. 2026).
In astrobiology, most of the funding, resources, and
activities are related to the search for biosignatures,
typically searching for microbial lifeforms in the solar
system or for traces of biospheres in exoplanets. But
the universe might also host signs of exotic, intelligent
or technological life. There are pros and cons arguments
between the search for bio- or techno- signatures,
but technosignatures could be abundant, long-lived,
highly detectable, and unambiguous compared to other
biosignatures (Wright et al. 2022). In both cases, given
the many layers of uncertainties, it remains very hard
to guess which of bio- or techno- signatures will be
confirmed and accepted first.
The term technosignature was first coined by Jill
Tarter (2007) as a general umbrella term to include
scattered efforts to search for intelligent life or
technologically advanced civilizations. These include
search strategies and observational searches that have
been conducted under the banner of Search for
Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI), but also a wider
search that has been called Dysonian SETI (Ćirković
2006; Bradbury et al. 2011), which includes the
Search for Extraterrestrial Artifacts (SETA), the search
for megastructures, macroengineering, astroarcheology,
astroengineering, or stellar engineering.
Since the very beginning of the modern search for
extraterrestrial intelligence in the 1960s, there have
been many isolated technosignature search proposals
and it is diﬀicult to get a clear overview and picture
of the landscape of possibilities. Historically, it is

worth mentioning that major strategies were articulated
in the 1960s: looking for interstellar signals (Cocconi
and Morrison 1959), considering interstellar probes
(Bracewell 1960) as well as stellar engineering (Dyson
1960b). Although less known, there are many more
technosignature possibilities, and this paper presents an
organized review of them all.
Most of the search efforts have focused on the search
for communicative signals (see e.g. Ekers et al. 2002;
Tarter et al. 2010), guided by the famous Drake (1965)
equation (see Fig. 1).
We should emphasize that the Drake equation was
proposed as a way to structure the 1961 Green
Bank meeting, and thus has always been seen as
a guide and invitation to better understanding the
various parameters leading to life and intelligent life.
Nevertheless, many authors have pointed out limitations
and proposed variations to the Drake equation (Vakoch
and Dowd 2015). For our purposes of guiding the search
for technosignatures, it is worth highlighting some blind
spots, biases and implicit assumptions behind this
equation. For example, one might draw the conclusion
that we have to know the first factors of the equation
before being able to assess the later factors. But it is
clearly not the case: we do not need to know everything
about star formation or to have complete statistics
about all planets in the galaxy to start searching
for biosignatures. In much the same way, we don’t
need to know everything about possible lifeforms and
their evolutionary trajectories to start searching for
technosignatures. The equation also implicitly focuses
on static planetary civilizations, i.e. Type I civilizations
on Kardashev’s (1964) scale. For example a Type
III galactic civilization could generate an exponential
suppression on other factors by lasting very long and
spreading across multiple stellar systems. The Drake
equation does not address the search for extraterrestrial
artefacts either, which has led to the proposition of
a Drake-like equation for artefacts (Benford 2021).
Another major blind spot is that, at least in its
original formulation, the equation attempts to estimate
the number of communicative civilizations. But as
we will expose in this review, there are many other
ways to search for technosignatures beyond the search
for interstellar communication. We will thus include
non-communicative technosignatures, i.e. looking for
traces of technological activity, even if there is no
intention to communicate. Technosignatures may also
be passive in nature in the sense that an ET civilization
could be long extinct, but its technosignatures could
survive over geologically long timescales.
Another limitation is the meaning of the lifetime L of
a civilization. What does it mean for an interstellar
civilization seeding life or colonies, or for galactic
colonization models? Some colonies might go extinct,
while others could transform so much that the link with
parent civilization or others would be lost. The picture

4

Figure 1. The Drake equation addresses the many factors used to estimate the number of civilizations producing
technosignatures in our galaxy at any given time.

could be much more dynamic and complicated than we
imagine while guided by the Drake equation only.
We do not aim at a critical and detailed evaluation
of each technosignature that we review: even the
different authors of the present paper would certainly
disagree about the different merits of the various
technosignatures. We would like to warn readers that
we include both mature and speculative proposals,
and invite readers to pay attention to distinguish
them according to evidential status, detectability, and
scientific ancillary value (for more on evaluation, see
Section 9).
As much as possible, we attempt to identify synergies
between technosignature searches and other related
fields. In principle the strategy to look for synergies
can go in both directions:
1. a study in field F can also inform and be useful to
search for a technosignature T
2. a search for a technosignature T can also be useful
to study field F.
Strategy (1) is a cost-eﬀicient strategy to search
for technosignatures,
for example by adding
technosignature science goals when designing missions
in the solar system (Haqq-Misra et al. 2022c), when
observing exoplanets, or when running commensal
SETI pipelines on some of Earth’s most capable radio
telescopes (Worden et al. 2018; Lebofsky et al. 2019).
The bottom-line is that it would be a pity to miss a
technosignature that would have been easy to detect
within existing missions, adding just a little bit more
effort and resources.
The strategy to synergize with other disciplines and
efforts (2) goes the other way. When designing a new
SETI search strategy, it is recommended to think about
what other non-SETI science goals it could achieve.
Indeed, we don’t know when -nor even if!- we’re going

to find extraterrestrial life, so we have to design searches
to also benefit other sciences at the same time. As
Drake (1965) put it, “any project aimed at the detection
of intelligent extraterrestrial life should simultaneously
conduct more conventional research”. This is also
known as the First Law of SETI Investigations: “Every
search for alien civilizations should be planned to give
interesting results even when no aliens are discovered”
(NASA Technosignatures Workshop Participants 2018).
For readers new to the field, an excellent recent
textbook by Wright (2026) covers much of the theory
and practice of the field. Its goal is to establish
technosignature science and SETI as a teachable
academic discipline. Wright also covers much of ”SETI
Theory” topics such as the Fermi paradox, the Rare
Earth hypothesis or the Doomsday argument, which we
intentionally avoided in this review. As a book-length
work, it expands on whether we should send interstellar
messages, on post-detection, and on societal and cultural
dimensions. Our focus by contrast is to produce a
companion for researchers who want a comprehensive
catalog of technosignatures that have been proposed,
organized by scale, and to open observational paths to
further pursue the search.
In this paper, we thus aim to answer the central
question: What kinds of technosignatures could possibly
be out there? Our secondary focus is about detectability
and instrumentation, i.e.: How can we detect them now
or in the near future?
To organize the types of technosignatures, we simply
follow spatial scales. We start very carefully with the
controversial idea of looking for technosignatures on
Earth (section 2), then we zoom out to Earth’s orbit,
the Moon, the inner solar system, the asteroid belt, the
outer solar system up to the Oort cloud (section 3);
then we jump to planetary technosignatures, reviewing
potential surface, atmospheric or orbital signatures
(section 4); we discuss then stellar technosignatures

5
which could reveal the existence of megastructures or the
capability to directly use or modify stars (section 5). We
continue with a review of interstellar signals, discussing
key dimensions and strategies to search for interstellar
communication (section 6). Then we consider signatures
of interstellar travel and migration (section 7), and we
end with more exotic technosignatures that may be
observable at a galactic, extragalactic or even universal
scales (section 8). We end with a discussion on key
issues, such as the lessons emerging from biosignatures
and technosignatures searches, anomaly detection and
machine learning, multimodal and multi-messenger
searches, the issue of evaluation and prioritization as
well as epistemological challenges (section 9), and a
summary of instruments relevant for technosignature as
a science traceability matrix in Appendix 12.1.
In choosing our references, whenever possible, we
mention the first historical paper and review papers.
We focus on organizing and reviewing all kinds of
technosignatures and as such we do not attempt to
cite every technosignature paper: for this purpose, we
release a bigger bibliography we used while researching
this paper 1 , which is itself based on (Reyes and Wright
2019; LaFond et al. 2021).
We hope that better organizing the wide array of
possible technosignature strategies and targets will clear
the way for strengthening, growing and legitimizing
the field and the community. We also hope to raise
awareness of the breadth of possible technosignatures,
that may be found by targeted or commensal programs,
or just serendipitously. We believe that pursuing both
bio- and techno- signatures searches with an equal
amount of resources should dramatically improve the
overall chances of finding extraterrestrial life.

1 https://www.zotero.org/groups/5098525/technosignatures

6
2. EARTH TECHNOSIGNATURES

Before going through the possibilities of past or
present technosignatures on Earth, it is useful to
consider the broader context of the potential expansion
of civilizations in the galaxy.
Many arguments have been made showing that even
at non-relativistic velocities, an advanced species could
explore the galactic disk within 50 million to one
billion years (Newman and Sagan 1981). It is worth
emphasizing that the argument works with just one
civilization embarking in such a program, thus it doesn’t
assume that all civilizations should be doing space
exploration and expansion. The dynamics is very much
non-linear, especially considering self-replicating probes,
where they would go to the next star system, mine
materials, and make more probes that would do the
same, recursively. This would lead to an amplifying
dynamics that would cover the majority of the galaxy
with such probes on a much faster scale than the age of
the Milky Way, which is about 13 billion years (Nepal
et al. 2024).
Relative to other G-stars, our Sun is on average 1.8
Gy younger (Lineweaver et al. 2004), and a more recent
study showed that the Sun is younger than 53 ± 2% of
F8-K2 nearby stars in the galactic disk; more generally,
our Sun was born after 86 ± 5% of all stars born in the
galaxy (Robles et al. 2008).
This galactic and stellar context shows that there is
ample time for advanced civilizations to have explored
the galaxy systematically. Perhaps more disturbingly,
Earth could have been visited several times: based on
the age of the Earth, we can put an upper-limit on the
number of times Earth could have been visited by a
single civilization. We can simply divide the age of the
Earth (4.5 × 109 years) by the galactic crossing time,
which is 106 years, assuming a velocity of 0.1c over
100, 000 ly:
Nvis ≈

T⊕
LM W /v

=

4.5 × 109 yr
= 4500
105 cyr/0.1c

(1)

It means that there could have been up to 4500
opportunities for visitation by one single spacefaring
civilization over the lifetime of the Earth. If there are
N civilizations exploring, we multiply this value by N .
What can we conclude? Hart (1975) and Tipler (1980)
used similar expansion models to conclude that we are
alone in the universe. The reasoning is that we haven’t
seen evidence of probes or traces of past visitation on
Earth, and given that galactic colonization should be
fast, we are alone in the universe. Of course, the
argument is flawed because we have barely searched
systematically for all kinds of probes or signatures
of visitations. Also, we may still be able to detect
non-visiting civilizations.
This implies that we should search for more evidence.
Many of these arguments are classic justifications to do

SETI in the universe or SETA in the solar system, but
they also logically apply to Earth. If ETI probes can do
interstellar travel and get to our solar system, there is no
reason to surmise that it’s somehow impossible for them
to go through our own atmosphere. If we put our shoes
into a space-faring civilization, it would be quite absurd
to travel for millennia, finally arrive to a solar system
hosting life, and explore only its non-living parts. This
would be the implicit assumption if we would advocate
to look only for technosignatures in our solar system,
and not on Earth.
There is also a large uncertainty regarding how much
matter falls into Earth, with estimates varying from 5 to
300 tons per day (Plane 2012). This means that Earth
is not closed to space, and that we are still far from a
systematic, high resolution monitoring and awareness of
everything that enters or exits the Earth.
At first sight, the strategy to look for technosignatures
on Earth is the easiest one: It would be right here!
In practice however, the search for past or present
traces of ETI on Earth may be the hardest search
strategy because it has suffered and still suffers from
numerous geological, sociological, psychological, and
methodological obstacles.
2.1. Searching for Past Visitation
Astrobiologists have hypothesized the possibility of a
shadow biosphere, the existence of a separate genesis
of life on Earth, with a different biochemistry that
would still exist today (Cleland and Copley 2005; Davies
et al. 2009). We propose to extend this concept to
technology, i.e. to also consider the possibility of
a shadow technosphere. For example, Paul Davies
(2012) did call for a general search for biological,
geological and physical traces of extraterrestrial life or
technology. It means that sciences such as climatology,
geology, archaeology or paleontology are relevant to
search for pre-human technological artifacts or processed
materials.
Even before searching for traces of past
extraterrestrial visitation, we can ask whether we
are the first advanced civilization in the geological
history of Earth.
It turns out that traces of a
civilization –even one going through an anthropocene
phase– would be very challenging to detect because of
erosion dynamics such as surface weathering or plate
tectonics. These constraints are discussed through the
Silurian hypothesis (Schmidt and Frank 2019), and the
authors conclude that artefacts or fossilized examples
of a population older than 4 million years (Ma) would
be unlikely to be found.
Still, what could be searched for in this 4 Ma window?
Here are a few examples.
We could look for evidence of large scale agriculture
that would have led to a disruption of the soil nitrogen
cycle. Another line of research could look for evidence
of mining, such as anomalous geological structures

7
that would be indicative of large mining operations.
These could include anomalous depletion of minerals
compared to the local standard, refined or processed
ore, and evidence of large-scale digging sites. Looking
for plastics or microplastics deep in geological layers, or
in ocean sediments would also be potential signatures.
Atmospheric pollution may be preserved in permafrost
or sedimentary layers. According to Schmidt and
Frank (2019), all of the pollution of the anthropocene
would fit within 1 cm of sediment layer, which makes
sense given how short our industrial civilization has
existed on geological timescales. This explains why
even if there was a pre-human civilization which went
through its own anthropocene, we might not have
noticed it in our sediment analysis yet, while also
leaving open the possibility that we could discover
such a layer in the future. Other signatures could
include persistent organic pollutants, which are organic
molecules resistant on large time scales to degradation
by chemical, photo-chemical or biological processes,
such as Per- and poly- fluoroalkyl substances (PFAS).
There are ways to distinguish these from biological
organics. In particular, life-as-we-know-it generally
obeys monochirality. If we found varying chirality, it
may indicate artificial organic polymers as opposed to
biological remains. Alternatively, finding a consistently
opposed chirality to life-as-we-know-it might then be a
trace of a shadow biosphere.
Another signature could be anomalous isotope ratios
in CO2 , such as greater abundances of 12 C than 13 C,
indicating mass burning of fossil fuels. This may be
investigated in correlation to markers of climate change
such as a sudden increased temperature.
Schmidt and Frank (2019) suggested paying attention
to radioactive isotopes, especially Curium-247 and
Plutonium-244 which have halflives of millions of years.
We could add Iodine-129, a byproduct of nuclear testing,
very rare in nature, and that has a very long half-life too
(Rao and Fehn 1999).
In this context, we can also mention an intriguing
1972 discovery of uranium ore from a mine in Oklo,
Gabon (Bodu et al. 1972; Neuilly et al. 1972).
Scientists discovered that the uranium had a lower
concentration of the fissile isotope Uranium-235 (U235 ),
a characteristic similar to spent fuel from a man-made
reactor. While this initially led to some speculation
about ancient technological civilizations, a thorough
scientific investigation concluded that the reactor was a
naturally occurring phenomenon (Cowan 1976; Meshik
et al. 2004). The evidence overwhelmingly points to
a natural origin rather than the product of a past
civilization. However, Davies (2010) points out that it’s
a kind of signature of a past civilization we could also
look for in a technosignature context. For example, if
the reactor was dated younger, there wouldn’t have been
time for a natural reactor.

We might also constrain the search within a
broader geological, biological or astronomical context.
Technosignatures might be correlated with mass
extinctions in the geological record, for example if a past
anthropocene or nuclear war took place.
On the astronomical side, searching for artefacts of
past interstellar visitors can be constrained by the
knowledge of stellar flybys, happening about every
100,000 years. This means that over the lifetime of
the solar system, 45, 000 encounters happened within
1 ly (Bailer-Jones 2022). For example, Scholz’s star was
inside the Oort cloud 70, 000 yrs ago (Mamajek et al.
2015)! The search for technosignatures in the geological
record can thus be meaningfully focused around the time
when such stellar flybys occurred.
Similar search strategies naturally apply to the search
for pre-human indigenous technological species that
would leave traces on dead and stable geological surfaces
in the solar system (Wright 2018a). We could also
search the Earth layers for nanomaterials such as
nanotubes, nano fibers, or even nanomachines. This
makes sense if we look at the Barrow scale that proposes
that civilizations progress by increasing their ability
to manipulate, manufacture, and control smaller and
smaller scales (see Barrow 1998, Vidal 2014, and the
Barrow scale section 4.1.0).
Paul Davies (2010) did propose a ”Genomic SETI”
program to leverage genome sequencing technologies
and to find anomalies, to possibly interpret them as
a message from ETI. Although not very convincingly,
some authors have speculated that there might be a
message in the DNA of organisms (Yokoo and Oshima
1979; Nakamura 1986), or in the genetic code itself
(shCherbak and Makukov 2013). DNA is an extremely
dense information storage solution (∼ 1019 bits/g,
Meiser et al. 2022) in comparison to state-of-the-art
solid state devices (∼ 1012 bits/g, see Figure 2).
So it is still worth exploring whether there could be
information content in the noncoding DNA of space
resistant organisms. Vidal (2019) suggested that a way
to test directed panspermia would be to look specifically
at the DNA of space-resistant organisms in the context
of galactic navigation. Millisecond pulsars are a prime
candidate to provide stable and long-lived coordinate
systems, so if ETI used the organism itself to store this
navigation metadata, it might still be there. These
genomic SETI hypotheses assume that the Earth has
been seeded, so they are part of directed panspermia
hypotheses (Crick and Orgel 1973, see also Section 7 on
travel technosignatures).
Another information system that might be a target of
visit of an advanced ETI might be the internet itself,
which led 80 scientists to place an invitation to ETI on
the web (Tough 2001).
We can note that distinguishing between a past
civilization from Earth and a past civilization coming
from space would be challenging. The distinction could

8
Gradually, this created a UFO taboo that made serious
study of any reports more and more diﬀicult (Fig 3).

Figure 3. The UAP Taboo: vicious circles prevent serious
studies of UAPs.
Figure 2. Lifetime, current storage capacity, and costs of
various storage systems. Estimates for mainstream media
were made with consumer pricing data. The authors of
the study note that ”(1) these costs are an estimation at
the point at which this work was written and (2) that the
basis for calculation is not perfectly aligned, as to date DNA
data storage cannot be purchased as a routine commercial
electronic storage medium and read/write infrastructure has
not been scaled”. Figure from Meiser et al. (2022)
.

be helped with an analysis of isotopic ratios of candidate
artefacts, to estimate whether they come from our solar
system or not. Now that we have examined possibilities
of past visitations, by extension it seems legitimate to
also examine the possibility of present visitations.
2.2. Unidentified Aerial Phenomena
Diﬀiculties in the Past

Although there are reports of unidentified flying
objects (UFO) dating back over millennia (Stothers
2007), the first modern sighting to popularize UFOs
was reported by Kenneth Arnold in 1947: he saw nine
crescent-shaped objects while flying his small plane.
His description of their movements as “saucers skipping
on water” led journalists to coin the term “flying
saucer”. This sparked a litany of reported sightings as
the media popularized the supposed phenomenon (see
(Frank 2023) for more details of the history of modern
UFO sightings). Multiple U.S. Air Force programs
began investigating this increasing number of reports,
culminating in the extensive Project Blue Book (PBBA
1953). The head of the Project Blue Book investigation,
Edward Ruppelt, replaced the term “flying saucer,”
which by then was loaded with unscientific connotation,
with the more neutral “Unidentified Flying Object”,
or UFO. UFO sightings grew into a strong social
phenomenon, nurturing folklore and fascinating the
general public; lack of substantive evidence drove
the scientific community to ever higher skepticism.

History repeated itself half a century later as UFO was
changed to “Unidentified Aerial Phenomena” (UAP)
in Project Condign, led by the UK Ministry of
Defence (Defense-Intelligence-Agency 2000). The “A”
of “Aerial” also shifted to “Anomalous”, for example by
the “All-Domain Anomaly Resolution Oﬀice” (AARO
2024) and therefore encompassing a greater variety of
reports, such as those made underwater or in space.
How many reports are really unidentified or
anomalous? Out of 12,000 reports analyzed in Project
Blue Book, 6% of them remained unexplained. How
are UAP reports categorized? 90%-95% end up as (1)
explained phenomenon. The remaining 5-10% of reports
could end up (2) unexplainable due to lack of credible
data. Those that do have credible data imply either (3)
an unknown physical mechanism, or (4) an unknown
manifestation of extraterrestrial intelligence (see Fig.
4).
Explained UAP reports are attributed to multiple
sources:
celestial,
meteorological,
biological,
instrumental, artificial, or psychological (see table
1). This means that ruling out systematically all the
confounding sources requires expertise in different
domains: astronomy, engineering, meteorology, but
also biology or psychology. It can be easy (e.g. Venus)
or very hard if not impossible (e.g. a secret military
device). One should note that a typical astronomer
interested in SETI would be expert in only a small
subset of such sources, so explaining away UAPs is
not within the typical expertise of scientists working in
SETI.
To look for a UAP as a technosignature positively
(i.e. not merely refuting alternative explanations)
one could expect one or several anomalous properties
(see table 2 and Siegel 2024). A study did analyze
the accelerations of some past UAP cases, estimating
minimum accelerations of 10s g’s, observed by the
Japanese cargo flight JAL1628 in 1984, or even 100s
or 1000s of g’s in the Bethune case of 1951 or the
Nimitz case of 2014. If confirmed —and it’s a big
if—, these anomalous velocities and accelerations would
be suﬀicient for interstellar travel, which may have

9
Table 1. Common sources causing UAP sightings. These need to be carefully considered and excluded before taking the ETI
road.
Source
Celestial
Meteorological
Biological

Example
Venus, Mars, Meteor, Meteorite
Clouds (e.g. noctilucent, lenticular, punchhole), Reflected light off clouds, Mirages (e.g. fata
morgana), Sprites, Ball Lightning, Ice crystals and sundogs
Birds reflecting the Sun, Insects interfering with instruments

Instrumental

Flares, Ghosting, Internal scattering of light inside the instrument, Other errors or distortions from
observing instruments

Artificial

Weather balloons, Airplanes, Contrails, Light on the ground, Sky lanterns, Military aircraft flying in
formation, military and defense: secret military aircraft, experiment, or exercise, Satellites reflecting
light, launching, cruising, or crashing, Space junk reflected or crashing, Rocket launch boom, Blimps,
Search light or laser pointer, Artificial auroras, Hoax

Psychological

Drugs, Hallucination, Fantasy prone personality, Altered states of consciousness, Mass hysteria

Figure 4.
Decision tree illustrating the possible
categorizations for UAPs. About 90-95% of cases end
up being explained, but about 5-10% remain unexplained,
and will likely eventually be explained in the future (see
Table 1). If not, they might remain unexplained due to
their unrepeatable nature, or a lack of quality data. But
this small unexplained percentage might also lead to the
discovery of a new natural phenomenon, or to the discovery
of extraterrestrial intelligence.

important implications for an ETI origin hypothesis
(Knuth et al. 2019).
There are other historical examples of transient
phenomena in the sky that turned into the discovery of
new phenomena. The core example is the discovery of
meteorites that relied on eye-witness testimony after the
fact, as opposed to real-time observation. Historically,
the discovery was pushed by the general public against
an incredulous scientific community (see Dick 1996,
chap. 2; Jacobs 1975).
Indeed, their existence contradicted the last remnants
of the Aristotelian paradigm, assuming that there could

Property

Constraint

Size

No known aircraft with a wingspan
greater than about half a kilometer.

Mass

No aircraft heavier than a few
thousand tons has ever been even
proposed.

Speed

No aircraft or spacecraft in Earth’s
vicinity has exceeded more than
around 17 km s−1 (∼11 miles/second)
while near our planet.

Acceleration

No aircraft has sustained an
acceleration or deceleration in any
direction of more than ∼ 10g for more
than a few seconds.

Emission

E.g. gamma-rays from antimatter
propulsion (see also other exotic
propulsion signatures in section 7 on
Interstellar travel).

Table 2. Properties of UAPs that would be considered
anomalous (Siegel 2024).

not be rocks from space, because the cosmos was not
made of the same matter as Earth (see also Watters
et al. 2023 for a discussion in the UAP context). The
rare phenomena of earthquake lights or ball lightning
may also provide a good analog, and the latter has only
recently been quantifiably observed (Cen et al. 2014).
The observing diﬀiculties in all these cases - including
UAPs - is that they are rare and transient phenomena.
How can we make scientific progress? Unfortunately,
the field is locked into a UAP taboo, where vicious circles
prevent serious studies (see Fig. 3). There is a huge
interest and fascination in popular culture about ETI
coming to Earth, which is fueled by countless movies,

10
TV shows, YouTube channels or blogs (see e.g. Denzler
2003). There are even a few UFO religions who may not
want scientists to even approach the topic.
Many UFO enthusiasts want to further study the
phenomena. Unfortunately, they are not trained as
scientists, so they end up doing pseudoscience as
they have no or low scientific standards. Indeed,
the notion of UFOs epitomizes pseudoscience, and is
associated with topics such as ancient aliens, abduction
stories, conspiracy theories, out-of-body experiences,
paranormal activities, or psychic channeling. Trained
scientists who dare to enter the field have their signal
drowned in a loud crackpot noise and risk being
ridiculed and rejected by their peers and the scientific
community at large. However, this is not an isolated
sociological issue as there are pseudoscientists in all
fields such as physics, medicine, etc. All scientific
fields have to deal with the issue of drawing epistemic
boundaries, deciding what qualifies as legitimate and
proper scientific practice, and what to leave out.
It is no secret that governments have been and are
studying UAPs (see Graff 2023; Eghigian 2024; and
Knuth et al. 2025 for a review). However, another
important obstacle comes from the way classified
defense programs work: by definition, they don’t share
much of their data and this can slow down scientific
progress and discoveries. For example, gamma-rays
were discovered on July 2, 1967 by the US Vela nuclear
test detection satellites. Although the data was not
classified (Bonnell and Klebesadel 1996), it took another
six years before the scientific community interpreted
the data as sky-bound gamma-ray bursts (Klebesadel
et al. 1973). The instruments that the military builds
have different purposes than astronomical instruments,
and have in this example detected a novel phenomenon.
This is not an isolated example, and astronomer
Harwit (1981, 234-239) showed that out of 43 major
astronomical discoveries, 26 of them were enabled
thanks to instruments and technologies first built for
military purposes.
When military data is released, it is often not
scientifically actionable, for example because releasing
the sensitivities of the instruments would reveal strategic
information to adversary nations. However, science
cannot be done without transparency, data sharing,
and reproducibility. Such classified research is typically
compartmentalized so no peer evaluation is possible, no
consensus building dynamics can emerge, and thus very
little progress can be made. What is more, concealed
data gives rise to conspiracy theories that are formulated
using speculations instead of data.
Publicly available reports from past programs have
failed to give conclusive scientific insights, which
stifles current interest in the topic. One historically
significant example is the Condon Report (1969) which
remains controversial. The report states, “Our general
conclusion is that nothing has come from the study of

UFOs in the past 21 years that has added to scientific
knowledge.” However, the study was also criticized
by several scientists at the time for lacking objectivity
and taking a ‘conclusions first, data second’ approach
(McDonald 1972; Sturrock 1999; Sagan and Page 1972).
Regardless of this particular debate, it underscores the
diﬀiculties of consensus building and peer review under
such conditions.
All these aspects lead to an academic stigma against
the UAP topic, so credible people often prefer to avoid
its study (see again Fig. 3). In addition, the search
for extraterrestrial life and intelligence has and is still
suffering from a “giggle factor” as a seemingly not
so serious field of research (Wright and Oman-Reagan
2018). The technosignature community has faced this
stigma repeatedly, and thus naturally wants to avoid an
additional stigma from ufology. So it makes sense that a
wide portion of the community tends to reject the study
of UAPs.
Although outside the scope of this paper, the
current unfortunate situation could be transformed
into opportunities for interdisciplinary education (e.g.
refuting mundane explanations such as the ones in Table
1); for teaching epistemology and the scientific method
to debunk reports; and maybe even stimulating UAP
enthusiasts towards solid citizen science projects related
to UAPs, extraterrestrial life and intelligence.
Present and future prospects

Despite all these diﬀiculties, we discuss UAPs in
this review because they logically are a part of the
technosignature search space, not because we believe
that current UAP data provides strong support for an
ETI interpretation. Let us give an overview of the
current research progress related to UAPs.
A recent survey showed that out of 1,400 American
research university professors, 37% of them agreed that
the subject should be researched in academia -even if few
were enthusiastic about the extraterrestrial explanation
(Yingling and Yingling 2024). An impressive review
of 20 historical government studies ranging from 1933
to 2025 has recently been published by Knuth et al.
(2025). The Society for UAP Studies aims to bring more
academic credibility to the emerging field and publishes
a journal, Limina (Cifone 2024; Rodeghier 2024). NASA
commissioned an independent analysis to design a
roadmap for getting better and more uniform data
(Spergel et al. 2023). The Galileo project was founded
in July 2021 as an effort to gather new high quality data
with multiple modalities (Loeb 2022b; Watters et al.
2023). This is to be contrasted with most existing UAP
reports that rely on eyewitness testimony, or very low
resolution images. As an illustration, if a UAP were to
fly over the instruments of the Galileo project: All-sky
infrared and optical cameras would capture it with
their continuous panoramic views. Machine learning
algorithms would compare the detection with known

11
confounding sources (such as the ones in Table 1 above).
The observational data would be checked against sources
of false positives, such as the Automatic Dependent
Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) to check whether it
was a known aircraft. If the algorithm flags it as
a genuine anomaly, then the Pan Tilt Zoom (PTZ)
cameras can activate to get close-up imagery. Passive
radars would cross-check the reality of the object, to
rule-out optical artefacts. Microphones pick up a wide
range of sounds, above and below what the human ear
can perceive. It is useful information to understand how
the object is interacting (or not) with the surrounding
air. If the object is within range, the magnetometers
would measure the electromagnetic activity around the
object, and be able to compare with a local ambient
baseline, as well as to the entire Earth’s magnetic field
via the US geological survey (USGS). Satellite images
can complement all these ground-based observations
by surveying more of the Earth’s surface than can be
reached by a stationary observatory.
A team did a field expedition on an alleged UAP
hotspot to collect reliable data, with a setup similar
to the Galileo project, but adapted for a short term
and mobile purpose, and found an ambiguous source of
ionizing radiation picked up by an instrument capturing
cosmic particle showers (Szydagis et al. 2025).
Getting physical access to UAP fragments would
provide a lot of opportunities for continuous, exhaustive
and repeated analyses by different independent teams.
For example, if we would find an unknown fragment,
we could do advanced material analysis to determine
whether its composition includes materials from
interstellar origins. Mass spectrometry can decipher
elemental compositions and abundances, while a study
of isotope ratios could determine whether the material
did form in our solar system or not. For an overview
of these techniques and related ones, see Nolan et al.
(2022). Of course, finding evidence of interstellar
origins would just be a first intriguing lead and not
conclusive of ETI origin.
A next step would be
to ascertain artificiality, for example, Embaid (2022)
suggested in a non peer-reviewed preprint paper that
known Bustee, Kaidun and Tucson meteorites display
minerals heideite and brezinaite that have no known
natural occurrence on Earth, and suggests that they
might be iron-based superconductors. Another example
is the meteor CNEOS 2014-01-08, and the debate
about its potential interstellar origin. Siraj and Loeb
(2022) argued for an interstellar origin, calling it IM1
for “Interstellar Meteor 1”, and followed up with an
underwater mission in Papua New Guinea to attempt
to find and analyze the remains of the meteor (Loeb
et al. 2023; Hyung et al. 2025). However, the interstellar
origin has been contested (Hajduková et al. 2024),
and the debate is unlikely to be fully resolved from
the CNEOS data, because it comes from a military
instrument that does not disclose its uncertainties

publicly. More generally, at a planetary scale the study
of ocean floor (bathymetry) remains incomplete and at
low resolution, especially in the deeper water. Following
up on “transmedium” UAPs reports, one might want to
map the ocean floor to a much higher accuracy and more
systematically (Gallaudet 2024).
Even if UAPs are not linked in any way to ETI,
explaining away mysteries and anomalies is the core
role of science, and as such they should be studied.
Other benefits include developing new instruments, new
methods for continuous all sky monitoring, improving
planetary defense, discovering new meteorological or
natural phenomena.
2.3. Earth Orbit
Villarroel et al. (2021, 2022a) conducted an analysis
of 1950s archival photographic plates from the Palomar
Observatory Sky Surveys (POSS-I, 1948-1958 and
POSS-II, 1980s-1990s).
The POSS-I survey was
mostly before Sputnik, the first man-made satellite
that was launched in 1957. The team discovered
intriguing multiple point sources that were not visible
in subsequent observations taken only 30 mins later (see
Fig. 5).
This short window of time excludes far away sources,
and nine objects would almost certainly not vanish
within such a close interval of each other if they were
located at interstellar distances.
They also considered radioactive dust from nuclear
tests, and apparently found statistically significant
correlations between the Palomar transients UAP
sightings and nuclear tests (Bruehl and Villarroel 2025).
However, a recent study by Watters et al. (2026) argues
that the correlation between the timing of observations
and nuclear tests is completely determined by the
observation schedule of the Palomar telescope.
A similar “triple transient” was found which appeared
to vanish within a 50 minute window, though in that
case it was hypothesized that it might have been a
gravitational lensing event (Solano et al. 2024). One
analysis argued that both transients could be spurious
artefacts of the photographic emulsion (see Hambly and
Blair 2024). To further probe whether these transients
are skybound or not, Villarroel et al. (2025a) did propose
to explore their relation with the Earth’s shadow, i.e.
when the Earth is casting a shadow in the sky, like
during a Lunar eclipse. Intriguingly, they did find
an apparently highly significant (∼ 22σ) deficit of
transients within Earth’s shadow, arguing against the
hypothesis that these were simply plate defects. The
transients might thus have been highly reflective objects
in Earth’s orbit that would seem to disappear when
entering the Earth’s shadow, simply because they would
not be lit up by the Sun anymore.
However, the study by Watters et al. (2026) challenges
the Earth shadow deficit argument and many others.
Yet, whatever the final word will be, this effort is

12

Figure 5. Nine simultaneously occurring transients on April 12th 1950, from Villarroel et al. (2021): 10 x 10 arcmin field shown
in POSS-1 and POSS-2 red bands. In the POSS-1 image we see a number of objects that cannot be subsequently found, marked
with green circles. Purple circles are artifacts during the scanning process. About 9 objects are present in the POSS-I E image
(left) from the 12th of April, but not in the POSS-2 image (right) from 1996. One slightly larger circle host two transients.
In addition, the 9 objects are neither visible in the blue POSS-1 taken half an hour earlier, nor in a second POSS-1 red image
taken six days later on April 18th. The 9 transients are not caused by a difference in depth or spectral sensitivity. The images
are based on the DSS digitizations of the Palomar plates.

a novel search strategy for extraterrestrial artifacts
(see also Villarroel et al. 2022b). Future searches
could also be done on older astronomical plates, going
back even further before the advent of satellites. We
could also search for ETI satellites today, although
the enormous number of satellites and space debris
would make the endeavor challenging. Nonetheless,
searching currently could allow for multiple telescopes
independently observing candidates (thereby ruling out
artefacts), or more accurately localizing their orbits (see
also Villarroel 2024; Villarroel et al. 2025b).
Other novel strategies could include searching the
International Space Station (ISS) video feeds for
anomalies, which would anyhow have ancillary benefits
for Earth sciences or planetary defense. We also suggest
staying open to a SETI angle for anomalies that may
be found during space domain awareness efforts in the
cislunar region (see e.g. Baker-McEvilly et al. 2024).
Let us now turn our attention further outward, looking
for technosignatures in our solar system writ large, from
the Moon to the Oort cloud.

13
3. SOLAR SYSTEM TECHNOSIGNATURES

There has been relatively little consideration of the
Search for Extraterrestrial Artefacts (SETA) in the
scientific literature, although various authors have called
for a renewal in recent years (see e.g. Ellery et al. 2003;
Gertz 2016; Benford 2019; Shostak 2020 and Haqq-Misra
and Kopparapu 2012 for a review).
As with Earth technosignatures (see section 2), the
serious plausibility of solar system technosignatures is
implied by the concept of Bracewell probes (Bracewell
1960, 1974), i.e. probes having communicating or
monitoring purposes, or of self-replicating probes, also
called Von Neumann (1966) probes, focusing on galactic
settlement (Freitas 1980; Ellery 2022).
The two
strategies are not mutually exclusive, and a Bracewell
probe program could use a von Neumann strategy for
fast propagation.
More precisely, there are two main strategies for a
civilization to expand which can be characterized by
r-K selection theory in biology (Boyce 1984): r-selected
species emphasize many offspring and fast reproduction
(e.g. insects), while K-selected species have a slow
reproduction and focus on having few offspring, but
take greater care of them (e.g. mammals). In the
context of interstellar expansion, self-replicating probes
are the optimal r-strategists (Jones 1976) for practical
(Valdes and Freitas 1980), economic (Ellery 2017),
reconnaissance and threat assessment reasons (Smith
and Hancock 1995), or simply to make the most of
astronomical resources (Bostrom 2003b).
There are two main dimensions we can look for in the
solar system; the first is their position in space, whether
it is in orbit, or on a surface; the second is whether
the probe is active or passive in terms of energy use or
communication (Lazio et al. 2023).
Generally, active probes or artefacts may be less
ambiguous, because one could readily assess whether
the behavior seems anomalous, and one could look
for transmission, but also look for waste heat or
waste material signatures. However, we could also
have alternating periods of activity and dormancy,
for example if a probe puts itself in a hibernation
mode to save energy and limit wear.
Typically,
in space engineering a rule of thumb is that an
operating device undergoes ten times more wear when
active compared to being dormant. Regarding surface
artefacts, the methods of archeology may be beneficial
to explore SETA hypotheses, as explored in (Vakoch
2014). One may object that if there were extraterrestrial
technosignatures in the solar system we would have
noticed it by now. However the solar system is a huge
place, and the vast majority of it has not been observed
at a high resolution (Haqq-Misra and Kopparapu 2012,
see also Table 3). What is more, technology tends to
progress at ever-smaller scales, a trend known as the
Barrow scale (Barrow 1998; Vidal 2014). It implies

that small and light probes are naturally preferred for
fast interstellar missions as they require less fuel and
can be propelled faster. We illustrate this trend with
human space technology and the concept of smart dust,
which are millimeter cube computers (Warneke et al.
2001). The point here is that we are far from having
systematically sieved the solar system from micro- or
nano- or smaller ETI technology that might be lurking.
3.1. The Moon
The idea to search for extraterrestrial artefacts in
the solar system has been popularized in science fiction
most famously with the Monolith of 2001: A Space
Odyssey (Clarke 1968). Compared to space, the Moon
is a privileged place for placing long-term human or
extraterrestrial artefacts and technology, because the
Moon shields from much meteoroids, it shields from half
of the ionizing radiation, no stabilization is required,
lunar resources can be used for maintenance and repair
(Arkhipov 1995). Compared to the Earth, since the
Moon is not geologically active, there is almost no
erosion, it also doesn’t have an atmosphere so there are
no atmospheric hazards, and since it’s dead there is no
influence from biological activity. Arkhipov (1998) also
proposed a search for alien space debris on the Moon,
and Davies and Wagner (2013) proposed to launch
a citizen science project to systematically examine
the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) images that
offer 0.5 m resolution. This may be conducted using
the methodology of similar citizen science projects
(e.g. Bugiolacchi et al. 2016). The sub-meter spatial
resolution of LRO’s imaging system has imaged various
Apollo landing sites that clearly show evidence of past
human activity on the Moon (Figure 6).
Preliminary studies of the Moon’s surface using
machine learning are able to detect human activities
on the Moon such as the Apollo 15 landing site
(Lesnikowski et al. 2020; Loveland and Sime 2024), but a
systematic search on the LRO data remains to be done.
One example of an unusual structure on the Moon’s
surface is seen on the floor of the farside crater
Paracelsus C. The structures observed in Paracelsus C
by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter’s high-resolution
imaging system (Figure 7) has drawn attention due to
their surprisingly linear and rectangular patterns, which
are uncommon in typical impact craters.
What is interesting about the Paracelsus C structures
is how isolated they are, and the lack of any similar
structures nearby. Since there is no weathering on
the Moon due to the lack of an atmosphere, the only
natural explanations for these structures would be some
type of complex impact erosion or tectonic stresses
that lead to contraction over time creating ridges and
faults that can appear strikingly regular. Paracelsus
C lies in a region shaped by intense bombardment,
thus angular features could result from impact-induced
fracturing, ejecta deposition, or solidified melt pools.

14
Solar System Body

Resolution (m)

Moon

0.5

Mercury

2.5×102

Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter
MESSENGER

3

Venus

10

Mars

1 for 1% of surface

Main Belt Asteroids

4.1×102 for Ceres

Magellan radar

100 for global
Jovian Satellites

Mapping Mission

∼ 6 over narrow swath(s)

Saturnian Satellites

∼ 3×103

Uranian Satellites

∼ 10

Neptunian Satellites

∼ 3×103 over 1/3 of surface

Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter
The Atlas of Mars
Dawn (best case example)
Europa
Iapetus, Cassini

4

Voyager 2 flyby
Voyager 2 flyby

Table 3. Missions have mapped solar system bodies at various resolutions, adapted from Lazio et al. (2023) and Fields et al.
(2023).

Figure 6. Left: An LRO/LROC image showing the Apollo 12 descent module and astronaut tracks located at selenographic
coordinates 3.0128 S, 336.57810 E. Two extravehicular (EVA) activities were performed on the lunar surface totaling 7.75 hours,
resulting in the collection of 35.34 kg of lunar samples. Right: An LROC image showing the Apollo 17 landing site. The
sub-meter resolution image clearly shows the descent module and tracks. A few bright point-like features can be seen around
the descent module, and are various experiment packages deployed on the lunar surface.

Of course, visual inspection can offer clues at best,
and as we have seen in history humans are prone
to “pareidolia”, a cognitive phenomenon where a
superficial and isolated visual inspection can easily bias
humans towards familiar shapes (e.g., faces, walls or
other sharp boundaries) on random terrain, especially
under low-resolution or shadowed conditions. In the
case of the Paracelsus C structures, a simple pareidolia
due to low-resolution observations can be ruled out as
the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter’s cameras imaged
the formations at approximately half-meter spatial

resolution. The high resolution images are suﬀicient
to discern shadows cast by the unusual structures
on the floor of Paracelsus C, thus revealing their
three-dimensional structure. While natural geological
processes remain the primary explanation for these
structures, some speculative theories suggest that
Paracelsus C could be of interest for further exploration
due to its atypical features (Carlotto et al. 2016). Future
lunar missions may provide more insights into the true
nature of these enigmatic formations.

15

Figure 7. LRO LROC-NAC frame M118769870LC of the unusual structures located on the floor of the lunar farside crater
Paracelsus C. The image shows complex geometrical structures and three-dimensional relief as evident by the cast shadows. At
a spatial resolution of 0.5 meters, details as small as 1 meters can be seen, assuming that two pixels are required to resolve
features in the image. The inset shows an enlargement of the unusual structures, with many complex features noted.

One should also note that the Moon is a unique
place for future astrobiological and SETI missions,
radio telescopes on the Moon would enable to search
for auroral radio emission from exoplanets (e.g.
LuSEE-Night, FARSIDE; Burns et al. 2021) but also
be capable to do radio SETI. Actually, an exciting
project to search for technosignatures from the Moon
has been announced, the Lunar Farside Technosignature
& Transients Telescope (LFT3, DeBoer et al. 2025).
It proposes to seize the opportunity that the Moon is
almost completely radio quiet now, before the launch of
many missions that are planned for the next decade.
3.2. Earth-Moon Lagrange Points
The gravitational geometry of two orbiting bodies
gives rise to stable regions in space, first discovered
by the mathematician Joseph-Louis Lagrange in the
18th century. Figure 8 displays these aptly named

Lagrange points. Since objects in these regions require
very little propellant to remain stationary, these regions
are particularly useful for human (or extraterrestrial)
artefacts in space.
This is why SETA researchers have focused on
proposals to observe and examine the five Lagrangian
points L1-L5, both for the Earth-Moon and the
Earth-Sun system (Freitas 1983a,b; Freitas and Valdes
1985; Benford 2019).
In particular, it has been
speculated that the Kordylewski clouds in L4 and
L5 of the Earth-Moon system might host some kind
of intelligent organism or “superbrain” (Temple and
Wickramasinghe 2019). However, we may also speculate
that amongst the cloud’s dust are small artificial probes
that would be ideally placed for the purpose of long-term
monitoring of planet Earth.
An ET could place a probe in a custom solar
orbit, where it could be on a unique orbit that only

16

Figure 8. The five Lagrange points of the Earth-Moon system in the co-rotating reference frame. Gravitational potential
contours (logarithmic scaling) are superimposed on the gravitational field lines (streamlines). The first three Lagrange points
occupy saddle points (blue dots) of the potential, while L4 and L5 local maxima (red points). Counterintuitively, these are
dynamically stable when Coriolis forces are taken into account. (Earth and Moon sizes not to scale)

occasionally brings it close to Earth, making it appear as
just another near-Earth object that is diﬀicult to track
consistently.
Also, a horseshoe orbit would be an excellent
candidate to place an ET probe for long-term
monitoring of the Earth. This type of orbit represents
an optimal balance of concealment, long-term stability,
and periodic opportunities for observation of the Earth.
The probe would slowly drift towards Earth from the
L5 point (an example), but before it gets too close, the
gravitational perturbation from Earth would nudge it,
changing its orbit and causing it to reverse direction.
It could then spend decades or even hundreds of years
travelling all the way around the Sun, passing through
the L3 region. Finally, it would eventually approach
Earth from the other side (near the L4 point), where it
gets another gravitational perturbation, sending it back
the other way. This ’cycle’ or ’cyclical motion’ repeats
over very long timescales. It is interesting to note that
we have discovered asteroids (e.g. 2010SO16, 419624,

...) in this type of orbit around the Earth, and we might
explore them from a technosignature perspective (e.g.
metallic surface, light sail signature).
Co-orbital objects are also a potential target of
interest, because they come very close to the Earth
annually (Benford 2019).
3.3. Inner Solar System
In the solar system search for biosignatures, it
is well-known that cross-contamination of living
microorganism — planetary lithopanspermia — is a
plausible scenario over long timescales (Nicholson 2009).
Similarly one could imagine the possibility that an
advanced civilization developing in our (or another)
solar system might migrate away from a dying planet
to a nearby one in the same stellar system. In our solar
system, we could frame this possibility as an extension
of the silurian hypothesis (Wright 2018a) beyond the
Earth’s boundary, and to search for extinct civilization
coming from the nearby planets.

17
Historically, Percival Lowell thought he saw canals on
Mars constructed by “Martians”, or a spider web on
Venus, another typical example of pareidolia. Another
explanation of these signatures might simply be that
the telescope was acting like an ophthalmoscope and
that Lowell was describing the vascularization of his own
eyeballs (Sheehan and Dobbins 2003)!
A general strategy is to look for outliers in the
orbital parameter spaces of solar system objects (Lazio
et al. 2023), maybe similar to the ones of human’s
technological solar-system missions.
These display
technosignatures such as non-gravitational acceleration,
fine-tuned gravitational assists, goal-directed behavior,
or active communication.
Phobos, the innermost
natural satellite of Mars was observed to have a
non-gravitational acceleration in the 1960s. Shklovskii
and Sagan (1966, chap. 26) explored in detail the
hypothesis that Phobos might be artificial, but later it
was shown that the effect was due to systematics (Singer
1967). Anomaly detection using fractal dimension
analysis has been applied to satellite images on Mars
(Carlotto and Stein 1990; Carlotto 2007), finding
intriguing but non-conclusive features. Similar efforts
could certainly be refined and more systematically
studied with modern machine learning capabilities.
3.4. Asteroid Belt
The asteroid belt has raw material resources
(Papagiannis 1978, 1983), and would be a good place to
hide for lurkers because it has a lower gravitational well
compared to the one of planets, which means it would
be less energy costly to go in and out. The worry about
collisions ingrained through popular culture is actually
unfounded because the density is low, and collisions
are very rare now (Bottke et al. 2015). Polarimetry
and spectroscopy instruments can detect metal surfaces
that would stand out from natural objects that rarely
produce polarization (Socas-Navarro et al. 2021). It has
been proposed to look for forensic evidence of extrasolar
asteroid mining (Forgan and Elvis 2011), but obviously
it would make even more sense to start such a search in
our own solar system first.
3.5. Interstellar Objects
Interstellar objects (ISOs) going through our
solar system have attracted attention through the
interpretation that ‘Oumuamua might be an interstellar
spacecraft propelled by a light sail (Bialy and Loeb 2018;
Loeb 2022a). The tumbling motion of ‘Oumuamua
led also to the idea that it was a passive probe, such
as a debris of a megastructures like a Dyson sphere
(Loeb 2023). This ETI interpretation led to heated
controversies as there are also natural explanations
to explain its phenomenology (Bannister et al. 2019;
Katz 2021). One can also see positive outcomes of such
debates (Elvis 2022), although the lack of additional
data is a key issue to solve this controversy. In the

near future, the Vera Rubin Observatory will be able
to detect many more ISOs (Ezell and Loeb 2023), and
the JWST could help to further characterize them. A
recent review of ISOs in relation to technosignatures
has been conducted in Davenport et al. (2025). The
authors suggest to look for anomalous trajectories,
spectra, color, and shapes, and recommend detailed
observational strategies during the whole observable
timing of the ISO (see table 4).
Davenport et al. (2025) suggest synergies between
ISO SETI searches with studies of surface composition,
comet activity and acceleration, shape, and rotation.
The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, scheduled
to be launched in 2027 is poised to be an exceptional tool
for discovering interstellar objects due to its unparalleled
combination of a wide field of view, deep-field imaging
capabilities, and high-resolution optics. By having a
population to work with instead of a single anomalous
case, one will have more material to do science, including
statistics. The ultimate data gathering may be to send
a rendezvous mission to intercept and study such ISOs
(Siraj et al. 2023; Hein et al. 2022). The recent discovery
of dark comets (Seligman et al. 2024) shows a population
of solar system objects that have non-gravitational
accelerations. Loeb and Cloete (2025) argues that one
of them matches the Venera 2 spacecraft, which implies
that differentiating between a natural population of
“dark comets” and artificial spacecraft may be nuanced,
an example they use to argue that perhaps some of them
are ETI.
3.6. Outer Solar System
Recently, Stanton (2025) did find two fast optical
pulses separated by 4.4s in the direction of HD89389.
After ruling out other possibilities, Stanton suggested
that the anomalous pulses might have been caused by
an opaque solid ring-shaped object in our solar system,
occulting the star sequentially.
3.7. Kuiper Belt
Matloff (2004) proposed a search for artificial Kuiper
belt objects, while Loeb and Turner (2012) showed that
lights on Kuiper belt objects are in principle detectable
with existing instruments.
Artificially illuminated objects might be detected in
the outer solar system, but also on the surface of
exoplanets (Loeb and Turner 2012).
3.8. Solar Gravitational Lens
As predicted by Einstein’s theory of relativity, massive
objects such as our Sun bend light (Einstein 1936), and
starting at 547 AUs, light converges, forming a lens.
If communication probes could exploit this effect, the
gains would be very important (see e.g. Maccone 2013b;
Turyshev 2024). A radio search of solar gravitational
lens communication between our Sun and alpha centauri
has been conducted (Tusay et al. 2022), while Kerby

18
Table 4. Observing recommendations for ISO technosignatures. Note that the timing here is a suggestion for the most likely
detection, and almost all proposed technosignatures benefit from additional data throughout the ISO passage. Table from
Davenport et al. (2025).
Observing Mode

Technosignature Class

Timing

Astrometry & tracking

Accelerations

Full arc of passage

Full sky photometry

Early detection & origin

Earliest possible

Optical/IR spectroscopy

Spectral anomalies, lasers

Closest approach

Radio spectroscopy

Transmissions

Closest approach

Multi-band photometry

Color & phase curve anomalies

Full arc of passage

High-cadence imaging

Rotational modulation

Multi-night campaign

Infrared photometry

Waste heat

Pre- and post-perihelion

Polarimetry

Unusual surface properties

Closest approach

Radar imaging

Shape anomalies

When within radar range

Figure 9. The Solar Gravitational Lens (SGL) is a region where gravitational and neutrino radiation starts to focus (respectively
at 22.45 AUs and 29.6 AUs) while the focus of electromagnetic (EM) rays starts from 547 AUs. Human or ETI observational or
transmitting probes placed at these regions would benefit orders of magnitude of gains. Figure adapted from (Maccone 2009,
page xxxi).

and Wright (2021) suggested that it would be a sound
strategy to look for artifacts around the focal region.
3.9. Oort Cloud
The more we go towards the outskirts of our solar
system, the more interstellar objects we can expect,
and indeed interstellar objects outnumber solar system
objects in the Oort cloud (Siraj and Loeb 2020). We
can note that Oort clouds of different stellar systems are
almost touching each other. They might play the role
of a boundary between stellar systems, where activities
and exchanges occur, much as in a cell membrane,
or as human activities mostly happen on the surface
of planet Earth, at the interface of the planet and
space. From this viewpoint, they are important search
targets for technosignatures, at the interface between
Romanovskaya
our solar system and other stars.
(2022b) proposed that civilizations may be exiting their
Oort cloud for migration purposes, and this might lead
to signs of ejection, or associated communicative or heat
technosignatures.
To sum up, many present and future observational
facilities such as the Vera Rubin Observatory or the
Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope as well as planned
missions in the solar systems that together with machine
learning techniques have the potential to enable a

much more systematic and comprehensive search for
anomalies and possibly artefacts in our own solar system
(see also Haqq-Misra et al. 2022c).

19
4. EXOPLANETARY TECHNOSIGNATURES

4.1. Classification Schemes for Advanced Civilizations
The Extended Kardashev Scale

As we shift our search for technosignatures beyond
our home solar system, it is prudent to take
a general perspective before looking at details.
From such a lofty perspective, energy utilization is
perhaps the most important driving force behind
civilization’s technological development. The greater
that consumption, the greater the effect a civilization
has on its environment, and the more possibilities there
are for observing it. Kardashev (1964) introduced
his eponymous scale, outlining three main levels of
civilizations, both in terms of spatial scale and energy
(see table 5). An extension to the universal scale was
proposed by Gray (2020), and a review made by Ćirković
(2015).
Consider a civilization extracting energy from its
environment at a rate of dE/dt. Its Kardashev index
K is
1
1 dE
K =2+
log10
(2)
10
L⊙ dt
where L⊙ is a solar luminosity. A civilization that
extracts energy at a rate equivalent to that produced
by our Sun has a K = 2, and is classified as a Type-II
on the Kardashev scale. Next, imagine a civilization
that utilizes all the solar energy impinging on its planet.
If the planet has a radius r and an orbital radius R,
then the civilization’s power extraction is r2 /4R2 times
its stars luminosity, L⋆ , giving
K =2+

( r )2 L
1
⋆
log10
10
2R L⊙

(3)

If human civilization reached this level of technological
ability, it would have K = 1.066, and be classified
as a Type-I civilization. We discuss technosignatures
generated by such Type-I civilizations in this section,
and of Type-II in section 5.
The jump from a Type-I to a Type-II civilization
requires the scaling up of energy harvesting technology
from a planetary to a stellar scale, which would include
a transition to the capability to harness resources at
a stellar system scale. Moving up another notch to
Type-III requires further scaling to some 10 billion
Sun-like stars, or a sizable portion of the output of an
average spiral galaxy. The impact of such an advanced
civilization on its home galaxy could be observable, and
are discussed in section 8. Moving up to cosmological
scales, a civilization that has extended its reach across
manifold galaxies is Type-IV (with some examples
discussed in section 8.3).
To put things in perspective, in 2021 the total human
energy usage from fossil fuels, hydroelectric, solar, and
nuclear was estimated at 19.6 terawatts, or about 5.12×
10−14 L⊙ . This puts human civilization at K ≈ 0.67.

Figure 10. Total human energy use through time on the
Kardashev scale. Depending on the definition of energy
usage we have a lower-bound (black line) and an upper
bound which adds the agricultural burning of biomass (green
dot-dashed line).

Slight variations from the literature on the definition
of K result in indices ranging from 0.55 to 0.76,
classifying modern human civilization between a Type-0
and Type-I. Figure 10 shows the upper and lower bounds
on the Kardashev index of human civilization since the
1800s (data from Ritchie et al. 2020). The inset projects
the rate attained since 1975 into the future, implying
that at the current level of growth, humanity will achieve
Type-I status around year 2500. Projections for growth
to Type-II and beyond are more speculative.
The remainder of the paper follows this spatial
scale, and we will review possible technosignatures on
planets, planetary systems, and stars up to the universal
scale. The Kardashev Type of civilizations engaging
in producing interstellar signals (section 6) or sending
probes would not be obvious to assess unless we know
more about the originating civilization.
The Barrow Scale

The Barrow scale (Fig. 11), proposed by cosmologist
John D. Barrow (1998), offers another compelling
metric for classifying the technological level of a
civilization.
In contrast to the Kardashev scale’s
focus on macro-level energy consumption, the Barrow
scale measures a society’s advancement in its ability
to manipulate matter and environment on increasingly
smaller physical scales, a concept we could call
“micro-dimensional mastery”. This framework suggests
that true technological sophistication lies not necessarily

20
Kardashev Index

Spatial Extent

Power Usage

Technological Level

−20

0

Planetary

10

L⊙ ≈ 10 W

Continent spanning pre-Industrial to planet
spanning industrial, using chemical energy sources

I

Planetary

10−10 L⊙ ≈ 1016 W

Planet spanning industrial with space-faring
abilities for solar system exploration. Chemical,
solar, and nuclear energy sources.

II

Solar System

1L⊙ ≈ 1026 W

Mega-structure engineering capacity and/or
interstellar space-travel capacity. Extensive solar
energy production.

III

Interstellar

1010 L⊙ ≈ 1036 W

Mega-structure mass production capacity, exotic
energy production capabilities

IV

Intergalactic

1020 L⊙ ≈ 1046 W

Multi-galaxy
spanning,
omnipotent technology

6

with

essentially

Table 5. The Kardashev scale describes potential civilizations at different spatial and energetic levels. Kardashev articulated
the Types I, II and III, which we extend here one order of magnitude lower (Type 0), and higher (Type IV).

in harnessing stellar energies, but in the precise control
over the building blocks of the universe. The scale is
delineated by “minus” types, signifying this inward focus
(Fig. 11).
The Barrow scale posits that the ultimate form
of technological evolution may be the conquest of
the small, achieving profound results with maximum
eﬀiciency and fundamental control. Such a trajectory is
also called the compression hypothesis, often contrasted
with the expansion hypothesis (Last 2017; Smart 2012).
However, manipulating small scales requires also a lot
of energy —think for example of the energy required for
particle accelerators to break atoms— so a civilization
may not have to choose between developing along
the Kardashev or the Barrow scale, but may instead
co-develop along both axes (Vidal 2016).
Let us now turn to the search for exoplanetary
technosignatures that aims to identify signs of
advanced technological civilizations on exoplanets. This
endeavor synergizes closely with exoplanet detection
and characterization, as well as the study of debris
disks, and can often be conducted commensally with
other astronomical observations.
There are three
main categories of planetary technosignatures: surface,
atmospheric and orbital.
4.2. Surface Technosignatures
Surface technosignatures are features on a planet’s
surface indicative of technological activity.
Given
the distances of exoplanets, detecting surface
technosignatures is much more challenging than in
our solar system, or than atmospheric signatures. It
was first proposed by archeologist John B. Campbell
(2006).
Agriculture has been going on on Earth
since about 10,000 years, so taking the Earth as a
model, the observational window is arguably one of
the most enduring human activity, and it has been
proposed to look for proxies of agricultural societies, by
looking at urban fires, landscape burning, deforestation,

desertification due to overgrazing, sea canals, seasonal
agriculture practices or irrigation (Lockley and Visioni
2021). The widespread use of solar panels would
create a distinct spectral signature due to their high
reflectivity in specific wavelengths, as explored by
Kopparapu et al. (2024). Observations would remain
challenging, as it would require hundreds of observation
hours with an HWO-like observatory, assuming a 23%
land coverage with solar panels.
The surface composition of exoplanets affects the
polarization phase curves due to the change in multiple
scattering (Singla et al. 2023). If there are artificial
surfaces which may be composed of cement, plastic, or
cloth, the change in surface albedo will be reflected in
the polarization phase curves, so polarization studies
will prove very useful to study surfaces.
Another compelling surface technosignature is
artificial illumination, such as city lights on the
night side of a planet (Beatty 2022. If a civilization
routinely lights its habitats, cities, or transportation
networks, such light could, in principle, be detected
from interstellar distances. The Earth’s night side
emits visible light from urban areas, observable from
orbit. A suﬀiciently luminous and widespread lighting
network on an exoplanet could similarly produce
detectable optical signatures. The unique spectral
energy distribution or “spectral signature” of artificial
lights differs markedly from natural sources, providing
an unambiguous signature (see Fig. 12).
Furthermore, lighting is likely to be stable and
predictable. For example, on tidally locked planets
orbiting M-dwarf stars, the constant night side of the
planet offers optimal contrast and predictable location.
LEDs can show sharp distinctive peaks in the blue
and green, while sodium and halogen lights emit
at specific narrow-band wavelengths. These spectra
differ from broadband thermal emission of planetary
surfaces or atmospheres. High-contrast imaging using
coronagraphy or starshades can be used to resolve an

21
PICOTECHNOLOGY

-12

-13

-14

FEMTOTECHNOLOGY

IV –
INDIVIDUAL
ATOMS

V–
ATOMIC
NUCLEI

-17

-10
-9

-15
-16

-11

III MOLECULES

-7
-6

MICROTECHNOLOGY

-5

-18

-4

VI – ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

-3

-31

-32

-20

-30
VOCTOTECHNOLOGY

ZEPTOTECHNOLOGY

-8

II GENES

ATTOTECHNOLOGY

-19

NANOTECHNOLOGY

QUECTOTECHNOLOGY

-2

PLANCKTECHNOLOGY

-33

-35

-21

-29

-1

-34
-22

Ω – SPACE-TIME´S
STRUCTURE

-23
YOCTOTECHNOLOGY

-28

I – OWN SCALE

-27 RONTOTECHNOLOGY
-24

-25

0

FIRST TOOLS

Powers
of ten

-26

Figure 11. The Barrow scale highlights the ability to manipulate and control from our own scale (1m) to the minimal
length-scale (10−35 m) . Humanity has created many tools at our own human scale down to the nanotechnological realm (green),
but has almost no mastery below (red). Barrow (1998) gave examples of types: Type I-minus: The ability to manipulate objects
on a human scale, such as building structures and mining, Type II-minus: The capacity to control and engineer genetics and
living organisms; Type III-minus: The mastery of molecular and chemical bonds to create new materials; Type IV-minus: The
ability to manipulate individual atoms, marking the advent of true nanotechnology; Type V-minus: The power to engineer
atomic nuclei and their constituent nucleons; Type VI-minus: The capacity to manipulate elementary particles (quarks and
leptons); Type Omega-minus (Ω-minus): The theoretical apex, representing the ability to manipulate the fundamental structure
of spacetime.

exoplanet’s light from the glare of its host star. The
JWST and two future space-based telescopes, HWO
and LIFE, are capable of detecting night-time lights on
nearby (30 ly) exoplanets. For example, a study was
done by Tabor and Loeb (2021) on the detectability of
artificial lights from Proxima b. The terrestrial planet
is likely to be tidally locked to its M dwarf host star
owing to its proximity to the star. The study simulated
lightcurves from Proxima b to compare natural reflected
starlight with artificial LED-like illumination. It found
that JWST could detect artificial lights if they are
500 times stronger than Earth’s current LEDs, or if
Earth-level illumination is emitted in a spectrum 1000
times narrower.
Nonetheless, the use of artificial lights as a
technosignature is based on an anthropocentric
assumption of the behavior of an alien civilization,
and for example a different biological or technological
evolution generalizing the use of NIR would render
massive illumination unnecessary.
More generally, large-scale artificial structures,
such as cities or industrial complexes, could also
alter a planet’s albedo or thermal profile, generating
an urban heat island effect (Kuhn and Berdyugina
2015), i.e. a localized warming due to activity or the

use of darker-colored materials in construction.
As an illustration, generating surface maps in
different colors for the nearest exoplanet, Proxima
b, may be achievable with reasonable ground-based
telescopes/interferometers (Berdyugina and Kuhn
2019). However, the observation remains challenging
and requires high resolution, very large aperture
telescopes, and a SGL telescope may be needed here
too.
Exoplanet Surface Technosignatures could also benefit
from a Solar Gravitational Lens (SGL) telescope. Such
a telescope would use the Sun’s immense gravity as a
natural lens (see Fig. 9). As predicted by general
relativity, light from a distant exoplanet, such as
one 10 parsecs away, is bent around the Sun and
converges at a focal line that starts at about 547
astronomical units (AU). A probe positioned on this
line could intercept this focused light, which manifests
as a highly magnified image of the planet called an
Einstein ring. Even when accounting for higher-order
effects like interference from the solar corona, this
technique provides enormous light amplification and
a powerful effective resolution. To characterize the
planet, the spacecraft would move laterally to scan
different portions of the Einstein ring, reconstructing

22

Figure 12. Spectra of four types of artificial lights. LED
(blue spectrum) is clearly distinguished from the other
three types of light sources. The incandescent (olive/green
spectrum) has no emission lines, in contrast to the sodium
and fluorescent light sources, which display a variety of
unique emission lines. Future large-aperture space telescopes
equipped with visible/near-IR spectrometers could detect
(and potentially identify) artificial lights on the night sides
of nearby terrestrial exoplanets.

a complete image pixel by pixel (Turyshev and Toth
2020). For an Earth-sized planet at 10 pc, this would
yield a surface map with a resolution of approximately
224 km per pixel (Figure 13). This level of detail is
more than suﬀicient to distinguish and map large-scale
geological and climatic features like continents, oceans,
or polar ice caps. By performing spectroscopy on the
light from individual pixels, scientists could analyze
the composition of specific surface areas and overlying
atmospheric regions, offering an unparalleled method for
studying an exoplanet’s global environment.
While a 224 km resolution would not allow us
to see individual buildings or small structures, it is
powerful enough to detect massive, artificially created
features that cover vast areas, often referred to as
surface megastructures. The key would be to look
for anomalies within a pixel that are inconsistent with
natural geology or vegetation. For example, immense
fields of solar panels covering thousands of square
kilometers would have a distinct spectral signature.
They would be much darker and have lower reflectivity
(albedo) than most natural surfaces like deserts, forests,
or oceans, and could also create a thermal anomaly.
The SGL could even differentiate between bio- and
techno- signatures: agriculture on a continental scale
would create unnaturally uniform geometric patterns or
vegetation types with a spectral signature different from
native plant life, detectable across multiple adjacent
pixels.

Figure 13. A simulated image of the Earth if it were placed
at a distance of 10 pc using a hypothetical solar gravitational
lens telescope. The simulation includes the point spread
function of the telescope, and the effects of solar coronal
distortion. The spatial resolution of the image is 224 km
per pixel, enough to discriminate continents from oceans,
clouds, and polar caps (if they exist). It could also detect
large surface megastructures, i.e. surface technosignatures.

Furthermore, a sprawling network of cities or a single
ecumenopolis (a planet-wide city, see (Doxiadis 1962))
would have a unique thermal and spectral signature. At
night, the collective heat from energy use and city lights
could make a 224 × 224 km2 area appear anomalously
warm in the infrared spectrum. During the day, the
composite reflectivity of artificial materials like concrete
and asphalt would differ from natural terrain. Detecting
these signatures would rely on identifying pixels with
brightness, color, or temperature characteristics that
are statistically unlikely to be produced by natural
phenomena. Therefore, while challenging, a 224 km
resolution represents a critical threshold where the
search for surface technosignatures becomes a tangible
possibility.
4.3. Atmospheric Technosignatures
Advances in exoplanet detection methods, such as
transit photometry, radial velocity, and direct imaging
have paved the way for the identification of potentially
habitable worlds.
Atmospheric spectroscopy offers
a powerful tool for detecting both bio- and technosignatures, which means that searches can be commensal
for both sides, on the condition that the signature
appears on the same wavelength range.

23
Ideally, technosignature gases should have a long
residence time in the atmosphere and, if the purpose
is to terraform, a very strong Global Warming Potential
(GWP). If we could detect an ozone layer that is
seriously depleting over time, that would also be a
strong lead of the presence of activity from a civilization.
Key candidates for technosignature gases include potent
greenhouse gases such as sulfur hexafluoride SF6 , carbon
tetrafluoride CF4 , and nitrogen trifluoride NF3 , which
have high GWP and long atmospheric lifetimes, making
them detectable across interstellar distances (Table 6).
Other potential technosignatures include industrial
pollutants (Dubey et al. 2025) and alterations to
the nitrogen cycle caused by agricultural activity
(Haqq-Misra et al. 2022a). Detecting these requires
advanced spectroscopic techniques and high-resolution
observations, achievable with next-generation telescopes
like the JWST or future possibilities such as a SGL
telescope.
However, distinguishing technosignatures from
biological or abiotic processes poses significant
challenges, as many gases, such as methane (CH4 )
and oxygen (O2 ), can be produced by both biological
and technological activity.
Chlorofluorocarbons
(CFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), and
perfluorocarbons (PFCs) are synthetic chemicals
that are not naturally occurring, primarily used as
refrigerants, having the potential to accumulate in
planetary atmospheres (Haqq-Misra et al. 2022b).
Sulfur hexafluoride (SF6 ), Tetrafluoromethane (CF4 ),
and Trifluoromethyl Sulfur Pentafluoride (SF5 CF3 )
are highly stable greenhouse gases that do not
appear naturally but are instead used in various
industrial applications (Schwieterman et al. 2024).
Nitrogen trifluoride (NF3 ) also represents a promising
technosignature gas, since it is not known to be
produced naturally by any fluorine based minerals,
photochemical, volcanic or other geological processes
(Seager et al. 2023; Petkowski et al. 2024).
Seager et al. (2023) made a strong case to focus
future atmospheric technosignature search efforts on
SF6 , CF4 , and NF3 (Figure 14). The planned Large
Interferometer For Exoplanets (LIFE) space observatory
is a prime instrument to investigate these (Glauser et al.
2024). A search for these gases could be carried out by
focusing on their fundamental vibrational modes within
the wavelength range of 7.5 to 16 microns.
Nitrogen dioxide (NO2 ) is also a good potential
technosignature candidate because it is produced
primarily by industrial activities, combustion processes
(e.g., fossil fuel burning), and vehicle emissions
(Kopparapu et al. 2021; Schwieterman et al. 2024).
A significant accumulation of NO2 in a planet’s
atmosphere would be highly anomalous as natural
processes such as volcanic activity or lightning make
much lower quantities of NO2 and are more transient
compared to a sustained industrial output. On Earth,

concentrations vary drastically from as low as 20 parts
per trillion (ppt) in remote areas to over 45 parts
per billion (ppb) in industrialized regions, highlighting
its strong connection to technological pollution. The
most effective method to detect NO2 is through visible
reflectance spectroscopy, which analyzes the starlight
that reflects off the planet. As this light travels through
the atmosphere, NO2 absorbs specific wavelengths,
particularly in the blue part of the spectrum between
400 and 500 nm. This absorption and others in IR
creates a unique spectral fingerprint that could be
detected on nearby exoplanets using the JWST and the
future Habitable Worlds Observatory (HWO).
In the visible region of the spectrum, nitrogen
dioxide (NO2 ) is a compelling technosignature candidate
because it is strongly linked to industrial activities on
Earth, such as the burning of fossil fuels. However,
its distinctiveness is complicated by natural sources
like lightning, volcanoes, wildfires, and soil emissions.
To confidently claim NO2 as a sign of technology
on an exoplanet, scientists would need to detect it
at concentrations that are significantly higher than
what could be produced naturally. This would require
detailed modeling of the specific exoplanet’s potential
for natural NO2 production.
Trichlorofluoromethane
(CCl3 F)
and
carbon
tetrafluoride (CF4 ) are also excellent technosignature
candidates (Lin et al. 2014), as they are produced
primarily from industrial processes, such as aluminum
smelting and semiconductor manufacturing.
The
low background concentration of CF4 from volcanic
activity or other geological processes would not be
detectable at interstellar distance. Thus, a detection
of CF4 based on its strong infrared absorption bands
at ∼9.2 µm (ν1 ) and ∼11.8 µm (ν4 ) would most
likely imply an industrial origin. CCl3 F is entirely a
synthetically produced gas on Earth, and is widely
used historically in refrigeration, aerosols, and air
conditioning. There are no known natural processes
(i.e., false positives) capable of producing CCl3 F,
meaning that its detection via IR spectroscopy (e.g.,
∼ 11 − 13µm) in the atmosphere of a terrestrial planet
would strongly imply an artificial origin.
Other potential technosignature gases targets
include ”chemical fossils” left by past or present
technology. PFCs, such as carbon tetrafluoride (CF4 )
and hexafluoroethane (C2 F6 ), are purely artificial
compounds with atmospheric lifetimes of thousands
to tens of thousands of years. Their extreme stability
means they could serve as an extinct technosignature,
a long-term record of industrial activity persisting long
after a civilization might have vanished or transitioned
to cleaner technology.
Reversing the observational logic as a proof of
concept, Lustig-Yaeger et al. (2023) considered Earth
as another transiting exoplanet, and showed that
JWST could detect an Earth-like planet both in

24
Table 6. Atmospheric concentrations, Global warming potentials (GWPs), and lifetimes of selected species.
Species

Concentration (ppt)

GWP (100 yr)

Lifetime (yr)

CF4

∼85

7380

50000

(IPCC 2025; AGAGE 2025; Droste et al.
2020). Note ∼95 ppt in 2050.

SF6

12.2

25200

3200

(IPCC 2025; NOAA 2025; Thoning et al.
2022). Note ∼22–24 ppt in 2050.

0.15–0.16

17700

800

(Sturges et al. 2012; IPCC 2025). Note
that its extremely long lifetime, and
decline in use, has resulted in a plateau in
its concentration. It is expected to remain
at this concentration level for centuries.

2.5

17400

>500

(Weiss et al. 2008; IPCC 2025).
∼8–10 ppt in 2050.

SF5 CF3

NF3

Sources

Note

Figure 14. (Top) A simulated transit depth spectrum showing SF6 and NF3 in the atmosphere of terrestrial exoplanets of
different atmospheric compositions orbiting an M Dwarf star. The concentrations of SF6 and NF3 are at 1 ppm. (Bottom)
Absorption cross sections for various atmospheric molecules, including the industrial produced SF6 and NF3. It is noted that
concentrations of 1 ppm for both SF6 and NF3 are orders of magnitude above that of present-day Earth’s abundances of these
two industrial gases. The high concentrations of SF6 and NF3 could exist in so-called “service worlds”. Figure from (Seager
et al. 2023).

terms of its biosignatures and its industrial pollutant
technosignature.
However, significant detection challenges remain as
the absorption signatures of some of these artificially
produced gases can be diﬀicult to discern in the mid-IR
due to other strong features from water vapor and CO2 ,
and hydrocarbons. Ideally, a large (> 15 m) space-based
telescope equipped with a high resolution mid-IR

spectrometer would be needed that also integrate
a stellar contamination control. To mitigate these
challenges, future space-based telescopes will need to
observe in the least-confused spectral windows of specific
technosignature gases, observe the spectrum in thermal
emission mode, since this mode weights the vertical
column differently than a limb transmission spectrum
and can place the SF6 /NF3 /CH4 bands on a planetary

25
continuum instead of a stellar one. Around 10 − 11µm,
CO2 is less interfering than at 15µm, and a sharp SF6
Q-branch or NF3 band can imprint on the N-band
(centered around 10µm) continuum.
Furthermore,
post-processing techniques on observed thermal-IR
spectrum (e.g. spectral deconvolution and/or derivative
spectroscopy) can mitigate the challenges of detecting
technosignature gas molecules in the atmospheres of
terrestrial exoplanets.
An extant technosphere refers to the physical and
environmental traces of a technological civilization
that persist even if the civilization itself is no longer
active or has undergone significant transformation.
It encompasses industrial byproducts, infrastructure,
atmospheric changes, and geological or isotopic
anomalies.
As an example of isotopic anomalies,
long-lived radioactive isotopes (e.g., plutonium-244)
or anomalously low deuterium/hydrogen (D/H) ratios
in planetary water could indicate the use of nuclear
technologies like fission or fusion (Catling et al. 2025).
Surface artifacts could also reveal evidence of
megastructures, mining, or even disasters related to
self-replicating nanotechnology (e.g.
a ”grey goo”
scenario Stevens et al. 2016). Stevens also argues
that signs of photochemical byproducts from nuclear
warfare such as gamma-rays may persist long after
a civilization’s demise. Additionally, mass extinction
events triggered by technological activity might leave
behind decay products like methanethiol (CH3 SH) or
other sulfur compounds (Stevens et al. 2016).
Of course, any of these atmospheric signatures would
need to be complemented with a contextual analysis,
including the presence of multiple technosignature gases
and the planetary environment, in order to avoid false
positives (see also section 9).
Temporal variations in potential technosignature
gases would be particularly indicative. For example,
following the example of humanity’s use of CFCs
(Newman et al. 2009), one might expect to see an
increase in the concentration of a given industrial
product, followed by a relatively rapid decrease,
indicating the initiation of a planetary regulation, or
management of waste products (see also Frank et al.
2022).
As a side note, many radio telescopes are searching
for auroral radio emission from exoplanets (Zarka
et al. 2015; Grießmeier 2018; Turner et al. 2021):
LOFAR, OVRO-LWA, NenuFAR, SKA. There is thus
a synergy possible between radio SETI in interstellar
communication (section 6) and exoplanet studies: The
collected data can be used both for studying auroral
radio emission and for SETI search. Indeed, all these
telescopes have either intentional or piggyback SETI
receivers.
Fisher (2023) and Fisher et al. (2023) used complex
systems modelling to distinguish between abiotic, biotic
and anomalous sources of atmospheric gases. The

results of these works suggest that the impact of
industrial pollutants on the topology of the atmospheric
chemical reaction network could be a viable means of
detection for exoplanets, regardless of the underlying
atmospheric chemistry.
Their analysis focused on
networks leading to the productions of CH4 and CFC-12,
but could also be applied to other technosignature gases
identified above. Other similar network-based studies
looking for non-random, biology-like networks are also
relevant for this endeavor (Wong et al. 2023).
4.4. Orbital Technosignatures
The characterization of debris disks around stars
gives insights into planetary system formation and
dynamics, which may also inform the likelihood of
technosignatures. Indeed, unusual structures in debris
disks, such as asymmetric features, could even hint at
the presence of artificial megastructures or industrial
activity (Jaiswal 2023).
This search for artificial
structures or activities in orbit is also known as ‘Clarke
exobelts’ (Socas-Navarro 2018; Sallmen et al. 2019).
Since stellar evolution is highly predictable, and as
the star heats up, it will change the habitable zones
of planets. One way to control the stellar flux is to
place a starshade at the L1 Lagrange point that could
control how much light the planet receives (Gaidos 2017;
Skoglund and Mustill 2025).
Lacki (2019) has studied the signature, geometry and
detectability of glints of light coming from artificial
satellites.
Since we have not only satellites, but
also mega-constellations of satellites, Osmanov (2021)
studied how an ETI equivalent of these could be
detected with the Very Large Telescope Interferometer
(VLTI). In the early stages of stellar system formation,
planetary accretion disks form.
If a system is
not young (i.e. post zero-age main sequence) and
still has a disk-like signature, this might be a lead
to inquire whether the disk is artificial in nature
(Socas-Navarro 2018). Interestingly, the duration of
such a technosignature could be long, as even non-active
artificial debris disks could be long-lived and thus
detectable during a long time window.
Solar power satellites in geocentric orbit would give
power all day and night, in contrast to solar panels on
the surface that give power only during daylight (Ellery
2016). The technosignature would be a strong beaming
of energy from ‘exogeocentric’ orbit to the exoplanet.
As the energy demand grows, the solar-powered satellite
band would grow too, making it more amenable to
observations. The limit being a kind of planetary
Dyson sphere that would give a similar 10µm waste heat
signature predicted for stellar Dyson spheres.
To sum up, atmospheric technosignatures—such
as synthetic greenhouse gases and industrial
pollutants—are the most accessible with current
and near-future technologies. Surface technosignatures,
including nightside city lights and urban heat islands,

26
offer additional, though technically demanding,
potential evidence of technological activity. Orbital
technosignatures remain the hardest to detect due to
their faint nature and the high resolution required to
resolve orbital artifacts.
If a civilization has a strong impact in transforming
its home planet, it seems logical and likely that over
time its reach will broaden to having an impact on other
planetary bodies in its planetary system.
4.5. Exoplanetary System Technosignatures
The search for exoplanet technosignatures should
not necessarily be limited to planets within the star’s
habitable zone. For example, water can also exist in
micro-habitable zones such as those around gas giants
where tidal friction induces geological activity in nearby
moons.
Some advanced extraterrestrial civilizations may
choose to use other terrestrial planets inside or outside
of the habitable zone as Service world briefly mentioned
by Lingam et al. (2023) and defined by Wright (2026,
9-7) as:
A planet with an extensive technosphere but
no (or practically no) biosphere, for instance
because it is the site of an interstellar
settlement but has not been terraformed. If
interstellar settlement is common, most sites
of technology might be on service worlds.
These planets could be used solely for industrial
processing, or they may be terraformed to make their
environments suitable for habitability. Such worlds
may show abundances of industrial or greenhouse gases
orders of magnitude greater than on present day earth.
In other words, a highly polluted and unlivable world
by our standards might be a technosignature candidate.
The technosignature search strategies identified for
our solar system (see section 3) also apply to other
planetary systems, although the interstellar distances
bring considerable challenges and re-assessments.
Forgan and Elvis (2011) has proposed to look for active
mining of many asteroids that would generate localized
infrared excess.
Given a planetary system with a narrow habitable
zone (M-K-G star), several terrestrial planets could be
found in horseshoe constellations, forming a ring of
planets (Raymond et al. 2023), detectable through a
study of transit-timing variations. Although by many
orders of magnitude not energy eﬀicient, a planetary
system engineering civilization might also engineer the
dynamics of the planets to form a beacon, producing
mathematical sequences that would be highly unlikely to
occur naturally (Clement et al. 2022). Ponnaganti et al.
(2024) proposed other examples of what they called
strange exoplanetary architectures, and suggested that
relocating planets using high-power lasers is feasible.

4.6. Multiplanetary Systems and Terraforming
A highly advanced terrestrial ET civilization may
terraform the atmospheres of rocky planets in their
planetary system to make them suitable to their form
of life. Terraforming is the mega engineering process
of modifying a planet’s atmosphere, temperature,
surface topography, and ecology to be similar to
Earth’s environment, making it habitable for life
forms that would otherwise not be able to survive
there.
To test this, one may try to observe
infrared signatures of greenhouse gases with very
high planetary warming potentials and long residence
times in rocky terrestrial exoplanets. The growth
of an oxygen-rich atmosphere, or an adjustment of
atmospheric pressure may all be indicative of such
engineering.
The discovery of multiple exoplanets
sharing very similar atmospheric compositions could be
a potential indication of terraforming by an advanced
extraterrestrial civilization, an idea that has been hinted
at by Tarter and Steel (2024).
This possibility suggests that the search for alien
life should not be rigidly confined to the traditionally
defined habitable zone of planetary systems. An ETI
might choose to terraform planets outside the habitable
zone for strategic reasons, such as resource availability,
lower risk from stellar events (for planets around volatile
stars), or simply because they have the technology to
make any suitable planetary body habitable.
Planets naturally develop a wide variety of
atmospheres based on their geological history, size,
composition, and interaction with their host star.
Finding a cluster of planets all possessing remarkably
similar and potentially engineered atmospheres would
be highly anomalous.
The resulting engineered
atmosphere could be designed to support either the
alien life itself or genetically/artificially engineered
lifeforms, creating a ”biotechnosphere” ––a biosphere
significantly shaped by technology.
The point of these wider considerations is that
examining anomalous structural, dynamical and
energetic patterns at the level of a planetary system
may reveal such activites from ETIs. Such feats bring
us closer to consider even more ambitious stellar
technosignatures.

27
5. STELLAR TECHNOSIGNATURES

The idea that an ETI could become capable of
significantly using energy from its home star, or even
modify stars for altering stellar properties such as
lifespan, luminosity, or mass composition has had
various terminologies. For example, “astroengineering”
was used in the early days of the SETI (e.g. Dyson
et al. 1973) while Criswell 1985) uses “stellar husbandry”
or “star-lifting”, Matloff and Bangs (2019) wrote a
book called “stellar engineering”, and Beech (2008)
speaks of stellar “rejuvenation”. We recommend simply
using “stellar technosignatures” as a general umbrella to
denote these closely related notions.
5.1. Stellar Megastructures
The
search
for
extraterrestrial
transiting
megastructures (e.g., Dyson swarms, or artificial
structures designed to message) has the advantage that
it can make use of well-established techniques that
monitor the dimming of a star’s flux when an opaque
object passes in front of it (Arnold 2005, 2013; Wright
et al. 2016). A transit light curve with an unusual or
complex structure (e.g., asymmetries, irregular, jagged,
non-uniform) may be indicative of artificial structures
compared with the relatively smooth U-shaped transit
curves produced by exoplanet transits (Figure 16).
Indeed, a megastructure might cause transit depths
that change or vary over time due to the modification
(e.g. construction) of the structure, moving components
of the structure, or an engineered design that varies in
opacity.
Another strategy to look for candidate megastructures
near a star is to use space-based transit observatories like
the former Kepler mission or the currently operating
TESS mission, looking for anomalous light curve
signatures during transits. For example, the highly
unusual light curve of Boyajian’s star (Fig. 15) has
been intensely discussed as a candidate megastructure,
although it is almost certainly dust (Boyajian et al. 2016;
Wright and Sigurdsson 2016; Ksanfomality and Tavrov
2017; Lipman et al. 2019; Schmidt 2022; Wright 2018b;
Wright et al. 2016).
Machine learning techniques are already used to
search light curve data for signs of such unusual patterns
(for early results, see Tong et al. 2023; Giles et al. 2024).
In the case of a Dyson swarm consisting of thousands
of individually collecting “statites”, an advanced
Type-II ETI would likely choose to live outside the
radius of a Dyson swarm they constructed around
their star (Figure 16, right).
Indeed, the swarm
would generate enormous amounts of waste heat, which
could make inner planets uninhabitable.
Outside
swarm, the civilization would enjoy a cooler and
more stable environment.
One can imagine that
it could construct habitats on mined-out comets in
the Oort Cloud or building free-floating, spin-gravity
habitats that orbit the star beyond the swarm. Such

Figure 15. Kepler observations of Boyajian’s star (KIC
8462852) dips. Dip numbers (in blue) correspond to 4 of the
10 discrete dips analyzed in (Boyajian et al. 2016).

a civilization could wirelessly beam the immense
energy collected by the swarm to power habitats,
colonies, and projects throughout their star system.
The construction of the swarm would require a
highly advanced interstellar mining and manufacturing
infrastructure, likely involving the disassembly of inner
planets, as originally proposed by Dyson (1966).
This stellar-system development would also serve as
a staging ground for interstellar expansion, with the
swarm’s energy being able to power massive ships
for traveling towards other star systems or building
even more advanced megastructures. If the civilization
were to transition to a postbiological existence, its
computational activities could be housed in a megascale
computer, or ”Matrioshka brain” – a term invented
by science fiction author Robert J. Bradbury (1999).
The point of highlighting these admitedly speculative
possibilities is that the whole stellar system and the
home star may be affected by intelligent life, and it
makes sense to keep them in mind as a cluster of
technosignatures.
5.2. Energy Utilization
The first proposal to harness the whole radiating
energy of a star was famously articulated by Dyson
(1960b, 1966). Dyson initially spoke of a “spherical
shell” and although it was later called a “Dyson
sphere”, Dyson was aware that a solid sphere would
be very unstable. In an issue of the Science magazine,
Dyson replied to early critiques by Maddox, Anderson,
and Sloane, and wrote that he was more thinking
of a swarm of solar collectors in orbit around a star
rather than a solid structure (Dyson 1960a). For
historical and comprehensive reviews about Dyson
spheres, see Bradbury (2001) and Wright (2020a). The
core point is that whatever the specific construction,
such a project would leave an observable signature of
waste heat. Searches for such waste heat signatures

<latexit sha1_base64="2F5O9ZujmdN7YqFltzTxnxFIHQM=">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</latexit>

Brightness

28

Time
<latexit sha1_base64="XpU/EkJNkY5bhSYfPDi5rt+U32U=">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</latexit>

Figure 16. The left panel displays a simulated transit light curve and a scaled visual inset of a natural, Earth-like exoplanet
passing in front of a sun-like star, causing a brief dip in brightness. In contrast, the right panel illustrates a highly complex
light curve produced by an artificial Dyson swarm as its various panels orbit and cross the star’s disk. Comparing these two
scenarios highlights how the intricate shape of a light curve can distinguish artificial cosmic structures from natural planets,
though real-world observational noise will add further complexity to both signals.

have been conducted in the infrared, with the IRAS
telescope (Jugaku and Nishimura 2004; Carrigan 2009).
Zackrisson et al. (2018) combined data from Gaia
DR3, 2MASS, and WISE to perform an even more
refined search. Out of 5 million sources,Suazo (2024b);
Suazo et al. (2022, 2024); Suazo (2024a) identified
seven M-dwarfs exhibiting anomalous infrared excess,
which could be interpreted as partially completed Dyson
spheres. These candidates deserve further analysis,
although false positives could be circumstellar dust
emission (which was also noted by Sagan and Walker
1966). Another possibility is that while the Dyson
sphere would capture back the energy, it would create
a feedback process that would create a hot sphere
(Osmanov and Berezhiani 2018; Huston and Wright
2022).
Machine learning methods are allowing to detect
more and more systematically such anomalous transits
(Giles and Walkowicz 2019; Martínez-Galarza et al.
2021). Simulations of transits (Sandford and Kipping
2019; Wheeler and Kipping 2019) enable the exploration
of potential shapes of megastructures and their light
curves. The use of Dyson spheres need not be limited
to simply collecting energy, and speculation has been
made for their use in communication and directed energy
weapons. Gerard Nordley proposed their use as a large
baseline array, and speculated that they might be used
as weapons that could destroy planets (cited in Shostak
2020).
5.3. Modification
The first proposal to modify a star was by Hubert
Reeves (1985, 120-122), who argued that a way to

delay the predictable red-giant phase of the Sun would
be to pump the unburned hydrogen that sits between
the core and the surface, and thereby mixing the
layers of Sun to extend its lifetime from 10 billion
years to… 100 billion years! He poetically proposed
that humanity’s nuclear arsenal could be used for
this purpose.
Criswell (1985) made a fascinating
study on how the solar system could be industrialized,
articulating in more detail how to prolong the lifetime
of stars.
In a book-length essay, Martin Beech
(2008) proposed many observable signatures of stars
being rejuvenated. In particular, Beech (1990, 2008)
proposed an original hypothesis to puzzles related to
the composition of blue stragglers, namely as being due
to stellar engineering. Recently, Scoggins and Kipping
(2023) made a contribution to the topic of stellar
rejuvenation and developed analytical models that lead
them to propose observational signatures. Huston and
Wright (2022) also proposed a model where a Dyson
sphere with high reflectivity could extend the stellar
lifetime of that star.
Besides energy utilization and stellar rejuvenation,
another explorative engineering consists in modifying a
star to control its motion in the galaxy by transforming
it into a stellar engine (see section 7.6).
5.4. Stellar Pollution
A Type II civilization may also end-up polluting its
home star, much as a Type I civilization pollutes its
home planet. Various authors proposed that a Type
II civilization may dump radioactive waste into a star
(Whitmire and Wright 1980; Carrigan 2010; Tarter and
Steel 2024), while Stevens et al. (2016) noted that high

29

Figure 17. A blue band light curve for V816 Centauri
(Przybylski’s star), adapted from (Kurtz and Wegner 1979).
Wikimedia CC BY-SA 4.0.

level nuclear fission waste products would remain in the
photosphere of a star, and would be detectable in its
stellar spectrum. A candidate is Przybylski’s (1961) star
(see Fig. 17), which has anomalies and peculiarities that
might be consistent with such stellar pollution (Tarter
and Steel 2024, see also Wright 2017).
5.5. Compact Objects
Despite the fact that white dwarfs, neutron stars and
black holes are often called the “stellar graveyard”, one
can argue that these are attractive sites for advanced
civilizations. The extreme density affords immense
computational capacity (Lloyd 2000); these compact
objects are extremely long-lived compared to other
stars, neutron stars can easily beam electromagnetic
radiation throughout the galaxy; and black holes have
many peculiarities that may make them attractors for
intelligence (Vidal 2011). The mastery of such exotic
substrates is also consistent with a civilization climbing
down the Barrow scale, being able to manipulate matter,
energy and information at ever smaller and denser scales
(see above).
Matloff (1986) pointed out that the great energy
released during the red-giant phase could provide a
significant boost for any civilization attempting to
migrate using solar sails. He also noted that the
remaining white dwarf would provide a much better
gravitational assist than a main sequence star like our
Sun. Gertz (2019) also made the case to look for
technosignatures around white dwarfs, as it would be a
site where a long-lived civilization would have survived
the stellar evolution of its home star. Dyson (1963) also
analyzed the immense potential of compact objects for
gravitational assists, discussing both the art of doing
gravity assists around white dwarf and neutron star
binaries. He noted that if they were used as such, they
should give off observable gravitational waves. Building
on Dyson’s work, Kipping (2018) proposed a propulsion

model extracting kinetic energy from a black hole, while
avoiding the strong gravitational tidal effects.
The notion of habitable zone has been extended
to a narrow region very nearby white dwarfs (Agol
2011). In the context of technosignatures, the concept
of Dyson spheres has also been expanded to apply to
white dwarfs (Semiz and Oğur 2015), with observable
infrared and optical signatures described in Zuckerman
(2022). Dyson spheres might also be constructed around
pulsars, leaving an infrared signature (Osmanov 2016);
or around black holes, which would be detectable in
optical, UV and infrared (Hsiao et al. 2021). Opatrný
et al. (2017) also explored the possibility of a Dyson
sphere that would absorb energy from the cosmic
background radiation while dumping waste energy to a
black hole. Dyson spheres may even be detectable as a
megastructure in X-ray binaries (Imara and Di Stefano
2018). Chennamangalam et al. (2015) proposed a model
where the pulsar radiation would be modulated by
an artificial satellite, for the purpose of galactic-wide
communication. Sagan also proposed to analyze pulsars’
pulses for messages or traces of artificiality (in Dyson
et al. 1973). The reasoning behind these proposals
is that it is much easier to modulate an existing
powerful natural beacon like a pulsar, than to build
one from scratch. A Dyson ring could modulate a
pulsar’s equatorial emission that would give a distinct
technosignature (Haliki 2019; Kayali et al. 2025).
The exceptional physics of black holes has led to
various speculations on how advanced civilizations
might use them. For example, Loeb (2024) proposed
that a rogue planet might embark a “black hole Moon”
as an energy source, and that, when used, the accretion
from the planet to the Moon should give a particular
gamma-ray signature. The concept of “mini-Earths”
was introduced in Vukotić and Gordon (2022) and
Ćirković (2023), defined as small rocky planets with
small black holes inserted into their centers, allowing
atmospheres to be retained. Discovering such objects
would be a strong suggestion of engineering. Closer
to stellar engineering, Beech (2008) proposed a model
where an artificial black hole would be inserted into a
star to mix its layers and prolong its lifetime. He noted
that it would not be so profitable for a Sun-like star,
but would be particularly advantageous for a star more
than 2M⊙ . Roger Penrose (1969, 270–272) imagined a
method to extract energy from a rotating (Kerr) black
hole. It consists of injecting matter into a black hole in
a carefully chosen way, thereby extracting its rotational
energy (see also Misner et al. 1973, 908 for more details).
A signature here would be a black hole whose rotational
rate is slowing down anomalously, i.e. a sudden change
in angular momentum. Blandford and Znajek (1977)
suggested a similar process with electrically charged
and rotating black holes. Other proposals suggest
collecting energy from gravitational waves of colliding
black holes. Misner imagined this in 1968 as a personal

30
communication to Penrose (1969). Frautschi (1982)
also proposed that ETI could be merging black holes
as a way to produce a power source. Chaisson (1988,
pg. 197-198) and Crane (2010, pg. 370) have suggested
that black holes are the perfect waste-disposal device.
Since black holes are made of the densest state of
matter, an advanced civilization could exploit them for
quantum computing, and Dvali and Osmanov (2023)
suggested that the signature of such artificial black holes
would be a black hole of a mass of 109 g, for which
there is no natural formation scenario. Anticipating
section 8, supermassive black holes (SMBHs) may also
be industrial or computational centers of choice for Type
II-III civilizations (Dvali and Osmanov 2023; Inoue and
Yokoo 2011).
It may be counter-intuitive to even consider life or
technology around the extreme physics surrounding
these compact objects, but it remains plausible in the
context of future extrapolations of life, if we argue that
life could transition into a postbiological form that has
completely different viability constraints (Dick 2003,
2008, 2009; Ćirković and Bradbury 2006).
There are two main approaches when discussing exotic
lifeforms: first, assuming that life and technological
life both follow a common developmental pattern,
and thus that life would start as-we-know it before
bifurcating towards other substrates. It may also be
that there are many developmental webs of life, the one
we know from Earth’s evolutionary history, but also
many others. In that case, one must consider that
self-organization and complexification might happen
through different pathways than life-as-we-know-it. For
example, Anchordoqui and Chudnovsky (2020) did
propose an early model of nuclear life in the interior
of a star. Maldonado-Lang and Vidal (2025) used the
formalism of chemical organization theory to explore the
potential of nuclear reactions to build complexity.
The topic of stellar consciousness was also explored
by Matloff (2016, 2017). He proposes a test via a
“volitional star hypothesis” to explain the Parenago
discontinuity —the observation that cooler, less massive,
redder stars revolve around the center of the Milky
Way galaxy a bit faster than hotter, more massive and
bluer stars. However, this interpretation competes with
existing astrophysical models of age-velocity dispersion
relations, or asymmetric drift.
Vidal (2014, 2016) and Haqq-Misra et al. (2025)
proposed to reinterpret some accreting binaries as
Type-II civilizations feeding on stars, or stellivores.
Indeed, their configuration satisfies the universal
metabolic nature of living systems: the extraction of
energy from the environment (here, the companion
star), and the ejection of waste and entropy (in the
form of jets or novas). Tests still need to be developed
to generate predictions and retrodictions that contrast
with the standard astrophysical models that already
explain many observations of these binary systems.

We have zoomed out from planets, to stellar systems,
and stars, and we now reach the interstellar scale,
which is the focal point of much past and present SETI
searches.

31
6. INTERSTELLAR TECHNOSIGNATURES

The search for interstellar communications marked
the birth of modern SETI. We structure the progression
of our review with the following key questions: What
communication theory do we rely on? Should we
attempt to Message to Extraterrestrial Intelligence
(METI)? What are the first principles and fundamental
constraints of interstellar communication? Then we
consider questions related to the search space itself, such
as where in physical space, when in time, where in the
EM spectrum, and other fundamental strategies to look
for signals.
6.1. Communication theory
Implicitly in the field of SETI, when we speak about
communication, we mean cybernetic communication,
i.e. the technical challenges related to information
theory and the hardware implementation. However,
this is just one perspective on communication,
as communication theory expert Craig (1999)
distinguished seven families of communication theories:
rhetorical, semiotic, phenomenological, cybernetic,
sociopsychological, sociocultural, and critical. We will
stay with the scientific and technological tradition of
communication from a cybernetic perspective, but we
should remain aware of these multiple perspectives and
disciplines—most of them from the humanities—having
all to contribute to get a full picture of communication
theory. The most fundamental model is the one of
Shannon (1948), reproduced in Figure 18.
In the interstellar communication context, the left
part of the Shannon model is the domain of Messaging
to Extraterrestrial Intelligence (METI), while the right
part is the central concern of SETI. One first starts
with an information source that one wants to transmit.
It needs to be encoded—arrow (1)—possibly with
compression and/or encryption. Then a transmitter can
actually transmit a signal with a physical carrier (2).
Shannon’s theory derives what the maximum rate of
information transmission is, given the noise source (3),
also known as the channel capacity. More specifically,
Shannon’s noisy channel theorem says that whatever the
level of noise is, there exists an encoding to transmit
the message essentially error-free. The receiver receives
the signal (4), and decodes it (5). SETI is primarily
concerned with step (4), and not the decoding step (5).
Indeed step (5) is about decoding and interpreting
a message, which is yet another chapter of SETI,
sometimes called xenolinguistics (Vakoch and Punske
2023).
It is extremely challenging too, as when
analysing signals that could have been generated by
extraterrestrial civilisations, we do not know a priori
what kind of encoding, encryption or compression
scheme was employed, nor do we know whether the
signal encodes a time series, an image, a 3D projection,
or some other data object. Algorithmic complexity
theory has been shown to be a powerful tool in such

a scenario. It was found that local dips in algorithmic
complexity correspond to the correct dimensionality,
aspect ratio or partition for signals, encoded images and
even 3D projections (Zenil et al. 2025). The authors
simulated in particular the scenario of receiving the
Arecibo message with no prior knowledge about the
content or properties of the message encoded in the
signal, and yet were able to infer the correct 2D nature
of the message agnostically.
From this perspective, it is useful to conceptualize
SETI and METI together. SETI focuses on us as the
receiver who attempts to de-encapsulate energy into
meaning. METI is the reverse exercise that encapsulates
intention and meaning into physical energy. This
encapsulation and de-encapsulation process has been
further standardized to clarify and help the development
of Earth communication through the Open Systems
Interconnection (OSI) standard, composed of seven
layers: physical, data link, network, transport, session,
presentation, and application (ISO 1994). However, we
should note that METI is controversial.
6.2. Should we attempt to Message ETI?
METI is the concept of intentionally signaling
potential extraterrestrial onlookers via targeted EM
transmissions, in hopes of a response. Because of its
proactive nature, it was also referred to as “active SETI.”
Vakoch (2011) argues that we should transmit
messages because potential ET onlookers may not wish
to transmit unless we attempt an explicit contact first.
In other words, the strategy is about triggering potential
lurkers in our solar system, to probe the zoo hypothesis
(Ball 1973). However, the same reasoning applies to
attempts to trigger a response outside of the solar
system. The hope is to get a reply after at least 2x years,
where x is the distance of the target in light years.
METI transmissions, though few, have been ongoing
since the first transmission to Venus in 1962 (Rădulescu
2025). METI is controversial for several reasons. Most
obviously, transmitting intentionally would expose our
location to potential ET onlookers. We have no idea
of their intent, whether benevolent or malevolent. A
worst-case scenario would be that a malevolent ETI
discovers us thanks to METI transmissions and then
harms or destroys life on Earth, e.g. via “deadly probes”
(Brin 1983).
Indeed, in a setting of sequential and incomplete
information game, game theory (Yasser 2020;
Fudenberg and Tirole 1983) tells us that an advanced
civilization’s best strategy is to remain undetected
and therefore safe from destruction by a more capable
civilization.
Alternative strategies are to signal
their presence, exposing them to potential attack
or benign communication, or to remain silent while
listening for other civilizations.
In game theory,
under the assumption that the negative potential for
complete annihilation outweighs any potential benefit

32

Figure 18. Schematic diagram of a general communication system after Shannon (1948).

from satisfying curiosity or collaboration, then the
Nash equilibrium implies that it is advantageous to
immediately attack any source of a detected signal
while remaining silent. This gloomy conclusion is also
known as the “Dark Forest” (Yu 2015) after the famous
science fiction novel by Liu (Liu 2015).
Another fundamental issue is when METI proponents
transmit without having the consent of the majority of
humans to craft and send a message that represents
humanity, and by definition without being able to
assume the responsibility especially because it could be
relevant only in hundreds or thousands of years.
Currently there is no policy guiding or limiting METI
transmissions, but efforts to address our more general
cosmic footprint are arising (Normier et al. 2025). For
more in-depth discussions about the METI debate, see
Haramia (2026), Brin (2019), and Haramia and and
DeMarines (2019).
METI is not to be confused with Earth’s unintentional
EM leakage, which is not targeted to specific stellar
systems.
We could monitor targets that have
intercepted our leakage radiation. For example, the
deep space network radar signatures leak preferentially
in the ecliptic, so we could narrow-down in space and
time the targets that could respond to such leakage.
Inversely, Fan et al. (2025) have analyzed how we might
detect radar leakage radiation from ETI.
6.3. First principles and fundamental constraints for
interstellar communication
The tyranny of the inverse square law

The primary hurdle of interstellar communication
is the natural weakening of the intensity of
electromagnetic signals as they travel across vast
interstellar distances. This attenuation increases very
quickly, with the square of the distance (1/r2 ). This is
simply due to the geometry of our universe that has 3
dimensions of space and 1 of time.
The
inverse
square
law
puts
interstellar
communication in a situation analogous to the
tyranny of the rocket equation where a spacecraft can
only carry a certain amount of weight (see section 6).
The common solution in the case of rockets is to launch

multi-staged rockets, where the mass of the fuel tanks
are disposed of.
In the case of the inverse square law, the analog to
multi-stage rockets is to use amplifying signal relays
so that the carrying of the signal is distributed. For
example, if one wants to send a signal across a distance
r, the power required is on the order of r2 . One relay
at mid-length would cut the energy requirement in 2;
10 relays would require only 1/10th of the energy. Of
course, the physical relays need to be established first,
which is no obvious feat and requires serious capacity
for interstellar travel.
The tyranny of the inverse square law has strong
implications for choosing a communication solution.
Some ways to mitigate it are, for example, on the
sender side, to use concentrated power such as lasers,
instead of omnidirectional transmissions. Contrary to
popular imagination, even lasers are cones growing with
distance, not perfect cylinders. Note that this choice
saves energy but makes the problem of pointing to a
desired target more sensitive. On the receiver side,
having bigger, more sensitive receiving antennas will
always be beneficial.
Another way to magnify the very small signals coming
from interstellar distances is to use the Sun itself as a
lens, harnessing its mass as a gravitational telescope.
The observer would have to be located at 547 AUs, at
the opposite of the target (see Fig. 9). We already noted
that stellar gravitational lensing is a great solution to get
immense amplification both for sending and receiving
signals. As a geometrical solution, it works much like
a magnifying glass and thus requires the alignment of
the target object, the lens (for us, the Sun), and the
observer. It means that the observer needs to physically
move around the solar system with a radius of at least
547 AUs.
However, compact objects such as white dwarfs,
neutron stars, or black holes have a much stronger
lensing effect, so the focal region starts at only 0.045 AUs
for white dwarfs, 1.9 km above the surface for a typical
neutron star, and 88.6 km from the singularity at the
center of a 10 M⊙ black hole. A relay-network made

33
of compact objects would arguably be a very eﬀicient
architecture.
A last solution is to send data through inscribed
matter, which is not subject to the inverse square law.

The related Margolus-Levitin theorem (Margolus and
Levitin 1998) gives an upper bound for maximum
processing rate, i.e. the number of operations per unit
time per unit energy:

Speed of light

2
= 6 × 1033 s−1 · J−1
ℏπ

Modern physics is founded on the finiteness of the
speed of light, which is unfortunately still very slow
when put in the perspective of the vastness of the
universe.
In the context of interstellar communication, it
means that immense patience or longevity is needed to
exchange data. One mitigation strategy would be to
send not a short message like “Hello”, but a massive
amount of information at each iteration, such as a
large language model (LLM), as suggested by Vidal
(Alexandre 2023). Indeed, imagine if we would receive
the chatbot of an extraterrestrial civilization: billions of
humans would be able to ask billions of questions about
that civilization during many years, which would make
the waiting period for the next LLM more bearable.
Technically, these large distances require particular
solutions, starting with rejecting network protocols
that require sessions and many feedback cycles (e.g.
acknowledging good receipt of a message, multiple
handshake protocols, etc.). Delay-Tolerant Networking
(DTN) architecture has been developed precisely in
situations of limited connectivity, and high error rates,
with an application for an “interplanetary internet”
(Cerf et al. 2007; Burleigh et al. 2003; Fall 2003).
For example, the protocol can embed pre-emptive
redundancy, to avoid slow and costly round-trip
requests.
In recent years, delay-tolerant networking protocols
have been developed to plant the seeds of an
interplanetary internet (Burleigh et al. 2014).
This effort will confront us to real space network
communication challenges, which would certainly also
give insights in how to search for an interstellar internet.
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle

The uncertainty principle places bounds on the
three fundamental informational bottlenecks known in
computer science: storage, processing, and transmission
bandwidth.
In terms of storage, the fundamental limit of the
amount of information that can be stored in a volume
of space is defined by the Bekenstein (1981) bound. It
is the number of Planck-length areas that can cover the
surface of a black hole of mass m. In other words, any
material substrate of mass m can not store more than
this limit. A one kilogram “ultimate laptop” would be
able to store up to 1017 bits kg−1 (Lloyd 2000).
The Bremermann (1982) (1982) bound, on the other
hand, places fundamental limits on the number of bit
flip operations that can occur in a given amount of time,
i.e. it is the maximal rate of information processing.

(4)

It too is a consequence of the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle.
Lastly, the transmission of information obeys the
Pendry bound (Pendry 1983), placing a minimum on the
amount of energy needed to transmit a certain number
of bits. In other words, to send 109 bits s−1 requires an
energy flow of E+ ≥ 10−16 Watts.
These bounds are not just curiosities; they give
fundamental insights about how much data can
ultimately be stored, processed, or transmitted, and at
what energy cost.
Galactic sources of noise

The sources of noise in the galaxy are varied, and
will also widely vary depending on the distance of the
two users communicating. Typically, the greater the
distance, the more power will be required. Depending
on the position of the source and destination of the
users, the galactic medium will be very different. For
example, two civilizations wanting to communicate
with each other from the opposite sides of the galaxy
(100,000 ly), will have to deal with a lot of obstacles,
delays, etc. and will devise a very different solution than
two civilizations separated by 10 ly with no interstellar
obstacle. This means that we can expect widely varying
communication channels and protocols depending on the
respective locations of the transmitter and receiver.
Let us see the obstacles that a signal being sent
from Earth would encounter. First, it needs to go
through the atmosphere of our planet. In our case,
the atmosphere is transparent to a narrow range of
the EM spectrum. However, it is hard to justify
atmospheric planetary constraints as absolute ones, as
we have already developed space-space communication
solutions. Furthermore, we do not want to assume that
communication only happens within planets that have
Earth-like atmospheres, as that would be unwarranted
and anthropocentric.
Next, the signal needs to
go through the interplanetary medium and solar
system dust, which may be particularly relevant for
observations in the ecliptic.
Then come the sources of interstellar attenuation,
the scattering and absorption of light by the
interstellar medium (ISM), which includes dust and
plasma. Additionally, nearly all astrophysical bodies
have magnetic fields which can also interfere with
communication efforts, from planets, stars, to the spiral
arms of the galaxy.
Gravitational lensing is also
well-known to affect light, here seen as a perturbation
instead of a clever way to amplify communication

34
as we discussed above. The weakest constraint is
to outshine the noise from the cosmic microwave
background (CMB).
Dealing with these multiple interstellar constraints
can require detailed modeling, and some communication
solutions will clearly be better than others. We dig
deeper into the issue of choosing a part of the EM
spectrum in Section 6.7.
6.4. Limitations with modern SETI
We outlined first-principles from which a search
for extraterrestrial communication should start.
Historically, however, the birth of modern SETI started
in a search for radio communications. Since 2016, the
Breakthrough Listen program dramatically increased
the scale of the search (Worden et al. 2017). While
a pragmatic starting point, this strategy is fraught
with significant challenges. Our chances of detection
dramatically decrease if alien civilizations are not
broadcasting powerful beacons in all directions. We
can assume that they would be sending highly targeted
intentional messages towards us, but it is a strong
assumption, and quite anthropocentric. These different
communication intents and their impacts on search
strategies are compiled in Figure 22.
Finally, the search for radio signals rests on key
assumptions about the technological development and
behavior of other civilizations. It is possible that
advanced societies have moved beyond radio technology
to other forms of communication, perhaps using other
parts of the EM spectrum, or even other information
carriers.
These factors combine to make radio SETI a highly
complex and diﬀicult task, and here we discuss strategies
to address some of these concerns and to broaden the
search.
The engineering constraints of sending and receiving
interstellar messages are very hard to estimate, mostly
because of the accelerating pace of technological
progress. For example, even a century ago, no human
could have thought about quantum communication. In
addition, engineering is a practical endeavor that is
strongly tied with economical constraints whether they
are of human or extraterrestrial origin.
The economics of interstellar communication is
rarely addressed (see however Benford et al. 2010),
but is an important topic to put upper limits on
communication solutions. For example, if we consider
two communication protocols, and one offers a higher
number of bits per watt than the other, then it is
a more promising candidate. To avoid speculating
about specific extraterrestrial economical structures and
systems, one can stay with the general requirement that
doing work requires energy, and energy is ultimately
in finite supply. So the domain of energy economics
(Bhattacharyya 2011) is also of relevance by its
generality.

A detectable communication technosignature would
only need to be evidence of an intelligent source, not
necessarily a deciphered message from an ETI like in
most science fiction movies (step (5) in Shannon’s model
in Figure 18).
A systematic galactic search would require an all-time,
all-sky, all-wavelength monitoring for artificial signals,
from all of the 1.8 billion stars in the currently biggest
galactic catalog, Gaia DR3. However, not only is this
practically impossible to conduct, but such a strategy
would be similar to the one of a butterfly collector, not
a scientist. Science progresses with theory and testable
hypotheses, so the core issue here is to find strategies
to clarify and constrain the search space, as well as to
select targets.
To do so, we first structure our approach with two
seemingly simple questions: Where should we look?
When should we look? Then we consider the physical
implementation of interstellar communication, which
includes the transmission medium, i.e. the channel
and the information carrier. We focus on photons as
information carriers, which begs the question of where
to look in the electromagnetic (EM) spectrum. Then
we discuss how to deal with anthropogenic interferences
such as Radio Frequency Interferences (RFIs), and
consider alternative information carrier options. Then
we ask: What are the communication rules (i.e. the
communication protocol)? How is the signal shaped
(i.e. which modulation)? Regarding the topology
of the communication network: Are we trying to
find a communication that is one-to-one, one-to-many,
many-to-one, or many-to-many? Are there relays?
6.5. Where should we look?
Lacki et al. (2021) constructed a comprehensive
review of a wide diversity of astrophysical targets to
keep monitoring. This “exotica catalog” includes not
only Sun-like stars, but also a wide breadth of 816
distinct targets, including more “exotic” astrophysical
phenomena spanning from Type I to Type III+
civilizations (see Table 7).
The motivation to closely examine known
astrophysical objects is that we might keep missing ETI
because we keep looking in the wrong ways or at the
wrong places. The idea to look cleverly at archival data
makes sense since, after all, astronomers have observed
the sky across many wavelengths over many years. It
could well be that there are technosignatures in existing
data that await to be sifted. To keep track of past
searches since the 1960s, the SETI Institute has created
a database called “TechnoSearch”.2
The opposite approach to archival search is to process
real-time data only, and only save anomalous events
that might correspond to an intelligent signal. It
2 https://technosearch.seti.org/

Giant planets
Stars
Collapsed stars
Interacting binary stars
Stellar groups
Nebulae and ISM
Galaxies
Active galactic nuclei
Galaxy associations
Large-scale structures
Technology
Reference

I

II

II

II

II 21

II 21

III

III

III

III 21

Any

···

Characteristics
Solid, small, typically irregular shape, modification mostly from cratering after initial 26 Al
differentiation
Hydrostatic equilibrium; solid, possibly with liquid oceans; round; geology plays key role
in interior evolution; thin atmosphere with insignificant mass compared to body
Hydrostatic equilibrium; fluids dominate mass and evolution; larger than Earth; typically
high internal heat luminosity; formation by gas accretion onto solid core
Hydrostatic equilibrium; plasma; powered by nuclear fusion or sometimes gravitational
contraction; no solid cores; includes brown dwarfs and protostars by convention
Supported by degeneracy pressure if at all; luminosity primarily from release of stored thermal,
rotational, or magnetic energy
Evolution of component stars affected by mass transfer; substantial luminosity from accretion,
surface nuclear burning, or shocked outflow; often compact object is mass recipient
Gravitationally bound collections of stars, which do not otherwise interact for the most part;
little to no dark matter
Diffuse gases and plasmas; includes flows of matter to/from stars and diffuse galaxy; generally
not self-bound
Gravitationally bound, dominated by dark matter; generally contain vast numbers of stars,
gas, and possibly a central black hole; gravitationally bound
Powered by accretion onto a supermassive black hole; includes gas flows on and off SMBH,
frequently with jets and particle-filled bubbles
Dark matter dominates internal gravitation; gravitationally bound collections of galaxies and
intracluster medium
Unbound or loosely bound structures on ≫Mpc scales; includes high-order arrangements of
galaxies and diffuse gas (IGM); non-virialized
Structures built intentionally, frequently for processing of matter, energy, and information; so
far only known to exist on/near Earth
Sky locations only important relative to observer

Example

Solar antipoint

Voyager 1

Shapley Supercluster

Virgo Cluster

Cygnus A

M81

Orion GMC

47 Tuc

SS 433

Sirius B

Sun

Jupiter

Titan

1IÓumuamua

Note—The “phyla” are used to group objects in the Prototype and Superlative samples by shared physical traits. From a SETI perspective, they indicate the need for very
different techniques necessary for astroengineering, as reflected in the amount of used power measured by the Kardashev (1964) scale rating of on left.
Table reproduced from (Lacki et al. 2021).

Solid planetoids

I

Phylum
Minor bodies

1
2

Power on Kardashev Scale

Table 7. Phyla of astronomical phenomena: a high-level classification system used in the Exotic Target Catalogue (Lacki et al. 2021)

35

36

Figure 19. Strategies to look for signals. Two dimensions
are represented here: archival vs. real-time in the x-axis,
and targeted vs. wide-field in the y-axis.

has the advantage of being fast, and does not require
infrastructure related to storage. The disadvantage
is that only the kinds of technosignatures that are
considered worthwhile at a certain time are examined,
and it is impossible to go back to deleted data. Even
if we cannot see the significance of it today, all data
is potentially significant, and as technology progresses,
future techniques and hardware may be able to extract
patterns and data we cannot even think of today.
However, telescopes produce data very intensively, and
storing such raw data remains prohibitively expensive.
A mixed approach between archiving a maximum of
data and doing real-time searches would be to dedicate
a percentage of the resources for a given SETI project
to store at least some data for the long term.
SETI researchers are very creative to select potential
targets, an endeavor which is informed by theoretical
expectations and constraints—sometimes called SETI
Theory (Wright 2022).
One way to organize the
strategies to look for signals is through two dimensions:
archival vs. real-time, and targeted vs. wide-field (see
Figure 19).
A strategy commonly adopted is to target stars with
appropriate spectral types (M-K-G-F types); not A, B,
or O because they have short lifespan and high UV
radiation that would likely sterilize life-as-we-know-it.
Tarter (2001b) also proposed a roadmap with targets
to focus on. As Turnbull and Tarter (2003a,b) argued,
habitable stars like our Sun should also be a prime
target, and the authors selected 17,129 targets around
140 pc from the Sun. Stars with known exoplanets
are also natural targets (Harp et al. 2016b), and

the Breakthrough Listen program has also narrowed
down targets for observation with the Green Bank
Telescope, Parkes Telescope, and Automated Planet
Finder (Isaacson et al. 2017).
Taking the perspective of an extraterrestrial
civilization looking for life signatures on Earth,
Castellano et al. (2004) noted that there is only a small
set of stars that could observe the Earth transiting
the Sun—which is the main method we use to find
exoplanets. This zone in the sky is called the Earth
Transit Zone (ETZ). The strategy is thus to assume
that those stars in the ETZ might have detected the
Earth easily, not only our technosphere but also our
biosphere already billions of years ago. Such stars are
thus prime targets for co-detection and communication
(see also Heller and Pudritz 2016; Sheikh et al. 2020;
Kaltenegger and Pepper 2020; Kaltenegger and Faherty
2021; Sheikh et al. 2025).
Another way to converge is by looking for civilizations
aligned with the solar gravitational lens (SGL, see figure
9), which is a zone at about 547 AUs where EM radiation
converges due to the Sun’s mass (Von Eshleman 1979;
Drake 1988; Maccone 2009, 2013a; Tusay et al. 2022;
Turyshev 2024). Telescopes placed at this region would
gain orders of magnitude in sensitivity, and could even
image exoplanets (Turyshev and Toth 2020).
Another general strategy is to concentrate
observations on high stellar density regions, simply
because they offer more targets: not only more targets
for us to search, but also more stars for ETI to live
from. Communication, interaction, and coordination
are likely to be much faster and richer in a high-stellar
density environment than between any two parts of
the galaxy. A logical place is the galactic plane where
the vast majority of stars in our galaxy lie (Grimaldi
2021). Even considering the trade-off between number
of targets and distance to the stars, Sullivan and
Mighell (1984) argued that searching in the galactic
plane is a superior strategy compared to nearby stars or
all-sky surveys. Shostak and Tarter (1985) conducted
a subsequent search in the galactic center with the
Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope. More recently,
Margot et al. (2020) conducted a search around 16
Sun-like stars in the galactic plane with the Green Bank
Telescope, and Gajjar et al. (2021) did a more thorough
search towards the galactic center.
Di Stefano and Ray (2016) also argued that
since globular clusters (GCs) being extremely dense
environments, it makes sense to prioritize searches in
them. They note that GCs contain many low mass stars
that can burn during many billions or trillions of years,
and that little gas and dust is present, which impedes
star formation or core-collapse supernovae. However,
we can note that the metallicity of such stars is low,
gas giants would be hard to form, and the formation of
rocky planets remains a point of debate (e.g. Sigurdsson

37
1992). If there are still some ETIs in such environments,
we would be looking at lifeforms as we don’t know it yet.
Finally, a way to observe many billions of stars at the
same time is to conduct extragalactic SETI (see section
8.2).
6.6. When should we look?
Without any prior communication, how could two
civilizations know how to coordinate with each other?
Where and when could they hope to find each other?
This problem has been studied in game theory, and
actors typically converge towards a focal point or
Schelling point (Schelling 1960) in order to avoid
coordination failure. A key challenge that has been
extensively discussed in the SETI literature is to guess
what such spacetime Schelling points could be (Wright
2020b). It is a mandatory exercise to prioritize searches
given the huge multidimensional search space.
In particular, the question of when to look can be
broken down into three: (1) At what particular time?
(2) How long should we look? and (3) How often?
At what particular time?

The universe is not static, and astronomical bodies
rotate, along their own axis, around their star, around
the galaxy, and even galaxy pairs orbit a common center
of mass. In the context of communication with planet
Earth, a good timing to transmit to Earth would be
when it is very visible from an ETI point of view. It
would be so when it is midway through its transit.
This event is called the anti-solar point, and Hort et al.
(2024) suggested that it would be an ideal moment
to communicate. The authors used the Hat Creek
Observatory to observe the anti-solar point during ∼24
hours, but did not find signals of interest.
Kipping and Teachey (2016) suggested that advanced
civilizations could alter their transit planetary signature
with lasers, either to cloak themselves, or to broadcast
their presence. They proposed that if we would find a
radial velocity signature of a planet, but not the planet
itself, this might be a technosignature of a cloaking
mechanism. Such a search strategy is arguably contrived
because by design, it may be nearly impossible to detect
an advanced civilization wanting to hide. However, this
possibility has been made popular by science fiction
author (Liu 2015), with the “dark forest” hypothesis,
in which most aliens hide from each other. The
opposite strategy from cloaking is where the ETI would
deliberately signal its presence by altering the shape of
the transit in a clearly artificial way.
Besides exoplanet transits, authors have proposed
that ETI communication would likely be in relation
to the transit of binary stars, especially during the
apastron and the periastron (Pace and Walker 1975;
Pace 1979).
Many have proposed that communication would be
synchronized with major astronomical events, such as

novas (McLaughlin 1977, 1986), supernovas (Tang 1976;
Seto 2021; Nilipour et al. 2023), Fast Radio Bursts
(FRBs; Zhang 2020), Gamma-ray bursts (GRBs; Corbet
1999), or gravitational wave events (Nishino and Seto
2018).
Cordes and Sullivan (Cordes and Sullivan 1995;
Sullivan and Cordes 1995) also introduced the notion
of astrophysical coding, arguing that intentional signals
are likely to be encoded and detectable with the same
techniques used to conduct regular astrophysics. In
particular, they noted that timing analysis can be used
to determine (1) the location of the source, (2) its
distance via its dispersion measure, (3) orbital motion
of the host planet or host satellite, and (4) orbital
perturbations, precession, and relativistic effects, and
mentioned pulsars as a prime example of astrophysical
coding.
Since millisecond pulsars (MSPs) provide stable,
continuous, high cadence timing reference points,
assuming that civilizations use them as a time standard
(Vidal 2017), it implies that there is no privileged
timing, because timing metadata is available since the
existence of MSPs, and pulsars are theorized to last for
billions of years.
How long should we look?

Assuming we are looking at the right target, how long
should we look to detect a technosignature? This is a
general issue concerning any bio- or techno- signature.
Some technosignatures may appear very quickly such as
laser pulses at a nanosecond timescale, while others very
rarely, every year, decade, century, millennium, etc. (see
Table 8).
Looking at biology, lifespans vary from mayflies that
live only 5 minutes, to hundreds of years in the case
of clams, and up to 5000 years for trees. For the
purpose of doing science, the timescale issue can largely
be mitigated by having many samples. For example,
a botanist may not be able to study the dynamics
of a 5000-year-old tree in isolation, but could get a
quite comprehensive picture of the species by studying
many samples, from seeds to trees of all ages up to
5000-year-old ones. Similarly, the universe is full of
different samples of diverse astrophysical objects, which
is why we can still reconstruct a general picture.
We can note that technological change happens much
more rapidly than biological change, and major changes
observed in a few decades could be quite unambiguous
(e.g. a gradual reddening of a star over decades could be
a signature of a megastructure being built).
Studying timescales going beyond human lifespans
is still conceivable, either by a consistent human and
economical investment (Long Now Foundation 2025); or
by building self-maintaining machines that can operate
reliably during decades, centuries or millennia. Other
strategies such as hibernation, or storing only surprising,
anomalous observations could enhance the energetic and

38
Table 8.
Observational timescales illustrated with
potential technosignatures, from the Planck timescale to the
billion-year timescale. Any technosignature requiring more
than years or decades of data-long effort is likely to exhaust
the patience of humans.
Timescale

Potential technosignature

Planck time

Simulation hypothesis?

Femtosecond

Laser pulses (future technology?)

Nanosecond

Laser pulses (Optical SETI)

Microsecond

Fastest radio bursts

Millisecond

Signals in sync with millisecond pulsars

Second

Active ongoing communication

Minute

Transient communication (e.g. the Wow!
signal)

Hour

Transit timescale (e.g. 13 hours for Earth)

Day

Light illumination (exoplanet day)

Year

Anomalous motion of a spacecraft; grey
goo scenario

Decade

Progressive
construction
of
megastructures;
industrial pollutant
concentration variations; disappearing
stars

Century

Close stellar encounters

Millennium

Terraforming

Million-year

Major biosphere/technosphere changes

Billion-year

Long-term tracking of stellar evolution and
migration of civilizations

memory autonomy of such multigenerational projects.
The point is that technosignatures have no reason
to appear in an anthropocentric timescale window
(from seconds to decades). Finding a strong proof
of a technosignature might require a decentering
in timescale, such as a long-term effort with a
multigenerational commitment to looking at large
temporal scales; or by developing technologies that can
probe shorter and shorter timescales.
The ideal of doing “all time” observation obviously
means that the longer the observation the better, but
pragmatically, telescope time is very expensive and
competitive. The Breakthrough Listen initiative is
a game-changer in this regard, including many SETI
observational hours at the Green Bank Observatory
(GBT), many backends on major telescopes such as
MeerKAT, Parkes, Lick Observatory, in addition to the
Hat Creek Radio Observatory (HCRO) that is managed
by the SETI Institute and can thus be prioritized
towards SETI targets.
An important development of SETI searches is thus
the use of commensal strategies, i.e. installing back-ends
on the raw data of observations done by major

telescopes, and running SETI pipelines on them. It
has the advantage that it does not require competition
for telescope time, but the disadvantage is that targets
cannot be chosen directly.

How often?

The cadence at which messages would be sent depends
strongly on the kind of communication aimed at.
Warning messages might be very rare, for example,
only when a civilization-threatening supernova or GRBs
would be about to occur. Leakage radiation may happen
often or not, depending on whether the leakage is
accidental, and depending on how carefully civilizations
cloak their EM footprint, if they do it at all. The
highest communication cadence would be between
two civilizations communicating continuously between
each other, or the expectation to find a continually
broadcasting beacon.
A very slow communication method would be
to encode artificially mathematical sequences within
planetary period ratios (Clement et al. 2022). However,
as we noted earlier, this would be extremely expensive
and ineﬀicient in terms of the number of bits per energy
unit.
Even assuming very powerful civilizations, economical
analyses can constrain the search.
Continuous
broadcasting is extremely expensive on the sender end,
and continuous observation is also expensive on the
receiving end (at least on present Earth). Benford et al.
(2010) made an economical assessment for building and
maintaining interstellar beacons, and concluded that it
leads to different strategies than most SETI searches,
namely steady searches in the galactic plane on the scale
of years.
Zenil and de Sena Monteiro Ozelim (2025) took
seriously the problem of timescale and its major
underlying uncertainties. They proposed a fractal
messaging scheme, using the Weierstrass function that
is scale invariant, as a means to design a spacetime
invariant communication protocol.
Yet, the galaxy is not in the timing dark, and
millisecond pulsars (MSPs) provide extremely stable,
accurate, and durable timing information. For this
reason, MSPs are very likely to be used as a timing,
navigation, and communication metadata standard
(Vidal 2017). This means that we can infer a lower-limit
on the time resolution of any kind of communication
that requires reliable galactic timestamping.
This
lower-limit is then in the range of fast MSPs, i.e.
milliseconds, and it thus constrains the time resolution
of communication signals. For example it predicts that
nanosecond optical messages are unlikely, and thus that
Optical SETI at that timescale is unlikely to succeed
(Vidal 2025).

39
6.7. At what electromagnetic frequency?
Choosing a spacetime region to look at is just one
decision to make in the search space. The next question
is to choose where to look in the space of electromagnetic
(EM) frequencies.
We noted that communicating at different distances
requires different strategies, and Hippke and Forgan
(2017a) made various proposals to deal with interstellar
extinction at various distances, ranging from short
distances (< 100 pc), medium distances (100–500 pc)
to large distances (500–8000 pc). For example at >
480 pc distances, a step appears where the optimal
low-energy wavelength moves from UV (160 nm) to IR
(690 nm). These detailed considerations lead to the
strategy to search at different wavelengths depending
on the distance of the target.
In their foundational paper that set the modern SETI
era, Cocconi and Morrison (1959) argued from the
perspective of an extraterrestrial civilization wanting to
make deliberate contact with Earth-like planets. This
required that the frequency would be transparent to
the planetary atmospheres. Writing in the technological
time of the 1960s, they considered optical up to
gamma-rays but chose not to pursue that direction
because such wavelengths would require more power at
the source or complicated techniques. They famously
proposed to target the emission line of neutral hydrogen,
the most abundant element in the universe, at 1.42 GHz.
This frequency was later extended to a range from
1.42 GHz (H, hydrogen) to 1.67 GHz (OH, hydroxyl
ions). This region of the EM spectrum has an extremely
low interstellar noise background. What is more, H
and OH form the components of water (H2 O), the
molecule essential for life-as-we-know-it. This range
has been called the “cosmic water hole”, playing both
on the meaning of water, and a water hole as a place
where animals end up meeting in the wild (Oliver and
Billingham 1971).
Schwartz and Townes (1961) made the case for looking
for laser transmissions, both in the optical part and
infrared part of the spectrum (see Table 9). They
noticed that focusing light on a tight optical beam
considerably increases the bandwidth of communication
compared to radio. This suggestion has since grown into
“Optical SETI,” or OSETI. Notably, just as Tesla was a
pioneer of radio communication and quickly considered
using them to communicate with planets (Tesla 1901;
Raulin-Cerceau 2010), Townes was a pioneer of laser
and maser technologies, and even co-received the Nobel
Prize in physics for building the first maser.
As with any observing modality, laser searches can
synergize with other strategies or programs.
For
example, Marcy (2021) searched for signals coming from
the SGL, assuming a probe would transmit towards us
or Alpha Centauri. Also, it was through an optical SETI
search directed towards HD 89389 that Stanton (2025)

Table 9. Comparison of radio and laser communication
modalities for SETI.
Radio

Laser

Pros:

Pros:

Suitable for
omnidirectional
beacons, to
communicate widely;
wide window for
observation.

Suitable for point-to-point
communication; a collimated
beam implies less leakage
(privacy), more energy
eﬀiciency, and more
bandwidth.

Cons:

Cons:

Less bandwidth; more
energy needed due to
the omnidirectional
nature.

Can only be detected if the
signal is directed toward us,
or if our solar system is in the
path of two communicating
civilizations; more affected by
interstellar dust (see Hippke
2018b).

suggested that the pulsed source came from a potential
ring-shaped artefact in our solar system (see section 3).
To solve the interstellar dust problem that would
affect laser communication, a more robust network of
carrier nodes could be deployed, possibly also leveraging
the gains at the solar gravitational lens (Maccone
2013a). Hippke (2018b) also suggested that to minimize
extinction by interstellar dust, a wavelength at 1064 nm
and its second harmonic 532.1 nm would be optimal
from a laser engineering point of view.
In addition to interstellar communication, we could
also detect laser communication going on inside an
extrasolar system, for the purpose of communicating
with spacecraft, or between planets. Nowadays, much
of our own space communication is migrating towards
laser solutions (Wu et al. 2017).
There are also non-communicative uses of lasers, such
as using them as a directed energy system to accelerate
small lightsail probes (Forward 1984; Guillochon and
Loeb 2015; Kulkarni et al. 2018). The concept of
a Solar Wind Power Satellite that would harness the
stellar wind to power a civilization may also use high
power lasers to beam energy where needed (Harrop
Lasers might also be
and Schulze-Makuch 2010).
sporadically used for planetary defense purposes such
as deflecting asteroids (Lubin et al. 2016) or even as
weapons.
Due to the phenomenon of thermal broadening, most
astrophysical phenomena will be spread around the
electromagnetic spectrum, while lasers are very narrow
and monochromatic. This means that a laser can
outshine even a star at a given wavelength and that
they can be readily distinguished from most natural
emission lines. Two strategies can be used to detect

40
laser emissions: spectroscopy and photometry. In
spectroscopy, lasers are defined by linewidths that
are narrower than natural emission lines, and can be
pinpointed by wavelength. In photometry, lasers are
detected by looking at the time-variability of brightness,
particularly at flashes of short durations. Each strategy
has its own pros and cons. Photometry is sensitive
to time variability, and can detect very short duration
pulses, but cannot reveal much information about the
wavelength. Spectroscopy, on the other hand, can reveal
information about the wavelength and thus the nature
of the laser, but is insensitive to time variability, and
can only show the result of the whole integration time.
It means that spectroscopy is better suited for detecting
continuous lasers and focusing on precise targets; while
photometry is better suited for detecting pulsed lasers
and conducting all-sky observations.
Following the spectroscopy strategy, the Keck
observatory observed 5600 stars, but did not find
traces of laser emissions (Reines and Marcy 2002;
Tellis and Marcy 2015, 2017). As a follow-up to the
anomalies of Tabby’s star, a program was conducted to
search for laser transmissions, without positive results
(Lipman et al. 2019). Recently, Marcy and Tellis
(2023) looked for laser emissions in the galactic plane,
using the objective prism Schmidt telescope, which uses
low-resolution short exposure time spectra to look for
time variability down to about 1 sec, and thus leverages
both advantages of spectroscopy and photometry. No
candidates were found. Fields and Goodman (2025)
used archival data from the HARPS spectroscope to
analyze 2821 stars, and found 3 ambiguous candidates
from 2 red dwarfs and 1 red giant that are currently
under further investigation.
Turning to photometric instruments, these allow going
down to the nanosecond timescale resolution, at which
laser pulses would be unambiguous because such rapid
variability is rare or nonexistent in nature (Howard et al.
2004). SETI researchers used the Lick and Leuschner
Observatories to conduct a near-infrared search (Maire
et al. 2014). Stone et al. (2005) targeted 4605 stars of
spectral types F–M within 200 light-years of Earth; they
found 14 events of interest, all of them being explained
as false positives, except one, HD 212107. Further
observations did not reveal any repeat detections. More
recently, PanoSETI is the main consistent effort for an
all-sky observation program (Maire et al. 2022).
Howard et al. (2004) observed 13,000 Sun-like stars
during 5 years, and found one particularly interesting
candidate, HIP 107395, which is part of the habitable
catalog (Turnbull and Tarter 2003a). Furthermore,
it showed up at two independent observatories,
the Harvard/Smithsonian Oak Ridge and Princeton’s
Fitz-Randolph. The paper reports that the probability
of any pair of triggers randomly occurring within 1 ms
is about 3 × 10−5 . Part of the observational strategy
was to sync the two observatories using GPS clocks,

because this allowed the team to know that if both
telescopes picked up a candidate, it was from the same
source. Unfortunately, the GPS clock at Princeton was
not working at the time, making it diﬀicult to confirm
that the two instances happened at exactly the same
time and leaving only a 2% chance that it was actually
the same signal. They did follow-up this star without
subsequent pulse detections, but it remains a candidate
worthy of further follow-up.
Hanna et al. (2009) did a search for nanosecond
optical transients via the Solar Tower Atmospheric
Cherenkov Effect Experiment (STACEE), but did not
find candidates. Korzoun et al. (2024) have shown that
a multimessenger synergy is possible between PanoSETI
and the Cherenkov telescope VERITAS to search for
laser signatures. VERITAS was also used to conduct a
search for optical flashes associated with Tabby’s star,
with null results (Abeysekara et al. 2016). Laser SETI is
an ongoing program led by the SETI Institute (Klesman
2017) using a wide angle grating-based spectrograph,
designed to find narrow, monochromatic emission lines
characteristic of a laser.
However, only small parts of the electromagnetic
spectrum have been the focus of SETI programs.
Already in 1983, Townes (1983) cautioned that
considerable uncertainty remains when betting on a
particular wavelength. For example, low frequency
SETI has only recently been debuted, notably using
simultaneously multi-site LOFAR stations in Europe
(Johnson et al. 2023).
This region of the EM
spectrum has not been probed before, and the multi-site
configuration allows for RFI rejection.
Hippke and Forgan (2017a) did a study of optimal
frequency to maximize data rate in interstellar
communication, and concluded that high-energy
photons present serious advantages. Indeed, X-ray
lasers can carry a high data transmission rate compared
to radio, infrared and optical due to their high
frequency.
In particular, X-ray lasers are capable of producing
highly focused and intense X-ray beams with a
very narrow divergence angle which allows for highly
energy-eﬀicient interstellar communication.
While
natural astrophysical sources of X-ray emissions are
generally characterized by specific spectral lines, we
could search for free electron lasers, which accelerate
free electrons to nearly the speed of light, directing them
through an alternating magnetic field in a way that
produces highly coherent X-ray pulses (see Figure 20).
Although above our present technological capabilities,
fusion-powered X-ray lasers are another possibility to
generate X-ray pulses.
In space, background radiation is lower in the
X-ray spectrum compared to radio waves (Carstairs
2002). This reduced noise makes it easier to detect
X-ray signals against the natural background, which
is advantageous for transmitting and receiving clear

41

Figure 20. A schematic illustration of a X-ray Free Electron Laser (XFEL). An electron gun fires a beam of electrons that are
directed through an undulator after being accelerated through a particle accelerator. The beam of electrons then passes through
an undulator, which is a periodic arrangement of magnets whose function is to produce the highly coherent X-ray pulses/beam.
Diagram courtesy of Wikipedia, based on (Patterson and Abela 2010).

and distinct signals over vast distances. There are
still natural X-ray sources coming from synchrotron
radiation, but the sources are generally known. If we
would find patterns of X-rays that are outside the range
of known X-ray sources, that would be an interesting
anomaly to clarify.
Long wavelengths such as radio waves are susceptible
to magnetic fields in the galaxy (inducing the Faraday
effect or scintillation), whereas X-rays are much
less susceptible to these effects (see Berera and
Calderón-Figueroa 2022).
Hippke and Forgan (2017b) did an archival X-ray
spectra search, looking for narrowband X-ray signals.
They found 19 monochromatic candidate signals, but
concluded that they are most likely due to natural
astrophysical origin. G-type stars would represent
good candidates to search for X-ray spectral lines since
these stars do not produce strong X-ray emission lines.
X-ray SETI remains challenging with present X-ray
observatories, notably because signal to noise ratio is
very low: for example, it takes about 5 days to build
a spectrum with the Chandra X-ray observatory. A
drawback of X-ray observatories is their lack of high
spatial resolution, but they are still very good in the
time domain.
In another study, Berera and Calderón-Figueroa
(2022) investigated the feasibility of quantum
communication across interstellar distances.
The
authors concluded that X-ray photons might allow
quantum coherence to be maintained over interstellar
distances. These studies contribute to the theoretical
foundation for considering X-ray lasers as a possible
mode of interstellar communication.
Gamma-ray communication is also a logical option
rarely explored (see however Harris 1991; Corbet 1999),
and has been mostly discussed as signatures of advanced
propulsion (see section 6).
Even when a particular part of the spectrum is chosen,
there remain many spectral channels to look into.
Since the inception of SETI, researchers have proposed
particular Schelling points related to mathematical

constants, physical and cosmological constants, and
astronomical references.
Mathematical constant Schelling points

The idea of modulating light according to universal
mathematical regularities to provide a clear signature
of an artificial source dates back to Charles Cros
(1869), who proposed that optimal signals towards
Mars or Venus should follow simple periodic laws,
and not be random. Mathematical scientists have
since considered that many Schelling points could be
chosen; for example, Makovetskii (1976) proposed that
calls could be composed starting with the waterhole
frequency at 1420 MHz and multiplying
√ it with a
mathematical constant such as π, e, or 2. Staying
with the 1420 MHz window, Shklovskii and Sagan (1966)
suggested its first or second overtone.
Another common suggestion is to bet on prime
numbers, because of their unique mathematical
properties, although one can argue that they have simple
algorithmic (Kolmogorov) complexity and might only be
a good beacon, but are not a good trace of a complex
signal.
One should note that many of these proposals were
made in a time where not many frequencies could
be analyzed, and thus stringent choices had to be
made. Nowadays, massive computing and spectrometer
technological progress follow a kind of Moore’s law
(see Fig. 21), and now measure billions of frequencies
simultaneously.
Physical & cosmological constants Schelling points

Using the cosmic water hole as a foundation, and
adding other fundamental constants Blair and Zadnik
(1993) derived a list of 55 possible frequency choices.
Fundamental physical and cosmological constants
also provide natural Schelling points. Historically,
this goes back to Planck (1900) when he defined
his eponymous units, and wrote in passing that
they ”remain meaningful for all times and also for
extraterrestrial and non-human cultures”.
Wright
(2020b) developed this suggestion and derived a ”Planck

42
Table 10. Extinction effects of the interstellar medium (ISM) at various frequencies.
EM Region

Wavelength/Energy

Status in ISM

Reference

> 10 cm

Transparent

Cocconi and Morrison (1959)

Microwave

1 mm – 10 cm

Transparent

Wesson (1975)

Infrared

700 nm – 1 mm

Transparent

Visible

400 nm – 700 nm

Hazy

Near UV

300 nm – 400 nm

Opaque

Extreme UV

10 nm – 121 nm

Very opaque

Radio

Soft X-Ray

0.1 keV – 2 keV

Opaque

Hard X-Ray

2 keV – 100 keV

Transparent

Gamma Ray

> 100 keV

Transparent

Figure 21. Moore’s law in spectral channels, from (Tarter
et al. 2009).

Frequency Comb”. He also emphasized that there are
still inevitable anthropocentric choices when making
such suggestions.
Kardashev (1979) did also consider cosmological
parameters, namely the range of maximum intensity of
the cosmic microwave background.
Astronomical Schelling points

Astronomical phenomena can also provide natural
timing and frequency references. For example Heidmann
(1988, 1992) and Heidmann et al. (1992) suggested
to use multiples of pulsar frequencies, and conducted
searches accordingly.
Vidal (2017) argued that
millisecond pulsars are prime and readily usable
galactic standards for timing, navigation, and metadata
communication purposes. This convenience also led
Vidal (2019) to suggest the hypothesis that stable and
regular MSPs functioning like a ”pulsar positioning
system” might have been engineered to a certain degree
(see also section 8.1).
6.8. How to deal with anthropogenic interferences?
Adding to the diﬀiculty is the abundance of both
natural and human-made interference. The interstellar
medium (ISM) itself creates background noise that can

obscure faint signals. Furthermore, radio frequency
interference (RFI) from our own technology, such
as satellites and mobile phones, present a constant
challenge for researchers trying to distinguish a genuine
extraterrestrial signal from terrestrial noise.
Back in 1999, a major goal of the SETI@Home project
was to use citizens’ idle computers to search for artificial
signals, but it also included algorithms to reject false
positives such as RFIs (Korpela et al. 2025; Anderson
et al. 2025).
RFIs give rise to many false positives, sometimes not
easy to reject, as in the case of Breakthrough Candidate
1 (BLC1; Smith et al. 2021; Sheikh et al. 2021).
Through the years, SETI scientists have devised
sophisticated RFI mitigation and rejection techniques,
for example by conducting multi-site observations (e.g.
LOFAR; Johnson et al. 2023); by pointing the telescope
ON or OFF its target to see if the signal persists (e.g.
Enriquez et al. 2017); by looking at the drift rate of
EM waves since local RFI generally does not drift; by
using polarization properties (Li et al. 2023); or by using
machine learning algorithms that can learn the patterns
of RFI, and thus reject them (Jacobson-Bell et al. 2025).
Another mitigation strategy is to prioritize the search
on higher frequencies that are not yet contaminated with
our technology. Unfortunately, the Earth may become
too contaminated for technosignature searches—and for
astronomy at large—which motivates the deployment of
telescopes on the farside of the Moon which is almost
completely radio-quiet (e.g. Mumma 1990), including
the recently announced Lunar Farside Technosignature
& Transients Telescope (LFT3; DeBoer et al. 2025).
6.9. What are the non-EM information carrier
options?
Hippke (2018a) reviewed information carrier options
for interstellar communication (Table 11), confirming
that photons are still a premium carrier, but also that
other carriers have advantages in certain scenarios.
Occulters

In many ways, the simplest solution to signal over
interstellar distances is to use an occulter in front of

43
Table 11. Carrier performance summary. All values for E = keV, transmitter aperture 1 m, distance 1 pc. Masses and lifetimes
from (Mohr et al. 2008). Text in red color indicates problematic properties.
Carrier
Photon
Neutrino
Electron
Proton
Neutron
Muon
Tau
Higgs
Inscribed matter
Occulter
Gravitational wave
Axion
Tachyon

Mass
(MeV/c2 )
0
≈0.001
0.51
938.27
939.56
105.66
1776.82
1.25 × 105
>0
>0
0
≈10−9
unclear

Lifetime
(s)
stable
oscillations
> 1036
> 1051
881.5
10−6
10−13
10−22
> 1013
> 1013
stable
stable
stable

Velocity
(c)
1
⪅1
0.0630
0.0015
0.0015
0.0044
0.0011
10−6
0...1
1
1
⪅1
>1

Charged
no
no
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
no
no
possible
no
no
no

an already existing, natural bright source. Indeed, this
solution dispenses with the engineering and economic
burden of creating the energy source, and focuses only
on modulating the signal. The Earth analog are smoke
signals that have been used for centuries in ancient
China, North America, or Australia.
Morrison (1962) proposed that an occulter could be
used by advanced ETI to communicate from Andromeda
to our galaxy. He proposed an opaque screen of
1020 grams that could beam algebraic equations.
In SETI, Arnold (2005) suggested that transiting
megastructures themselves could be used as information
carriers to encode prime numbers. Chennamangalam
et al. (2015) suggested that pulsar radiation could
be modified with an artificial satellite, a proposal
that Vidal (2019) kept as a possibility regarding the
hypothesis that millisecond pulsars would have been
modified for the purpose of engineering a “pulsar
positioning system”.
Neutrinos

As already noted by Morrison (1962), neutrino
communication is a plausible way to engage in
interstellar communication.
Neutrinos are nearly
massless, electrically neutral particles that have
extremely low interaction cross-sections with matter.
As such, they go through many layers of the Sun’s
composition, being absorbed only by the densest core
layers. In relation to searching for probes in the solar
system, this implies that neutrino radiation converges
through a solar gravitational lens effect at 29.59 AU
(Maccone 2009), so searching for probes in this area
is much nearer and feasible than searching for a
photon-based probe at 547 AU (see again Figure 9).
Neutrinos are produced in nuclear fusion reactions,
high-energy astrophysical phenomena such as
supernovae and active galactic nuclei (AGNs), and
nuclear reactors. These high-energy particles have been
proposed for global communications with submarines,

Beam
(arcsec)
10−4
106
106
106
106
106
106
106
≈0
103
4π
10−4
unclear

Extinct.

Lensing

Diff.

Init. Cost

Op. Cost

0.001
≈0
medium
≈1
≈1
≈1
≈1
≈0
≈0
0.001
0
≈0
unclear

good
very good
medium
very good
very good
very good
very good
very good
no
unlikely
low
good
unclear

low
medium
≈1
low
low
low
low
high
low
low
high
high
high

medium
high
medium
medium
medium
high
high
high
high
high
high
unclear
unclear

medium
medium
medium
medium
medium
medium
medium
high
zero
very low
high
unclear
unclear

planetary-wide communications,
and interstellar
communications (Stancil et al. 2012; Huber 2010).
Their extremely low interaction cross-section makes
them good candidates for interstellar communication,
since they rarely interact with matter: they can
travel through interstellar dust, gas clouds, planetary
and stellar objects, or even strong magnetic fields
surrounding pulsars and neutron stars with negligible
attenuation. In other words, neutrino emissions are
immune to common interstellar communication issues
like dispersion, scattering, absorption, or polarization
rotation (problems prevalent with electromagnetic
signals). This enables neutrino signals to propagate
across interstellar distances while maintaining coherence
and fidelity.
Natural neutrinos typically exhibit broad spectra
and random arrival directions. In contrast, artificial
neutrino signals from extraterrestrial civilizations could
be designed to appear distinctly structured (e.g.,
coherent, pulsed signals with specific temporal patterns
or unusual energy distributions, or another modulation
scheme that we use with EM frequencies, see Table 13).
Neutrinos communication could be modulated according
to a specific neutrino flavor (electron, muon, or tau); or
by switching between neutrinos and antineutrinos.
They persist undistorted over timescales spanning
millennia or even millions of years, which means
that they would provide a reliable beacon for ET
civilizations separated across vast temporal scales. The
generation and detection of neutrinos on a directed,
coherent scale requires enormous energy resources and
technological advancements far beyond current human
capability. At high energies, neutrinos are rare from
any given direction, and in contrast to photons, they are
essentially noise-free in the galactic plane where galactic
civilizations may be located (Learned et al. 2009).
Learned et al. (1994) also conducted a theoretical
exploration of neutrinos as a high cadence timing

44
standard. However, the location of neutrino sources
is hard to pinpoint, and timing and navigation require
many stable sources.
Gravitational Waves (GW)

We saw that the energy of electromagnetic radiation
follows an inverse-square law (1/r2 ) in intensity as it
propagates through space. However, even if the energy
flux of gravitational waves decays as 1/r2 , the detection
of gravitational waves is done through measuring
gravitational wave amplitude (h), representing strain
(relative changes in distances), and diminishes only as
1/r. Wright (2026) also notes that radio telescopes
cannot measure the 1/r amplitude because one does not
know the waveform of radio signals in advance, as we
know the waveform of gravitational waves.
Much like neutrinos, gravitational waves also offer
the advantage that they propagate virtually unaffected
through ordinary matter (Wang and Akan 2025). Unlike
electromagnetic signals, gravitational waves interact
extremely weakly with dust, gas, magnetic fields, or
charged plasmas in the interstellar medium, making
them ideal for penetrating dense environments without
signal degradation.
Gravitational wave communication offers a lower
natural background noise level.
For example,
electromagnetic channels (radio, optical, infrared)
are crowded with natural and artificial sources
of interference (stars, interstellar medium, cosmic
microwave background, human-made signals).
In
contrast, GW channels have comparatively lower
natural background noise in certain frequency ranges,
especially in the high-frequency regime above stellar
binaries and below cosmological GW backgrounds (see
Table 12).
The primary reason we do not use this technology
yet is the generation problem: gravity is the weakest
of the four fundamental forces, 1040 times weaker
than electromagnetism.
To generate a detectable
gravitational wave currently requires accelerating
masses the size of black holes.
To use this
for communication, a civilization would need to
master High-Frequency Gravitational Wave technology,
which requires energy scales far beyond our current
capabilities. However, Jackson and Benford (2018)
proposed a concept for a gravitational wave transmitter
by a civilization using small black holes. Abramowicz
et al. (2020) argued that a Jupiter-mass GW emitter at
the center of our galaxy would make sense to be built
and would be detectable by LISA-type GW detectors.
As with other carriers, artificial GW signals, if
engineered at characteristic frequencies or modulations,
could stand out distinctly from natural sources.
Inscribed matter

If the desired data transfer is very high, inscribed
matter may be a better choice than sending information

in the EM spectrum (Rose and Wright 2004; Hippke
et al. 2018; Lingam and Loeb 2021). Think of slow
postal services versus fast internet transfer. However,
what is faster to transfer 2 petabytes of data? Maybe
counterintuitively, sending a box with one hundred
20 TB hard drives to the other side of the world
goes faster than attempting to transmit it via the
internet, even with the best optical fiber consumer-grade
connection.
An adage by Andrew Tanenbaum in
computer science illustrates this: “Never underestimate
the bandwidth of a station wagon full of tapes hurtling
down the highway.”
This train of thought involves a tradeoff between the
desired latency versus bandwidth. As argued by Rose
and Wright (2004), this advantage provides additional
strong arguments to look for solar system artefacts that
might be extremely information-rich (see section 3).
Also, inscribed matter does not need the recipient to
be listening at the exact moment when the data is being
transmitted. A civilization could discover a message
with inscribed matter millions of years after it actually
arrived, much like in the famous science fiction novel
2001: A Space Odyssey.
We saw that the inverse square law makes the data
rate of EM radiation fall off proportionally to 1/r2 .
How does it fall off for inscribed matter? Consider that
the total bits delivered with one package of inscribed
matter is a constant (B), the time (t) it takes to arrive is
simply distance (r) divided by velocity (v), i.e. t = r/v.
Therefore, the data rate (bits per second) is:
Data Rate =

B
Bv
B
=
=
t
r/v
r

(5)

Because the distance (r) is in the denominator, the data
rate for inscribed matter falls off proportionally to 1/r.
Naturally, the equation shows that the velocity v at
which the package is sent matters too. This means that
EM radiation degrades much faster (inverse-square law,
1/r2 ) due to beam diffraction, or requires exponential
energy increases to maintain the rate. To sum up,
inscribed matter is favored over longer distances, unless
the inscribed matter is travelling at a low velocity,
or unless the inscribed matter device is not very
information-dense.
From the perspective of a civilization broadcasting,
inscribed matter also has many advantages. Indeed,
for a civilization sending EM photons, it only gains
information if it sends messages, receives a reply, and
is able to decode it. By contrast, a civilization that
sends a probe could have a hybrid EM and inscribed
matter strategy. Indeed, a probe could host massive
amounts of inscribed information onboard, but could
simultaneously carry antennas that could engage in
real-time conversations with local lifeforms, and could
also transmit information back to the host. Even if no
ETI is found by the probe, it could still serve as a potent
galactic scouting strategy.

45
Table 12. A comparison of the advantages and disadvantages of electromagnetic waves versus gravitational waves for interstellar
communication.
Feature

Electromagnetic Waves (Radio/Laser)

Gravitational Waves

Obstacles

Blocked/absorbed by stars, planets, dust

Pass through everything unimpeded

Noise

High (stars, CMB, dust, electronics)

Extremely low (at high frequencies)

Jamming

Easy to jam or shield

Nearly impossible to jam or shield

6.10. What signal modulation scheme?
We already dealt with the questions of choosing
targets in space, time and frequency, but what remains
is the question of the modulation scheme. This aspect
is important not only for the goal of deciphering
a message, but also because different modulation
schemes imply different communication choices and
thus search strategies. A communication protocol is
a system of rules that allows two or more entities
of a communications system to transmit information.
The protocol defines the rules, syntax, semantics, and
synchronization of communication and error recovery
methods. Even if we guess the right frequency and
information carrier, to conclusively determine if a signal
is artificial, we cannot assume that it would always be
a simple carrier wave, and we need to dig into possible
and suitable modulation schemes.
At first sight, we might want to systematically explore
the whole space of possible modulation schemes, at least
the ones known to humanity (for a textbook see e.g.
Haykin 2009).
Delay-Tolerant Networking protocols,
already
mentioned in the context of speed-of-light delays
are particularly designed for space applications (Cerf
et al. 2007; Burleigh et al. 2003), and have also been
successfully tested on the Moon (Wang et al. 2025).
The most common way engineers implement
modulation is by varying the amplitude (e.g. AM
Radio), the frequency (e.g. FM radio), or the phase
(phase modulation) of a carrier wave.
Modern
modulation solutions vary both amplitude and phase, a
method known as Quadrature Amplitude Modulation
(QAM). These modulations can be done both in analog
or digital settings (see Table 13).
Another engineering consideration is the requirement
for robustness. A common solution in modern digital
wireless engineering is to use several parts of the EM
spectrum, a technique known as spread spectrum. It is
actually so common in communication engineering that
Messerschmitt (2012) argued that we should search for
such modulation patterns in SETI.
Polarization

In astronomy, light polarization refers to the geometry
of the electric field of the EM wave. There are multiple
ways of characterizing an EM wave’s polarization,
including elliptical, linear, and circular.
That
polarization can be stable (fully polarized), unstable

and random (unpolarized), or in between (partially
polarized).
Polarization constitutes a continuous
degree of freedom, which can be characterized through
the Stokes parameters (Stokes 1851).
In optical
communication engineering, polarization states can
be modulated continuously through this state space
(also commonly represented as a Poincaré sphere).
Polarization could thus be used as an additional degree
of freedom in interstellar communication, although it
has rarely been considered in SETI.
One can even go further and combine quantum
communication with the Stokes parameters, which gives
a quantum version of the parameter space, and in that
case we speak of Stokes operators. The polarization on
the Poincaré sphere is then represented by cells instead
of points, due to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
This opens even more channel capacity, up to 33%
compared to coherent beam combining, with a squeezed
polarization technique (Schnabel et al. 2003).
Polarization is associated with Spin Angular
Momentum (SAM). However, there is another way
to encode much more information with light, using
Orbital Angular Momentum (OAM), by modulating
the shape of the wavefront and creating vortex beams
(Allen et al. 1992). It has been shown that a wireless
network using such encoding could achieve 2.5 Tb s−1
(Wang et al. 2012). In the context of SETI, Hippke
(2021) noted that OAM degrades more than 1/r2 over
interstellar distances, as beam divergence increases
at least with the square root of the number of OAM
modes. OAM also occurs in natural sources such as our
Sun or rotating black holes, but an artificially generated
OAM wavefront could have distinguishing features, a
topic not yet explored in a SETI context.
Classical communication uses bits, but quantum
communication uses qubits, which could also be used
for interstellar communication (Hippke 2021; Berera and
Calderón-Figueroa 2022). Given that we might be just
decades away from generalized quantum communication
and quantum computers, this axis of research should
be considered seriously. Indeed, as Hippke (2021)
argues, quantum communication (1) might be a way
to gate-keep less advanced civilizations who do not
know how to use it, (2) quantum computers can
solve some problems faster than classical computers
(quantum supremacy), (3) quantum key distribution
and cryptography are very secure and enable the
detection of eavesdropping, and (4) it offers higher
information eﬀiciency.

46
Table 13. Examples of common analog and digital modulation techniques. These techniques aim to encode information by
varying parameters of the basic equation of a sinusoid carrier wave: x(t) = A · sin(2πf t + ϕ), i.e. varying either amplitude,
frequency, phase, or both amplitude and phase in the case of QAM.
Analog Modulation
AM (Amplitude Modulation)
FM (Frequency Modulation)
PM (Phase Modulation)

Digital Modulation
ASK (Amplitude Shift Keying)
FSK (Frequency Shift Keying)
PSK (Phase Shift Keying)

Parameter Changed
Amplitude (A)
Frequency (f )
Phase (ϕ)

Analog QAM

Digital QAM

Amplitude (A) & Phase (ϕ)

However, qubits are just one way to use quantum
properties to transmit information.
In quantum
communication, the concept of qudit is used, a quantum
d-ary digit that is a unit of quantum information with
d levels. This means that a qubit is a particular case
where d = 2, but other systems can be built with much
larger values of d; for example, a 25-dimensional qudit
was demonstrated recently (Dong et al. 2023).
Exotic protocols

All of these considerations might also be outdated or
inferior to other more advanced, exotic communication
solutions. An exotic communication protocol might use
properties of both quantum and relativity theories. On
the quantum side, a major property of quantum systems
is that they can display entangled states, also known as
Einstein Podolsky Rosen (EPR) correlations (Einstein
et al. 1935). On the relativity side, wormholes were first
proposed as an Einstein-Rosen (ER) bridge (Einstein
and Rosen 1935).
Maldacena and Susskind (2013) formulated the
ER=EPR conjecture, proposing that an ER bridge is the
geometric manifestation of EPR entanglement. More
specifically, two black holes would be entangled via a
wormhole. Crucially, faster-than-light communication
would still be forbidden, but this geometry, with the
addition of a classical channel, might be a way to
implement the quantum teleportation protocol.
Another exotic possibility would be the ability to
harness dark matter or dark energy as an energy
source or for communication, which has been evoked
by Garrett (2025), although the possible anomalies or
technosignatures have not been elaborated yet.
Many thinkers have argued or assumed that ETI
would converge towards one particular solution for
interstellar communication. If taken too dogmatically,
these ways of restricting the search space might
create lock-in situations, where alternatives would be
forgotten.
To summarize, if we combine our insights, the
ultimate communication solution for two advanced
civilizations might be an X-ray laser modulated
hybridly with quantum and classical protocols,
including polarization and orbital angular momentum
encoding, and pulsed at the millisecond timescale (to
be congruent with millisecond pulsars for galactic

Behavior
Changes signal strength
Changes oscillations per second
Changes the starting angle of
the wave
Changes both strength and
starting angle simultaneously

spacetime timestamping).
searched for such signals.

As of today, no one has

6.11. What is the communication transmission mode
and purpose?
We distinguish four main communication network
topologies:
a beacon broadcast (one-to-all);
point-to-point
unicast
(one-to-one);
multicast
(one-to-many); and many-to-one (e.g. a warning
signal). Note that an intentional communication to
Earth would be a particular case of a one-to-one
communication, and that there are many multicast
options: any given communicating civilization might
communicate with n other civilizations.
As we argued earlier, the issue of inverse square
attenuation with distance (1/r2 ) would arguably be
counteracted with a relay network that repeats or
re-amplifies signals. Searching for such a relay network
is thus also a valid strategy, e.g. by trying to find similar
signals at different intensities.
These communication network topologies imply
different preferred modulation schemes, and thus
different kinds of search strategies that we can employ
to detect them (see Figure 22 for an illustration).
One-to-one

A direct one-to-one communication could take several
forms.
A common scenario coming from popular
culture is a direct communication to Earth, with a high
signal/noise ratio, adapted to our cognition/technology,
and anti-cryptographic, so humans are able to decode
it. But one-to-one communication could also happen
between two communicating ETIs, and for us to detect
this case, we would be eavesdropping on them. The
decoding step (5) in Shannon’s diagram (Figure 18)
would most likely be nearly impossible to achieve, but
we may still be able to detect that communication
is going on.
The more secure and secret the
communication channel is, the more the signal would
look like noise, and thus the harder it would be for us
to receive and decode it. Highly compressed signals also
look like noise, which is deeply problematic for SETI
Wolfram (2002, p. 836).

47
One-to-many

6.12. A cosmic haystack

A beacon broadcast targeting dense stellar regions
such as the galactic center or globular clusters would
constitute a one-to-many communication.
As a
one-to-many example, the Arecibo message was targeted
to a globular cluster (Staff at the National Astronomy
and Ionosphere Center 1975). Expected features of a
one-to-many communication could include: a strong
signal to cover large distances, long-lasting, isotropic,
multiwavelength, and anti-cryptographic. Interestingly,
over long operational timescales, broadband pulsed
beacons are more energetically eﬀicient compared to
narrowband beacons, which is another reason to also
search for broadband communication (Gajjar et al.
2022).
A beacon could also be used as a warning message,
and if it would aim to warn the whole galaxy, it would
be an instance of a one-to-all communication effort.
In that case, much as warning messages on Earth use
multimodal solutions (sound sirens, radio, TV, internet,
etc.), we might detect interstellar warning signals via
a correlation across wavelengths or communication
channel options.

We can summarize the main dimensions of the search
for signals by mapping the “cosmic haystack problem”
(Wright et al. 2019). In Table 14 we compile core
dimensions we reviewed that are relevant to the search.
One should note that each time one adds a dimension
to the search space, this leads to an exponential growth
in the search space volume, a phenomenon known as a
“curse of dimensionality.”

Many-to-one

The topology of many-to-one requires specific and
speculative assumptions, where several civilizations
would want to warn us with a similar message. For
example, a warning of a bad event such as a supernova
risking to wipe life from planet Earth. Note that it
would be a very peculiar impact scenario: it would
be climactic for SETI as a field, and anticlimactic for
humanity.
Many-to-many

A many-to-many communication system could include
a distributed system analogous to Global Navigation
Satellite Systems on Earth, which actually has a direct
analog as the pulsar positioning system (Vidal 2019).
An amplification system made of distributed relays is
also a candidate.
No communication intent

Note that signals may be detectable outside of
the possibilities of these commmunication network
distinctions. Indeed, humanity does leak radiation
in space, through military radars or the Deep Space
Network. Fan et al. (2025) has proposed ways to search
for such Earth analogs of leakage radiation as a SETI
search strategy. Assuming a solar-system spanning
civilization, Sneed et al. (2023) proposed to search for
overhearing spillover of signals between planets, much
like the Deep Space Network leaks powerful signals as
we communicate with space missions in our solar system.
Some communication solutions are close to travel
signatures (e.g. sending probes or inscribed matter),
which will be the topic of the next section 6.

Figure 22. From communication intents to communication solutions, and their associated technosignature search strategies.

48

49

Table 14. A cosmic haystack: interstellar messages might be embedded in various dimensions. Partially inspired from Hippke
(2018a); Tarter et al. (2010); Wright et al. (2018). Note that it is “a” haystack and not “the” haystack as we might be missing
dimensions.
Dimension

Options

Notes

Target in space

Targeted searches; wide-field surveys;
archival data mining

The three options are complementary and
are regularly analyzed by various studies.

Target in time

Various timescales from Planck timescale to
billions of years (see Table 8)

Time dimensions address: (1) At what
particular time? (2) How long? (3) How
often?

Information carrier

Photon; Occulter; Neutrino; Gravitational
waves; Inscribed matter; Electron; Proton;
Neutron; Muon; Tau; Higgs

Photons are still a premium choice. See
Table 11 and Hippke (2018a).

Frequency

Radio, Optical, X-ray, etc.

Radio has been the most searched.

Frequency range

Narrowband, wideband, broadband

Narrowband signals have been most
searched for.

Sampling rate

Frequency intervals chosen for the detection
algorithms (e.g. every 1 Hz)

Also often referred to as “channels” in radio
astronomy.

Modulation & encoding
scheme

Analog: AM, FM, phase modulation;
Digital: spread spectrum, pulse-amplitude
modulation, etc.; Quantum communication
modulation techniques; Polarization;
Orbital Angular Momentum (vortex
beams), see Table 13.

Polarization provides degrees of freedom
that could be used to encode more
information. Quantum communication is an
underexplored frontier in SETI.(Hippke
2021).

Transmission modes and
purposes

One-to-one; One-to-many (beacon);
Many-to-one; Many-to-many (e.g. warning
signal)

50
7. TRAVEL TECHNOSIGNATURES

7.1. Motivations
Why would a long-lived civilization even engage in
interstellar travel? After all, interstellar distances
are immense, travel times are very long, and require
significant economical and political investment to secure
the required technology and energy.
In addition,
travel is often associated with leisure or the luxury of
exploration for its own sake. However, two universal
evolutionary motivations will make interstellar travel a
necessity for any long-lived civilization: survival and
reproduction (see Vidal 2024).
Survival motivations include avoiding a death
threatening supernova or migrating towards a nearby
star as the home star fades away (Zuckerman 1985;
Hansen and Zuckerman 2021). A pioneering study
by Hansen (2022) looked for close stellar encounters
in the solar neighborhood. The strategy is then to
look for active interstellar migration, where “generation
ships” are sent during a close encounter window, hitting
this window because it would cost orders of magnitude
less time and energy than crossing the otherwise vast
interstellar spaces. Hansen proposes this method as a
way to constrain search targets because a lot of heat
or communication signatures might be associated with
such migration.
By a similar logic, two civilizations inhabiting two
planets orbiting each star of the same binary system
(S-Type) would have a strong incentive to visit or
communicate with each other.
Such systems are
thus good targets for technosignature searches, and
a first candidate system, TOI-2267 has recently been
discovered (Zúñiga-Fernández et al. 2025). Note that
this is distinct from a circumbinary configuration where
planets orbit the center of mass of two stars (P-Type).
To avoid frequent migrations, an advanced civilization
might also choose to target high stellar density
environments such as globular clusters or the galactic
center. If this is true, it implies that we can expect
more travel signatures from and towards GCs and the
galactic center.
The reproduction motivations may include the
settlement of a second planet in a given extrasolar
system. This would arguably imply intense traveling
routes between the two inhabited planets to exchange
goods and materials.
Another possibility is directed panspermia, which was
proposed by Crick and Orgel (1973). This is plausible
as life is space resistant (Olsson-Francis and Cockell
2010). It is actually so much space resistant that it
is extremely hard and expensive to confidently sterilize
any space mission. This field of study is called planetary
protection (Coustenis et al. 2023), with the objective to
avoid contaminating solar system targets from Earth-life
(forward contamination), but also to prevent potential

extraterrestrial microorganisms from entering the Earth
(backward contamination).
The question of whether we ourselves should engage in
a directed panspermia program is another debate that
raises ethical questions, much like the METI debate
but this time sending matter and life, and not only
electromagnetic radiation. We should note that in this
context the meaning of “directed panspermia” makes a
180 degree turn, i.e. the idea that humans would send
life in space (Mautner and Matloff 1979).
Directed panspermia initiated by humans is not just
an abstract idea, as the Lunar lander “Beresheet”
(Aharonson et al. 2020) sent information to the Moon:
the Wikipedia encyclopedia, the PanLex database, and
an artefact designed by the Long Now foundation called
the Wearable Rosetta disc. More controversial was the
decision to add tardigrades as part of the launch of the
lander (Oberhaus 2019).
Search
strategies
for
interstellar
travel
technosignatures are obviously very similar to the
search for ISO technosignatures (see Table 4). The
difference being that some cases, such as radar searches,
are much more limited because of the huge distances
involved. Some general strategies and anomalies to
look for have to do with the origin and destination of
spacecraft. Indeed, if we were to find a high velocity
object whose extrapolated trajectory begins and ends
at precisely two stars, it would be extremely unlikely
to be a natural occurrence. Such studies are possible
in principle by sifting through the Gaia mission catalog
(Prusti et al. 2016).
This strategy works to detect the longest cruising
phase of interstellar travel but fails while a spacecraft
is in a maneuvering phase near either the point of
departure or destination, or during some intermediary
gravitational assist.
Other anomalous trajectories
include three body interactions that generate
high-velocity ejections, as explored in detail by
Breeden (2013, 2014). Another logical signature to look
for is an interstellar contrails (Kitajima and Inutsuka
2023). Indeed, it can be seen as an instance of a waste
signature, that has the advantage of being particularly
extended in space, and thus detectable. We could look
more specifically whether candidate contrails are going
towards or away from habitable stars or planets.
Zubrin (1995) studied the radio spectral signatures
of advanced interstellar spacecraft, and concluded that
the most detectable form of starship radiation would
be low frequency radio emissions of cyclotron radiation
caused by interaction of the interstellar medium with a
magnetic sail.
Independent of the propulsion technology, at extreme
velocities, a relativistic spacecraft would interact
with CMB photons, which would produce specific
signatures (Yurtsever and Wilkinson 2018). These may
be interpreted as technosignatures if not associated

51
with other natural inverse-compton radiation such as
Sunyaev-Zeldovich effect in cosmology.
7.2. Energy sources for propulsion
Considering any spacecraft relying on onboard fuel,
using a high energy density source of fuel is almost a
prerequisite for interstellar travel.
In comparison to chemical rockets, a nuclear fission
source of energy is ∼ 105 more eﬀicient, a nuclear
fusion ∼ 106 and the absolute theoretical maximum,
matter-antimatter annihilation is ∼ 108 times more
eﬀicient (Mallove and Matloff 1989).
This means
that crossing the threshold from chemical rockets to
nuclear fission propulsion leads to a gain of 5 orders
of magnitude in eﬀiciency, while going from fusion
to matter-antimatter means ’only’ gaining 3 orders of
magnitude.
Harris (1986) argued that matter-antimatter
propulsion would produce a contrail of neutrinos
that may be detectable. Also pushing the theoretical
limits, Crane and Westmoreland (2009) made a
theoretical exploration of a spacecraft powered by an
artificial black hole. They derived a future detectable
technosignature, as a gravitational wave detector
sensitive down to 10−15 m would be needed.
Other technosignatures might be derived from work
on advanced propulsion methods, for example, the
edited book by Millis and Davis (2009) explores
frontiers propulsion science and proposals, from nuclear
propulsion to exploiting vacuum energy, and many
others.
As we mentioned, the core hard physics constraint to
interstellar travel is known as the tyranny of the rocket
equation: A spacecraft only carries a certain amount
of weight. The further one wants to travel, the more
propellant one has to carry. However, doing so increases
the overall weight, thus also increases the propellant
needed to accelerate it: a tyrannous feedback loop.
7.3. Light sails
One way to bypass the tyranny of the rocket equation
is to propel a spacecraft not with onboard fuel, but by
beaming directed energy to it (Lubin 2022).
A recent example is the Breakthrough Starshot
program (Parkin 2018), that explored the engineering,
scientific and economical constraints and challenges
of launching probes towards Alpha Centauri.
Unfortunately, the project has recently been
discontinued (Scoles 2025).
However, its success
would have meant breaking a trend of an already
exponential growth of maximum speed of vehicles (see
Figure 23).
As Heller (2017) noted, reaching 0.1c would not
happen before 150 years from now, assuming this
exponential growth continues unabated. In that sense,
the project might have been a few centuries ahead of its
time!

Figure 23. Historical speed records of vehicles or probes,
with the Starshot project in the upper-right. Figure from
Heller (2017).

Of course, even if we do not use directed energy
propulsion solutions yet, ETI might already be doing
it. This reasoning can be called the cosmic reversibility
principle that Crick and Orgel (1973) proposed in
the context of directed panspermia, and that was
generalized in (Vidal 2019):
“If we are capable of doing X in the future,
then, given that the time was available,
another extraterrestrial civilization might
well have done X already.”
This principle is often at play implicitly in many SETI
speculations: whatever technological project we can do
now or in the near future, ETIs might already have done
it better, more eﬀiciently or at a larger scale. As we saw
in the context of Earth Technosignatures (section 2),
there is ample time for this to happen given the age of
the galaxy. So, by attempting more and more ambitious
space or interstellar travels ourselves (see e.g. Mallove
and Matloff 1989), we will have better and better ideas
about how ETIs might be doing it.
In the case of directed energy, Lubin (2016) proposed
a general search for directed energy beaming activities,
and Guillochon and Loeb (2015) proposed to look for
leakage from a light sail spacecraft traveling between
planets of a given stellar system. This search can
be done in synergy with optical laser SETI searches.
However, note that if the beam matches perfectly with
the size of the sail, then there is no leakage to detect, so
we would be looking for leakage from a system designed
to minimize it, which may be hard.
Lingam and Loeb (2017) also explored a directed
energy signature, namely that Fast Radio Bursts (FRBs)
might actually be powering light sails, arguing that
the properties of FRBs are particularly well-suited for
this purpose. One might also try looking for the
light sail itself; for example, when Avi Loeb argued
that ‘Oumuamua might be a light sail, or if the next

52
generation coronagraphs such as the forthcoming HWO
would be used to detect reflected light from huge
light sails, possibly with similar strategies to look for
starshades Skoglund and Mustill (2025).
Clifford E. Singer (1980, 1981) proposed an analogous
solution to directed energy that we could call directed
mass. He proposed that a home world could send pellets
at high speed that would bounce off a receiving area
of the spacecraft and thereby transfer the momentum.
He argued that it would offer one to two orders of
magnitude improvement over a fusion rocket in terms
of propulsion system mass, reaction mass requirements,
and power consumption.
We are not aware of
associated observable technosignatures, but a stream
of high-energy particles going out from a planet,
hitting a spacecraft and heating it might be such a
signature. However, a few ultra-high energy cosmic rays
(UHECRs) have been detected, such as the Amaterasu
particle, or the ”Oh-My-God” particle. Cosmic rays
are generally very hard to trace, but UHECRs are
more promising to trace because their high kinetic
energies makes them less susceptible to be re-routed
by magnetic fields. The acceleration to such energies
produces synchrotron radiation which is a secondary
signature from another modality. In this perspective,
this makes UHECRs at the boundary of extreme natural
objects and technosignature candidates (see section 9.2).
As with directed energy leakage searches, this search
also suffers from an attempt to detect ”failure modes”,
i.e. leakage from particles of a directed mass propulsion
system.
7.4. Ramjet
Another approach to avoid carrying all the fuel is to
scoop material from the ISM and use it as fuel. This
is the proposal of the Bussard Ramjet (Bussard 1960;
Fishback 1969).
Carl Sagan (1963) explored the consequences of such
a spacecraft and concluded that with accelerations and
decelerations of only 1 g, the whole Galaxy would
be accessible within a human lifetime of the traveler,
due to relativistic time dilation. Kevin Knuth (2019)
has further explored the consequences and mindset of
nomadic civilizations traveling at relativistic velocities.
Peter Schattschneider and Albert A. Jackson (2022)
re-analyzed the ramjet design and found not only that
travel within a human lifetime would in fact not be
possible, but also that the ramjet would require a 1 AU
wide magnetic scooping area. If such a megastructure
is actually built, it makes the ramjet actually more
observable. We are not aware of specific observable
signature proposals, but we could imagine that the
combination of a 1-AU collecting ISM structure, a
high-velocity or accelerating object, leaving behind a
fusion exhaust and a void in the ISM would be a set
of intriguing properties.

7.5. Planet engines
The more payload a spacecraft can carry, the longer
its crew can survive interstellar space. The limit to
this logic is to travel with one’s planet to form a planet
engine, or one’s home star by designing a stellar engine.
We already saw that Ponnaganti et al. (2024)
proposed a mechanism to move planets within a stellar
system thanks to high-powered laser. The notion of a
controlled planet engine for interstellar travel has been
touched upon by Romanovskaya (2022a) who considered
ejected rogue planets as potential technosignatures.
Indeed, an active iron core could provide energy for
a long time, even for a rogue planet without a stellar
energy source. A technosignature search strategy could
try to examine the trajectory of such rogue planets, and
see whether they are directed away and towards nearby
stars.
Another example of an observable technosignature
from a planet-mass spacecraft would be when it
accelerates or decelerates abruptly (Sellers et al. 2022).
Changes in velocity generate time-varying quadrupole
moments, a source of gravitational waves (GWs).
Detectors in our Solar System would notice periodic
GW pulses that would look artificial, being distinct
from astrophysical merger chirps. Sellers et al. (2022)
concluded that a Jupiter-mass RAMAcraft (Rapidly
Massive Accelerating craft) undergoing a change in
velocity of 30 percent the speed of light would be
detectable from 10-100 kpc. This range is decreased
to 1-10 pc when the mass of the craft is lowered to the
mass of the Moon.
As another example, a massively decelerating
spacecraft approaching our solar system would also
produce an unusual gravitational waveform (see
simulation in figure 24). The figure plots a gravitational
waveform for a decelerating spacecraft at a distance of 10
kpc, with a mass of 2 × 1024 kg (∼ 0.335 Earth masses)
approaching the solar system, and a change in velocity
from 0.5c to 0.1c. Such a GW waveform is very different
from known gravitational wave merging events.
The main technical challenge for detecting any
gravitational wave signals from a massive decelerating
spacecraft is the extremely small characteristic strains.
Future gravitational wave detectors are expected
to achieve a characteristic strain of (10−25 ) or
better, as proposed for next-generation ground-based
observatories like the Einstein Telescope and Cosmic
Explorer.
This will be accomplished through
new technologies such as longer arm lengths, laser
stabilization, and quantum optics to increase sensitivity
and overcome noise limitations.
7.6. Stellar engines
After a planet engine comes the possibility of stellar
engines that Type II civilizations could drive (see
Section 5). The idea of stellar engines was pioneered
by the great astronomer Fritz Zwicky (1957/2012, 260)

53

v + 2V
<latexit sha1_base64="pi3AZbP2Wy1oc45DMGwzO1JMBaw=">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</latexit>

v
<latexit sha1_base64="fH1VqBvMDoQYb5epCsRjB3wf4BA=">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</latexit>

Figure 24. This simulation models the unique gravitational
wave ”fingerprint” produced by a massive alien spacecraft
decelerating toward our solar system. The resulting signal
features a distinct, ripple-like waveform that represents
changing deceleration over time, mapped by its pitch
(frequency) and strength (strain). Ultimately, this unusual
structure could allow scientists to easily distinguish an
artificial, massive spacecraft from natural cosmic sources of
gravitational waves.

who also considered using the Sun and planets as
nuclear propellants. The first detailed model of a
stellar engine was proposed by Shkadov (1987), where
a giant parabolic mirror is held at fixed distance from
a star in order to create thrust. Fogg (1989) proposed
another design building on Criswell’s (1985) mechanism
to extract stellar mass for the purpose of extending
the Sun’s lifetime. More sophisticated designs and
analytical studies were developed by Caplan (2019) and
Svoronos (2020), focusing on achieving high-acceleration
capabilities. Vidal (2024) proposed the first binary
stellar engine design, highlighting potential candidates
in spider pulsars that may have anomalous velocities,
trajectories, accelerations, or active steering signatures.
As a pioneering observational search of stellar engines,
Lingam and Loeb (2020) searched the Gaia catalog
for hypervelocity stars, but without finding good
candidates.
An advanced Type III civilization that has developed
during billions of years might also want to preserve its
galactic structure and integrity, and try to gain some
control over the merging of its galaxy with another.
We know that our galaxy will merge with Andromeda,
which will slowly but surely affect many stars, gas
regions, before the merger stabilizes. Galaxy pairs are
actually common in the universe, and so are galaxy
mergers. The merging of two supermassive black holes
will lead to about 5-10% of their mass being converted to
gravitational energy in the form of gravitational waves.
A Type III civilization could try to make the two SMBHs
end up in a wide orbit to delay the ultimate merger,
or to align their spin, this in order to avoid turning
the resulting merger into an active quasar that might
destroy many ETIs across a galaxy.

V
<latexit sha1_base64="L55ZPw5h5IyOwL1iKpkLgltk6EQ=">AAACPnicbZDLSsNAFIYnXmu9VpduBovoIpZGRF0W3bisYGuhDTKZnOrgXMLMRC0hT+BW38fX8AXciVuXTmIXWv1h4OM/lzn8UcKZsc3mqzc1PTM7N19ZqC4uLa+srtXWu0almkKHKq50LyIGOJPQscxy6CUaiIg4XEa3p0X98g60YUpe2FECoSDXkg0ZJdZZ592rtXqz0SyF/0Iwhjoaq31V83YGsaKpAGkpJ8b0SWJ892eYabiz8HCwF+TVQWogIfSWXEPfoSQCTJiV5+Z42zkxHirtnrS4dH9OZEQYMxKR6xTE3pjJWmH62EExbkqKzMjHkfBxXJo+LnqsUtz8t6Sf2uFxmDGZpBYk/b5omHJsFS5CwjHTQC0fOSBUM8sopjdEE2pdlNWBhHuqhCAyzgaRyftBmDlQPC6uVjyrB3meV120wWSQf6G73wgOG4fnB/XWyTjkCtpEW2gXBegItdAZaqMOogjQI3pCz96L9+a9ex/frVPeeGYD/ZL3+QWn+63G</latexit>

M

M

<latexit sha1_base64="Sp2xHlcK0/Wb02cyN7C8hmmuaII=">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</latexit>

<latexit sha1_base64="Sp2xHlcK0/Wb02cyN7C8hmmuaII=">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</latexit>

V
<latexit sha1_base64="L55ZPw5h5IyOwL1iKpkLgltk6EQ=">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</latexit>

Figure 25. Illustration of a gravitational machine (Dyson
1963) for accelerating spacecraft using binary star orbital
energy. Diagram based on Mallove and Matloff (1989,
p. 141).

7.7. Newtonian gravitation for propulsion
A universal strategy to gain energy and momentum
is to harness gravitational energy by doing gravity
assists. In this line of thinking, Dyson (1963) proposed
the concept of a gravitational machine which offers a
mechanism for extreme acceleration. As illustrated in
Figure 25, a spacecraft approaches a tight binary of
equal masses M that orbit each other with speed V
about the barycenter. The craft dives past one star
on a near-parabolic swing-by so that, in the star’s
rest frame, its velocity reverses direction (≈ 180◦
turn). Transforming back to the barycentric frame, that
reversal adds roughly 2V along the star’s instantaneous
motion, so the outbound speed becomes v + 2V in the
ideal case. The extra kinetic energy comes from the
binary’s orbital energy, exactly like a planetary gravity
assist but with far faster “primaries.” With careful
phasing and safe closest approach, the craft can gain of
order thousands of km s−1 ; repeated passes could add
more, limited by geometry, tides, and the finite energy
of the binary.
Let us try to translate this possibility into an
observable technosignature. If many or very massive
spacecraft would use binaries as a gravitational machine,
the inspiral rate would be faster than the effect of
gravitational wave radiation alone. If our timing is lucky
enough, we might even observe propulsion signatures.
Following this lead, binary neutron stars, and by
extension binary compact objects, should be part of
technosignature target lists.

54
As with interstellar communication, our imagination
may be failing, and other more exotic propulsion
solutions might be used by ETI. Let us review some of
them. Kipping (2018) proposed the halo drive concept,
using a moving black hole as a gravitational mirror.
The idea is to shoot light towards the photosphere of
the black hole, and collecting the photons coming back
to the spacecraft with more energy, blueshifted. Such
a burst of light from an isolated moving black hole
would have its light rapidly shifting in wavelengths,
and would be a candidate signature. Kipping proposes
other observable technosignatures for binary black holes,
a slightly eccentric orbit at the extraction point at
periapsis, or changes in the inspiral rates in binary black
holes leading to higher merger rates, which might be
observable as a gravitational wave signal.

7.8. Spacetime manipulation for propulsion
Spacetime Bubble Propulsion Systems

A spacetime warp bubble is a theoretical construct
defined as a region of spacetime that remains “flat” and
contains a spacecraft, while the surrounding spacetime is
dynamically warped to enable apparent faster-than-light
travel relative to an external observer (see Figure 26).
This concept formulated by Alcubierre (1994) is a valid
solution to Einstein’s field equations within general
relativity, although it requires the presence of negative
energy density matter (i.e. “exotic matter”). The
Alcubierre metric works by dynamically altering the
geometry of spacetime. In front of the warp bubble,
spacetime is compressed, which brings the destination
closer. Behind the bubble, spacetime is expanded,
pushing the origin farther away. Since the spacecraft
within the flat-spacetime bubble is not moving relative
to its local frame, it does not locally exceed the
speed of light. Because the interior of the spacetime
bubble remains in an inertial reference frame with flat
spacetime, an occupant would experience no proper
acceleration and no relativistic time dilation, meaning
their clock would tick at the same rate as a stationary
observer’s clock.
The violation of Weak/Strong Energy Condition
(WEC/SEC) is a major challenge to the creation of warp
bubbles. The Alcubierre metric requires a stress-energy
tensor with negative energy density in the walls of
the bubble, violating the WEC. While quantum effects
like the Casimir effect (Casimir 1948; Bordag et al.
2001) produce localized negative energy density, the
vast quantities required for macroscopic warp bubbles
are well beyond the technological capability of human
civilization. This may not be the case for highly
advanced civilizations. More recently, metric solutions
for spacetime warp bubbles that require only positive
energy sources have been discovered (Lentz 2021;
Bobrick and Martire 2021; Fuchs et al. 2024).

Figure 26. The York-time representation of an Alcubierre
spacetime bubble, showing a localized region of warped space
with contracted space ahead and expanded space behind.

Another hypothetical challenge with warp drives
is that particles with an initial positive velocity
in the spacetime bubble’s path are swept up and
accelerated. During the collapse of the bubble, these
particles produce a concentrated beam of extremely
high energy, effectively irradiating any destination and
its inhabitants (McMonigal et al. 2012).
Though
unfortunate, such high energy events could provide a
discernible technosignature.
A bi-modal signal (Lentz and Felton 2024) is a
unique technosignature predicted to occur only when
the spacetime bubble’s speed is greater than the speed
of the emissions it is broadcasting. This mechanism is
a purely craft motion effect, since the craft is moving
super-luminally, essentially outrunning the signals it
produced earlier in its path. Thus, a distant observatory
would record emissions that occurred at two different
times simultaneously. One signal would move in the
apparent direction of the craft’s motion, showing the
emissions occurring in the correct, forward order in
time. The second highly unusual signal would move
in the opposite apparent direction, presenting the
craft’s emissions in a reversed temporal order. This
technosignature is considered a key observable (Lentz
and Felton 2024) because there is no known natural
phenomenon that could produce such a signal.
The collapse of a warp bubble is predicted to
also release a very distinct gravitational wave
signature—short,
high-frequency
bursts
unlike
the slowly in-spiraling “chirps” of merging black
holes or neutron stars (Clough et al. 2024).
A
non-electromagnetic technosignature from a warp
bubble collapse would be an intense gravitational
wave burst signal with a characteristic frequency
proportional to the bubble’s size (e.g., ∼300 kHz for a
1 km size bubble). Unfortunately, such gravitational
wave signals are outside the range of current detectors,

55
but potentially measurable by future gravitational wave
detectors.
Traversable Wormholes

Traversable wormholes, in theory, would allow
movement between different regions of spacetime
within the universe, or from one universe to another.
Wormholes are metric solutions of classical general
relativity, having been discovered soon after the theory
was proposed (Einstein and Rosen 1935).
These
original solutions were later found to pinch off before
anything could pass through them (Fuller and Wheeler
1962). The first traversable solutions were found soon
after(Bronnikov 1973; Ellis 1973). These and those to
follow faced the problem of requiring the presence of
negative energy density or “exotic matter,” violating
the WEP. Much later, solutions were found that do
not violate the WEC, but still require us to push our
imaginations to the extremes of theoretical physics.
Woodward (2011), for example requires the bare mass
of the electron to be negative, while Klinkhamer (2023)
requires defects in the fabric of spacetime. As strange
sounding as some of these ideas are, they do not violate
the known laws of physics, so could, if correct, be
harnessed by a suitably advanced civilization.
In contrast to black holes or non-traversable
wormholes, a traversable wormhole does not have
an event horizon. Light passes through the throat,
permitting observations of cosmic sources on the other
side. The central region may thus show a distorted
image of objects/sources on the other side. The lensing
pattern of a traversable wormhole could depend on the
observation angle relative to its throat. If observed
from an angle, the multiple rings might appear offset
or elliptical. This asymmetry would be a distinguishing
signature of a traversable wormhole, as black hole
lensing patterns tend to be more radially symmetric.
Ellis-Bronnikov Solution —The Ellis-Bronnikov metric is
the earliest and simplest traversable wormhole solution
(Ellis 1973; Bronnikov 1973). It is an exact solution to
the Einstein field equations of a phantom scalar field:
(
)
ds2 = −c2 dt2 + dr2 + r2 + ℓ2 dΩ2
(6)

where, here and in what follows, dΩ2 = dθ2 + sin2 θdϕ2
is the line element on the sphere. The radial coordinate,
r ∈ R, measures the proper radial distance. Two
spacetimes, one with r > 0 and the other r < 0, are
glued together, at r = 0, by a 2-sphere wormhole throat
of radius ℓ.
The total energy of the matter needed to curve
spacetime in such a way is
)
(
π c4 ℓ
ℓ
43
E=−
= −9.51 × 10 J
.
(7)
4 G
1m
The negative sign means that the matter is exotic —
nothing like the atoms we are used to. Even a Planckian

Figure 27. An embedding diagram of the t = 0, θ = π/2
spatial slice of the Ellis wormhole.

Ellis wormhole (ℓ ∼ 10−35 m) requires a Gigajoule of
negative energy.
Morris–Thorne
Solution —Morris
and
Thorne
popularized the idea of traversable wormholes with this
example (Morris et al. 1988). Their metric represents a
static, spherically symmetric wormhole:

ds2 = −e2Φ(r) c2 dt2 +

dr2
+ r2 dΩ2
1 − b(r)/r

(8)

Φ(r) is the redshift function and b(r) the shape function.
The Ellis-Bronnikov wormhole is a special case of this
solution, with vanishing redshift, and shape b(r) = ℓ2 /r.
With the redshift and shape functions, one could now
specify how the exotic matter was distributed around
the wormhole.
Visser Solution (Thin-Shell Construction) —Visser
attempted to minimize the volume of exotic matter
needed to make a wormhole (Visser 1989, 1996).
His “cut-and-paste” construction method describes
wormholes with polytope (many flat faces glued
together), instead of spherical mouths. This results in a
multiply-connected spacetime that localizes the exotic
matter to the edges between the faces.
Teo Metric (Rotating Traversable Wormhole) —Edward
Teo generalized the Morris-Thorne construction to
include the effects of rotation (Teo 1998):

[
]
dr2
2
+r2 K 2 dθ2 + sin2 θ (dϕ − ω dt)
1 − b/r
(9)
Here ω(r, θ) is the frame-dragging function, describing
how spacetime is dragged by the rotating wormhole,
ds2 = −N 2 dt2 +

56
N (r, θ) is the lapse function (a generalization of the
redshift function in the Arnowitt-Deser-Misner (ADM)
formalism). b(r, θ) is again the shape function but
now with angular dependence, and K(r, θ) describes the
geometric distortion of the 2-surfaces caused by rotation.
One problem with rotating wormholes is the potential
to create closed timelike curves (CTCs), which would
allow for time travel (Morris et al. 1988).
Klinkhamer Metric (Spacetime Defect Without NEC/WEC
Violation) —The paper by Klinkhamer (2023) replaces

the usual exotic matter support with a degenerate
metric (or “spacetime defect”).
Klinkhamer uses
a ”cut-and-paste” procedure similar to Vissers, but
results in a simply connected topology where the
3-space orientations are opposite. This metric solution
represents a spherically symmetric line element in which
the determinant vanishes on a 3-surface at the throat
ξ = 0 (where ξ parameterizes motion through the
wormhole):
ds2 = −e−2Φ(r) dt2 +

(
)
dr2
+ξ 2 dθ2 + sin2 θ dϕ2 (10)
λ2
1 + r2

Here λ is a length scale associated with the defect,
and ξ(r) is the ADM radius. The Einstein equations
give stress-energy components with non-negative energy
density and, crucially, the NEC/WEC are satisfied.
The “exotic” behavior is supplied by the metric
degeneracy itself rather than by exotic matter—once λ
is large enough, no energy-condition violation remains,
supporting the claim that traversability without exotic
matter is possible.
7.9. Fundamental forces for interstellar travel
To sum up this section, it makes sense to harness the
four fundamental forces of physics for the diﬀicult task
of interstellar travel. We saw that nuclear forces are a
prime choice for high-density fuel, electromagnetism can
be used as directed energy, while Newtonian gravitation
allows the well-known gravitational assist maneuvers,
and Einsteinian gravitation allows in principle to alter
the fabric of spacetime.
A realistic propulsion solution would employ multiple
strategies using all available forces. For example, a
spacecraft could be launched with rockets, perform a
gravitational assist around its home star, deploy sails
and get directed energy (or matter) from the home
system. While cruising far away from the home system,
it could use a ramjet to scoop matter from the ISM,
perform gravitational assists on massive objects along
the way, and while approaching the final destination use
onboard fuel for critical maneuvers.

57
8. GALACTIC AND BEYOND

8.1. Galactic
In our galaxy, the Galactic Habitable Zone (GHZ)
depicted in Fig 28 is the region within the galaxy where
conditions are thought to be most favorable for the
emergence and long-term sustainability of complex life
(Lineweaver et al. 2004).
It is based on the metallicity gradient of the
galaxy, its temporal evolution, the location of
potentially
hazardous
astrophysical
phenomena
including supernovae explosions and gamma ray bursts,
as well as relative motions and locations of stars in
the spiral density waves (also known as the corotation
circle).
Even though it is biased towards parts of the galaxy
conducive to life-as-we-know-it, the GHZ provides an
excellent starting point in a search for technosignatures
from Kardashev Type II civilizations. Such civilizations
might have built either a massive structure around a
single star or multiple smaller structures around many
stars.
In the case of the latter, communication within the
galaxy-spanning civilization is subject to delays and
galactic time synchronization issues due to the finite
speed of light.
Broadcast hubs might continually
transmit important information, making it available to
even the most distant colonies. One galactic center radio
transient (GCRT J1745−3009) has been suspected as a
potential candidate (Benford et al. 2010).
With an estimated 106 − 108 million pulsars in
the Milky Way (Rozwadowska et al. 2021), we have
already mentioned that these stellar remnants could
be used for both navigation and timing (Vidal 2017).
Edmondson and Stevens (2003) and Edmondson (2010)
envisioned a SETI-strategy based on pulsars seeking
alignments between Earth, a pulsar and a habitable
star. If pulsars would be artificially modulated, they
might also form a galaxy spanning information network
(Chennamangalam et al. 2015; Vidal 2019; Haliki 2019;
Davis 2024).
Given the vast distances between planets and the
resource demands of an interstellar civilization, planets
suitable for colonization, resource extraction, and even
terraforming may be distributed very differently than
those in the GHZ. In such scenarios, the distribution
of planets with expected technosignatures would differ
greatly from those harboring biosignatures. Recent
models of galactic settlement (Carroll-Nellenback et al.
2019; Wright et al. 2021) distinguish between habitable
and settleable worlds, and assess the transition of a
Type I civilization to a Type II. Settlement driven
by minimal distances and maximal energy extraction
results in settlement wavefronts strongly biased towards
the galactic center. Since this is where less habitable
planetary systems are to be found, technosignatures for

Type II civilizations decouple from those of Type I or
early Type II.
Getting to a galactic core increases the energy
available to a Type II civilization not just due to the
higher density of stars there; supermassive black holes
(SMBHs) residing in the cores of galaxies are prime
candidates for energy exploitation. A SMBH of the mass
of about a million suns (M = 4 × 106 M⊙ ), and low
Eddington ratio (10−3 ), should form an accretion disk
with a luminosity of 100 million suns (L = 108 L⊙ ), and
a total corona and jet luminosity an order of magnitude
higher (Hsiao et al. 2021). Inoue and Yokoo (2011)
showed that a Dyson swarm around such a SMBH
provides the energy equivalent of smaller swarms around
∼ 10% of a galaxy’s stars. It means that rather
than spreading out across a galaxy, to satisfy their
energy needs, some Type II civilizations may instead
concentrate at the cores of galaxies. The energy harvest
there is enough to transition a low Type II into a
high Type II, and possibly even a Type III civilization
(Hsiao et al. 2021). A civilization near a SMBH could
also make the most of extreme gravitational lensing for
galactic and intergalactic observation or communication
(Maccone 2012).
Another speculative source of energy utilization by
a Type III civilization is the concept of a “Black
Hole Bomb” (Cardoso et al. 2004). It is a theoretical
device that exploits a phenomenon called superradiance
to extract the rotational energy of a spinning black
hole. Thus extracting the rotational energy stored in a
supermassive black hole at the center of a galaxy would
constitute a power plant more powerful than output of
billions of stars combined.
8.2. Extragalactic
Galaxies outside of the Milky Way might also
harbor extraterrestrial civilizations. The Breakthrough
Listen program has put constraints on extragalactic
transmitters, using existing observations (Garrett and
Siemion 2022; Tremblay and Tingay 2024; Uno et al.
2023). Given the tremendous distances involved, the
magnitude of energy usage that could feasibly be
observed by astronomers here on Earth would have
to be immense, implying that such technosignatures
would have to be produced by Type III civilizations
or beyond. Kardashev (1964) speculated that quasars
might be artificial sources.
This was before the
current understanding (which emerged in the 1970s)
that quasars are active SMBH. Simultaneously, the
farther out we look, the farther back in time we observe
galaxies, implying that any technosignatures must come
from civilizations that arose and advanced very early in
the history of the universe.
What are possible observables of galaxy spanning
civilizations?
Astronomers studying galaxies have
discovered several empirical scaling relations between
galaxy sizes (R), luminosity (L), and dispersion of

58

Figure 28. The GHZ (Green) as a function of radial distance from the galactic center (GC) and time before the present for
the Milky Way Galaxy. The left model is for complex life, for which it assumes life requires 4 ± 1 Gyr to form, while the right
model considers all life. The green curve on the right of the left figure is the age distribution of complex life, and in the right
figure the age distribution of all life. The GHZ begins as a thin annulus some 8kpc from the GC around 8Gyr, and widens.
Its inner radius eventually reaches a minimal distance to the GC, and, due to the higher metallicity rates in the core, halts and
shrinks. Meanwhile, the outer radius continues to expand as the Galaxy ages. Figures from (Lineweaver et al. 2004).

stellar velocities (σ), that are well-motivated by
simple gravitational physics.
For spiral galaxies
the Tully-Fisher relation and for ellipticals the
Faber-Jackson and Fundamental Plane show that when
you plot the logarithms of these variables against one
another for a great many galaxies, you find that they are
highly correlated (Figure 29). A galaxy hosting a Type
III+ civilization might be observed as a large deviation
from one of these scaling relations, if the luminosity of
the galaxy is altered by megastructures. Annis (1999)
performed an observational search of dimming effects
due to Dyson swarms on dim galaxies.
We were referring to Dyson spheres in the section
5 “Stellar engineering”, but actually some searches for
them were done not only in our Milky Way but also
looking for an infrared excess at the scale of galaxies
(Wright et al. 2014b,a; Griﬀith et al. 2015). Zackrisson
et al. (2015) selected optically underluminous galaxies
for followup infrared observations that would violate the
Tully-Fisher correlation.
If megastructures are built around black holes instead
of stars, Hsiao et al. (2021) argued that they could still
be detectable through their waste heat. Lacki (2016)
went a step further arguing that if a whole galaxy could
be enclosed in a black box, it could still be observable in
the Planck catalog. None of these approaches resulted
in any promising candidates.
Galaxy wide dimming negative results thus far point
towards Type III civilizations typically concentrating
instead of spreading out. Technosignatures could still
be observed if these civilizations created very powerful
point sources. Manipulating Planck length volumes

of spacetime requires a particle accelerator whose size
can range from several AU to hundreds of AU. Such
accelerators could harness 100 solar masses worth of
energy; the collisions in them produce neutrinos with
energies measured in YeV (1024 eV!). Thus, the scientific
endeavors of Type-III civilizations could provide point
sources with distinct signatures (Lacki 2015). The
energy infrastructure could play a similar role. Energy
harvested from a SMBH would have to be distributed
if the Type III civilization wants to expand. Power
stations at the SMBH producing highly collimated
beams pointing at receiving stations in distant star
systems were proposed by Inoue and Yokoo (2011) as
a possible technosignature coming from this kind of
activity.
Voros (2013) argued that the very peculiar
morphology of Hoag’s object might be the result of
galactic engineering. The signature remains ambiguous
as galactic collision simulations can also reproduce
such a ring (e.g. Brosch 1985), which means that more
stringent tests need to be developed.
8.3. Universal
Moving up in scale to swathes of spacetime
encompassing many galaxies over cosmological
timescales, could civilizations exist that are no
longer bound to their home galaxies? A Type-III
civilization which has expanded to its local group would
only be a fraction of the way to a Type-IV. Typical
distances between galaxies are an order of magnitude
larger than their sizes, so the communication diﬀiculties
faced are significantly greater than those of a merely

59

Figure 29. Galaxies display astrophysical correlations: the Tully-Fisher for spiral galaxies (left) and the Faber-Jackson for
elliptical galaxies (right).

galactic Type-III civilization. Ambitious technological
life, life that seeks to maximize resource availability,
has been proposed as motivation for the existence of
multi-galactic civilizations (Olson 2017). All it takes
is for a single civilization across hundreds of galaxies
to be ambitious for the onset of aggressive expansion
(Olson 2015, 2016, 2018). As we will see, this behavior
can keep pushing a civilization up the Kardashev scale.
An ambitious civilization utilizes free energy in their
domain at a pace comparable to the rate of expansion.
As they spread out they use all available resources in
the galaxies they encounter and then continue on their
way. A mathematical treatment models the emergence
of civilizations as rare point processes in spacetime,
represented by the bullseyes in Figure 30.
Those which achieve ambitious expansion (stars)
begin to spread out from their home galaxy at a speed
v = ∆r/∆t. This expansion produces a wavefront
propagating outward. This wavefront speed depends
on both the technological limits of the civilization’s
spacecraft, as well as the timescales associated with
energy harvesting, ∆t, though its geometry can
be approximated as spherical.
Energy harvesting
also determines the thickness of the wavefronts, ∆r,
describing the spatial extent of colonized galaxies.
Taking into account factors such as the appearance of
human civilization relative to others on cosmological
timescales, gamma ray burst suppression of galactic
habitability, and the improbability of such life, these
models place limits on what we, here on Earth, might
expect to see as the extent of such a civilization in our
night sky. Rather modest assumptions imply that one
such civilization would cover a bubble taking up between
∼ 0.1% − 1% of the sky. This may seem small until one
realizes that the Moon takes up ∼ 0.0008% of the sky;
even on the smaller end of the estimate, an ambitious
civilization would cover a circle with a diameter ∼ 10

Figure 30. A spacetime diagram of the emergence of
ambitious (A1 , A2 ) and non-ambitious civilizations (C1 , C2 ,
C3 ). The horizontal direction represents space, and the
vertical time; light cones are represented in yellow.

times that of the Moon in the sky! The typical distance
to such bubbles is billion light years, making these
intergalactic civilizations both incredibly large, close to
Type-IV, and incredibly far away from us (Olson 2015).
If ambitious technological life exists then the
universe is peppered with civilizations nearing Type-IV.
Detecting them, however, requires leaping farther into
the unknown, and hypothesizing about technology
at the limits of our knowledge of physics.
For
example, if such a civilization has an eﬀicient way of
converting matter into energy, then one would expect
the average matter density within its domain to be
lower. Accordingly the radiation density would be

60
higher. Since the expansion of the universe is sensitive
to the ratio of matter to radiation, such activity would
produce a backreaction on the galactic filaments of the
cosmic web (Olson 2015). Significant local deviations
in the statistical distribution of voids could herald the
presence of an ambitious civilization.
8.4. The Simulation Hypothesis
The simulation hypothesis (Bostrom 2003a) posits
that our universe is an artificial simulation, most likely
operated by an advanced civilization, possibly even our
future selves (Wolpert 2024). Bostrom concluded from
reasonable assumptions that the number of simulated
conscious beings would vastly outnumber the original
biological population. Without the ability to distinguish
between the simulated and biological, it is far more likely
that you, a conscious being, are in fact simulated.
Such a possibility is congruent with digital and
computational philosophy and physics, that attempt
to model and understand the world according to the
principles of information and computation theories
(Floridi 2003; Lloyd 2000, 2005). In our context of
the search for technosignatures, it means searching for
empirical indicators or anomalies within the universe
that could reveal its simulated nature by an intelligent
creature (Campbell et al. 2017).
In our context, the technosignature search is geared
towards empirical phenomena that serve as fingerprints
of an underlying computational substrate.
These
signatures would not be intentional communications but
rather inherent artifacts of the universe’s code, such as:
Structural limitations imposed by a finite computational
grid; “glitches” or rounding errors in the execution
of physical laws; or resource-saving optimizations that
manifest as observable quantum phenomena.
Discrete Spacetime and the GZK Cutoff

A computer simulation would likely operate on a
discrete grid rather than a continuous spacetime,
implying a minimum possible length or “resolution” to
the universe. Beane et al. (2014) argue that a spacetime
lattice would violate perfect rotational symmetry. This
anisotropy would be detectable in the behavior of
ultra-high-energy cosmic rays (UHECRs). In standard
physics, there is a theoretical energy limit for cosmic
ray protons known as the Greisen–Zatsepin–Kuzmin
(GZK) cutoff (around 5 × 1019 eV). Protons above
this energy should interact with cosmic microwave
background (CMB) photons and lose energy. Beane
et al. (2014) predict that on a discrete lattice, this energy
cutoff would become direction-dependent, varying based
on the cosmic ray’s path relative to the lattice axes.
The detectable technosignature would be a statistically
significant anisotropy in the GZK cutoff energy across
the sky, providing a lower-limit on the size of the lattice
that we would be simulated on.

Physical Law “Glitches,” Anomalies, and Varying
Constants

A simulation running on finite computational
resources might exhibit artifacts analogous to rounding
errors or processing shortcuts. These could manifest as
slight deviations from what we consider fundamental
laws. Campbell et al. (2017) suggest searching for
such inconsistencies. This includes unexplained drift in
fundamental constants like the fine-structure constant
(α) or momentary, localized violations of conservation
laws; such phenomena could constitute candidate
technosignatures worth examining. Whitworth (2008)
further speculates that the inherent ”weirdness” of
quantum mechanics (like non-locality and wavefunction
collapse) might itself be an artifact of a computational
substrate.
Quantum Indeterminacy as Computational Eﬀiciency

Quantum mechanics posits that a particle’s state
is indeterminate until measured.
Hamieh (2021)
has drawn an analogy to video games in computing,
where a system only renders details when they are
needed or observed. The act of observation, which
collapses the wavefunction, might be a sign that the
universe is conserving computational resources by not
calculating definite states for unobserved systems. A
potential technosignature avenue of research would be
the observer effect in quantum mechanics interpreted as
a resource-saving mechanism.
Computational Complexity Limits

Certain physical systems are so complex that
simulating them with classical computers is believed
to be intractable.
Ringel and Kovrizhin (2017)
showed that simulating a specific quantum Hall
effect phenomenon would be exponentially diﬀicult.
The fact that our universe appears to handle such
complexity could be seen as evidence against a
classical simulation.
Conversely, if we discover
that nature systematically avoids states of intractable
computational complexity, it might imply that the
universe operates under computational constraints.
Therefore the potential technosignature would be
evidence that the universe avoids physical states that
are computationally prohibitive to simulate.
The
existence of hypercomputational possibilities such as
Malament-Hogarth spacetimes (Pitowsky 1990; Hogarth
1992), e.g.
a Kerr black hole could imply that
the computational power of our universe is much
higher than what we can imagine. This could mean
either that advanced civilizations have access to even
higher computational capabilities, or that the simulation
hypothesis is disfavored.
Cosmological Fine-Tuning and Embedded Messages

The simulation hypothesis offers a potential
explanation for the “fine-tuning problem”, i.e. why the

61
fundamental constants of our universe appear precisely
calibrated to allow for complex structures and life
(Barrow 2007).
A related idea is that the simulators might have
embedded an intentional message. This “Easter egg”
could be hidden in the numerical values of physical or
mathematical constants. Some have speculated that a
message might be in patterns of the CMB (Hsu and
Zee 2006), which was later rebutted by Hippke (2020).
The technosignature here would be the discovery of
a recognizably intelligent and non-natural pattern or
message encoded in fundamental physics.
Leaving the idea of simulation aside, some authors
have proposed that intelligent life in another universe
might have fine-tuned our universe to some degree.
This is not a wild speculation, but an effort to tackle
the fine-tuning problem in an evolutionary framework,
starting with Lee Smolin’s (1992) cosmological natural
selection theory.
Indeed, questions of apparent
design in biology have been successfully explained with
evolutionary theory, and Smolin hypothesized that
an evolutionary process may have given rise to the
peculiar, complexity-creating values of the constants of
our universe. Cosmologists Louis Crane (1994/2010)
and Edward Harrison (1995) have proposed that the
selection of universes might not be just “natural” but
also “artificial” involving intelligent life in the process.
Gardner (2004) argued that the fine-tuned physical
constants themselves are the life signature! In other
words, that the bio/techno signature lies within our
reach, in cosmological and fundamental physics models.
Vidal (2014) developed a book-length argument of this
scenario from a big picture perspective, and evolutionary
thinkers have also argued for the plausibility and
cogency of this view (Stewart 2010; Smart 2009; Gardner
2003; Flores Martinez 2014; Price 2019; Azarian 2022).

62

Figure 31. Synergies between bio- and techno- signatures
overlap for targets at the Earth, solar system and exoplanet
scales (in red). Technosignatures searches extend beyond
these scales where they have different synergies with
astronomy, astrophysics or engineering (in black).
9. DISCUSSION

9.1. Biosignatures and technosignatures
The
frontier
between
biosignatures
and
technosignatures may be fuzzy.
If we detect a
technosignature on an exoplanet, it might also have
biosignatures, much like present Earth displays both.
Let us give a few examples.
Raup (1992) argued that since some animals can
not only detect radio signals, but also generate
electrical pulses, we could envision an exoplanet whose
evolution develops animals using radio communication
that would leak into space and thus be detectable. The
technosignature is in fact a biosignature.
As another example, imagine an ETI analyzing an
Earth satellite image of an agricultural field. It would
notice a biosignature of the vegetation, marked by the
red edge feature in its reflectance spectrum, but also
a technosignature through its geometrical design, as a
pattern with the purpose of delineating a boundary.
Now imagine an exoplanet with genetically modified
organisms used in the upper atmosphere to regulate
its climate. The organisms would have a spectral
biosignature, and since they are being used as a
technological deployment to control the planet’s climate,
they could also be classified as a technosignature. In
a similar vein, advanced ET civilizations could harness
bioluminescent organisms to create light, motivated
by the desire for low-energy solutions for nighttime
illumination. The observation would be a combination
of bioluminescent biosignatures and structured lighting
patterns associated with technosignatures.
A key difference between biosignatures and
technosignatures is the sheer number of possible
targets. It is very low for biosignatures, with a handful
in the solar system and a few thousand exoplanets
known; while it is very high for technosignatures, with
billions of potential targets and a huge search space.

The number of targets is so high that the main issue
for technosignatures is to find strategies to constrain
observations and select targets.
An argument regarding the duration of signatures
is that it is long for biosignatures (after all, Earth
has had a biosignature for 4 billion years) and
unknown for technosignatures. Even if the existence
of technosignatures is not recent, or short, given the
exponential dynamics of technological progress, the
observational effects of civilizations expanding in the
galaxy or affecting larger scales could still be ubiquitous.
We also do not know how typical the development of
life and technology on Earth is. To the extreme, one
could speculate that Earth was exceptionally slow to
develop life and technology, in which case the 4 billion
year observational window of biospheres would not be
typical nor guaranteed.
We can expect biological life to exist in many places in
the universe more so than technological life, due to the
many more steps required to reach technology. However,
the chances of us finding technological life could be much
higher than biological life, due to technosignatures being
more distinct from background noise than biosignatures
(Des Marais et al. 2008; Wright et al. 2022; Smith and
Mathis 2023) and the fact that technological life may
have intentions to find other technological life, while
biological life would not.
Taking the Drake equation too seriously, one may also
naively conclude that the more we go towards the right
of the equation, the more constrained the outcome will
be, so the less likely and the less targets there will be.
This is wrong even for other factors. For example, we
now know that there are many more planets than there
are stars in our galaxy. Planets form from stars and
outnumber them. In the same way, technology forms
from biological life, and may outnumber it.
Technological fossils—traces of a previous civilization
on Earth (see Section 2)—or technological trash, such
as inactive, broken probes in our solar system, broken
Dyson spheres (Loeb 2023), and as Holmes (1991) noted
more generally, rubbish, debris, defunct equipment, and
defunct spacecraft are also potential technosignatures.
For attempts to quantify this longevity factor of
technosignatures, see Lingam and Loeb (2019) and
Ćirković et al. (2019).
Putting all these considerations of number of
targets, duration, and detectability together, it remains
uncertain what the best chances are to find either
bio- or techno- signatures (see also Wright et al.
2022). One reason that testing technosignatures may be
perceived as more diﬀicult is that it requires studying
and extrapolating not just biological agency, but also
cognitive, intelligent, and technological agency. This is
a blind spot in traditional natural sciences that seeks
to study causal effects in a detached and objective way,
and thus neglects or avoids the complexities of modelling
agents (see Frank et al. 2024).

63
9.2. Anomaly detection and agnostic searches
Historically,
many
anomalous
astrophysical
phenomena were hypothesized to be due to activity
from ETI. For example, we mentioned that Shklovskii
and Sagan (1966) examined in detail whether Mars’
moon Phobos could have been an artificial satellite
based on observed anomalies in its orbit. Once higher
resolution revealed that Phobos is a rubble pile, its
anomalous low density and unusual orbit became less
mysterious.
Kardashev (1964) suspected that two recently
discovered strong radio sources might be artificial, but
were later identified as quasars. Pulsars were first
suspected to be ETIs; the discovery team, not wanting
to jump to such conclusions too hastily, did not release
the news until after developing a physical mechanism
(Penny 2013). Likely influenced by the Breakthrough
Starshot project, Lingam and Loeb (2017) speculated
that Fast Radio Bursts might be beams powering large
sail spacecraft.
We want to highlight that the diversity of possible
technosignatures we reviewed share a common thread:
searching for technosignatures agnostically is ultimately
searching for anomalies. The bottom line is that
anomalies cry out for explanation, so even when they
end up not being ETI, their resolution contributes
direct benefits for science. The topic of anomalies in
epistemology is central to the philosopher of science
Thomas Kuhn (1996), who wrote in his foundational
The Structure of Scientific Revolutions:
“If all members of a community responded
to each anomaly as a source of crisis or
embraced each new theory advanced by a
colleague, science would cease. If, on the
other hand, no one reacted to anomalies or to
brand-new theories in high-risk ways, there
would be few or no revolutions.”
This quote may translate into two attitudes regarding
the search for ET life. Amateur or pseudo-scientist
enthusiasts about UAPs may overreact to anomalies,
while the natural philosophers who refused to accept
heliocentrism underreacted to anomalies.
Another way to express this discrepancy is that two
attitudes are possible in the face of anomalies. First,
a too optimistic “alien-of-the-gaps” attitude, where,
much as with the god-of-the-gaps, if there is a new
phenomenon not understood, it is assumed that it
must be extraterrestrial life. This leads to many false
positives. The opposite attitude is one of extreme
skepticism, or a “nature-of-the-gaps” attitude, where
whatever anomaly is found, it is never ETI. This leads to
false negatives. Carl Sagan (1993) famously wrote that
“life is the hypothesis of last resort.” But on careful
examination, there is an infinite number of physical
mechanisms that could attempt to explain a given

phenomenon, which means that under this attitude,
we are never going to exhaust all the possibilities,
and thus never consider the life or ETI hypothesis.
In sum, a healthy solution is to be aware of and
to carefully navigate between these two symmetrically
biased attitudes, and to choose the hypotheses that best
explain the past through retrodictions, and that best
anticipate the future through predictions (Vidal 2014).
Modern astronomical surveys such as Gaia (Vallenari
et al. 2023) or LSST (Ivezić et al. 2019) give rise to
petabytes of data, containing high-dimensional datasets
with significant potential for extraterrestrial anomaly
detection. Analyzing the data of large SETI searches
can be done by crowdsourcing (Li and Margot 2024), or
if the data to process is too big for humans, machine
learning (ML) becomes a key tool.
The algorithms can be tested by injecting anomalies in
test datasets, and checking whether the SETI pipelines
can detect them.
Information theory has provided a panoply of tools
for agnostically analyzing data and offers prospects to
do so in a less biased way than was possible before.
The diversity of animal communication is of particular
relevance to study with information theory (Doyle et al.
2011). The problem of communicating information is
also always relative to a background, and Brooks et al.
(2025) took inspiration from fireflies to model how ETI
communication might proceed.
Still, we should keep in mind that we cannot simply
feed big data into an ML algorithm and hope to get
as output all possible anomalies. A great deal of
data preparation and processing is needed, along with
extensive training, and more or less implicit or explicit
underlying theories and assumptions. There is also the
question of relying on big data from terrestrial systems.
This approach may overfit to life-as-we-know-it, creating
a high-dimensional black box attuned to life on Earth
that might not be able to detect extraterrestrial life.
What we call an “anomaly” is always relative to a
chosen baseline, a threshold for anomalies, but also an
existing theory, a scientific paradigm, and additional
assumptions (see Figure 32).
Another approach is to use network theory to
characterize whether a network has properties that are
either universal (shared with biotic and abiotic systems),
or whether some network structures and dynamics are
uniquely present in bio- and techno- logical systems.
Such a dynamic, process-centered approach to searching
for life is a sound foundation for a general agnostic
search for life, even life-as-we-don’t-know-it, because it
assumes only general living functions such as dissipation,
autocatalysis, homeostasis, or learning (Wong et al.
2024; Bartlett and Wong 2020).
Techniques such as network reconstruction from noisy
data (Newman 2018) may be particularly useful for
remote characterizations. For example, characterizing
reaction network topologies in exoplanet atmospheres,

64

Figure 32.
Schema of an anomaly-driven search for
technosignatures. This method helps to identify SETI
candidates, but also to detect and study extreme natural
objects, between a defined upper-limit and an anomaly
threshold. As such, it naturally produces ancillary science,
even if no ETI is found. Figure from (Lazio et al. 2023).

in combination with other measurements, can help
to assess the degree of thermal disequilibrium of an
exoplanet (Fisher et al. 2022).
Below we discuss some promising machine learning,
information and complexity metrics that are especially
relevant for SETI. We saw that information theoretic
tools are a key foundation for technosignature research
(see section 6). The most important metric at the heart
of modern information theory is the entropy, as defined
by Shannon (1948):
H[X] = −

N
∑

pi log2 pi

(11)

i

Entropy represents the uncertainty when dealing with
a set of N possible outcomes; these outcomes are
quantified by the probability distribution p, where pi =
p(X = xi ) is the probability of the ith outcome, xi ,
occuring. The more uncertain an observer is in the
outcome, the higher the entropy. Shannon showed that
H[X] is equivalent to the number of yes/no questions
an observer would need to have answered in order to
become certain of an outcome. Maximum entropy is
associated with maximum randomness (at least, from
the perspective of the observer with the given prior
distribution p).
As can be seen from Equation 11, it is very
straightforward to calculate the entropy of a discrete
distribution, such as a discretized signal received from
the cosmos. But we cannot simply associate high or low
signal entropy with a high likelihood that that signal
encodes meaningful information from a technological
civilization. Shannon entropy alone is insuﬀicient to
assess whether a signal is artificial, because non-living
and non-technological sources can generate low-entropy

signals. A pulsar, for example, creates a periodic signal
with low entropy, whereas white noise creates a signal
with maximal entropy.
Single symbol entropy Equation 11 does not factor in
any kind of temporal correlations (if you scrambled the
sequence of symbols in your string, the single symbol
entropy would be unaffected). Therefore, more subtle
and sophisticated methods must be wielded (Gleiser and
Sowinski 2018). A common approach, used heavily in
linguistic analysis, is to compute block entropies, where
one uses the equation above but applied to finite-sized
blocks of symbols, as opposed to just single symbols.
One can then assess how the entropy varies as a function
of block size, and compare the scaling of these metrics
with known information-rich signals. Crucially, if the
block entropy decreases below that of the single symbol
entropy as a function of block size, then this implies
higher level structure in the strings of symbols, e.g., a
grammar (Doyle et al. 2002).
One step further into the realm of intra-signal
dependencies takes us to conditional entropies. First,
the joint distribution of seeing two symbols adjacent
to one another is pij = p(X = xi , Y = xj ), with
∑ the
single letter probability related to it by pi =
j pij .
Conditional entropy uses an analogous expression to
H[X], but invokes the conditional probability pi|j =
pij /pj , the probability of encountering symbol instance
i, given that j was just encountered:
H[X|Y ] = −

n
∑

pij log2 pi|j

(12)

i,j

Note that one can also explore conditional probability
distributions of blocks (words) of individual symbols,
e.g., the probability that a given block of 3 symbols
such as “ere”, follows a given block of 2 symbols
such as “th” (Shannon 1951). Conditional probabilities
and entropies introduce the idea of context-dependence,
also a fundamental component of formal linguistic
analysis, and the foundation for constructing so-called
Hidden Markov Models (HMMs). HMMs are abstract,
statistical generative models for any process that
produces strings of symbols from finite alphabets (e.g.,
the bits 0 and 1, or the Roman characters used in
the English language). They are generated through
an inference process that begins with observations of
whatever physical, biological or technological process
produced the data of interest in the first place.
One example class of HMMs is the ϵ-machine from
computational mechanics, discussed below (Crutchfield
2012).
Additional information theoretic metrics use the
concept of ‘how many yes/no questions must be
asked to ascertain a given signal’ applied to multiple
probability distributions. For example, the KLD is a
similarity metric for probability distributions, based on
the information entropy concept Kullback and Leibler

65
(1951). It measures the excess uncertainty when one
assumes the distribution is q when it is in fact p:
∑
pi
DKL (p∥q) =
pi log .
(13)
qi
i
Meaning, how many more YES-NO questions must
one ask, on average, when working under a wrong
assumption. This metric was developed in order to be
able to generalize the Shannon entropy to continuous
events.
Since the KLD between p and q is not the same as
the KLD between q and p, one can also employ the
symmetrized version known as the Jensen-Shannon (JS)
divergence,
JSD(p, q) =

1
p+q
p+q
(DKL (p∥
) + DKL (q∥
) (14)
2
2
2

The JS divergence has recently been used as the
basis of a putative life detection method, where
planetary atmospheric transmission spectra are treated
as probability distributions (Vannah et al. 2024, 2025).
Those exoplanet spectra carry crucial information
about the chemical composition of a given planet’s
atmosphere. Despite the intrinsically physical meaning
of transmission spectra, one can equally treat them as
probability distributions, rendering them amenable to
all the above techniques of information theory. In this
vein, Vannah et al. (2024) compared different planetary
spectra using the JS divergence. This permitted an
entropic comparison of a given spectrum with that
of Earth, hence yielding a measure of ‘Earthlikeness’
grounded in information theory.
Another promising entropy metric for biosignatures
and technosignatures is a measure of time series
complexity called permutation entropy (Bandt and
Pompe 2002).
It captures how unpredictable a
sequence of values is by analyzing the orderings of
neighboring points rather than their magnitudes: low
values indicate regular or deterministic behavior, high
values indicate randomness, and intermediate values
reflect structured but non-random dynamics typical
of complex systems. It was recently integrated into
a software package for time series analysis, including
astrophysical phenomena (Hyman et al. 2025). Given
its strengths as a complexity measure, the permutation
entropy is particularly promising for assessing putative
biosignatures and technosignatures: the expectation is
that life will produce signals in the middle ground
between perfectly ordered and purely random, which the
permutation entropy can capture.
Recent developments in information theory also
probe the concept of meaning or semantics, a feature
that Shannon (1948) admitted was absent from
his framework. This burgeoning field of Semantic
Information Theory (Kolchinsky and Wolpert 2018;
Sowinski et al. 2023) proposes new ways to search

for life in samples, such as might be returned from,
or analyzed at solar system bodies (Bartlett et al.
2025).
The basic concept involves interventional
causal experiments, where information that might be
relevant to the putative living system is systematically
scrambled, and the resulting effects then tracked. A
terrestrial example would be scrambling genes of an
organism and then evaluating the impact that such gene
loss has on its viability (i.e. its ability to survive).
However, extraterrestrial life might use different
molecules or systems to store information, therefore
scrambling other information stores or correlations
between the agent and its environment would likely
be necessary. The so-called causal leverage density
attempts to measure semantic information of any kind
(not just that related to the viability of an agent)
(Sowinski et al. 2025). Hence information that is
meaningful to the agent in any sense, e.g., influencing its
behavior, can in principle be measured by this technique.
Beyond information theory, there are several powerful
sub-disciplines at the intersection of information theory,
computer science and complexity science, which hold
great promise for discerning signs of life and technology.
While the majority of complexity metrics invoke some
form of entropy measure, there are other techniques
that go even further and try to automate the process
of generative model-building. Most such techniques
were formulated before machine learning became a
mainstream tool of science and could hence be regarded
as ‘ahead of their time’.
One such method, epsilon machine reconstruction,
takes as input a time series of measurements (e.g., a
radio signal), and uses it to ‘reconstruct’ an HMM model
(called an epsilon machine) capable of reproducing time
series that are statistically equivalent to the input
(Crutchfield 2012). Crutchfield highlights several broad
families of processes: 1) simple and deterministic, e.g.,
bit flipping 010101010101 . . ., 2) simple and random,
e.g., white noise, 3) complex and deterministic, e.g.,
the Lorenz attractor, 4) complex and stochastic, e.g.,
a planetary atmosphere. (see Fig. 1 in (Crutchfield
2012)).
Epsilon machines have been used as the basis for a new
approach to life detection, wherein planetary reflectance
light curve time series are assessed in terms of statistical
complexity and Shannon entropy (Bartlett et al. 2022).
It was found that synthetic versions of Earth with
reduced atmospheric and surface features clustered at
incrementally lower complexity and entropy values (see
also (Segal et al. 2024), and Earth was shown to have
a higher complexity than Jupiter (Bartlett et al. 2022),
as well as Mars. Given these foundational results, the
method has the potential to apply to a range of signals
from both biotic and technological sources, and even
establish a benchmark that can quantify distinctions
between physical, biological, cultural or technological
processes.

66
Arguably the ‘purest’ approach to signal analysis
involves the use of Turing machines (Turing 1937)
that represent the most general and universal of all
computational devices. Algorithmic Complexity Theory
(Zenil et al. 2023) builds on this foundation and uses
Kolmogorov Complexity (KC), essentially measuring
the size of the smallest Turing machine program that
can reproduce a given string of symbols of a data stream.
A purely random string is by definition incompressible,
and hence its KC is simply equal to its length. In
contrast, highly compressible signals, such as a sine
wave or the digits of π, have very small minimal Turing
machine programs and hence low KC. Although there
is no universal method to infer the smallest Turing
machine program for a given string of symbols (due to
the halting problem), there are various approximation
methods available (Zenil 2020). This method has been
applied in the context of decoding an extraterrestrial
intelligent signal (see section 6.1 and (Zenil et al. 2025)).
9.3. Instruments for detecting technosignatures
Our focus in this paper was on possibilities, but
many targets require more instrumentation and search
strategy development to be actually testable. There
are ongoing efforts in this direction, e.g. NASA’s
technosignature gap list (Timmaraju et al. 2022).
Without aiming to be comprehensive, we propose
in Appendix 12.1 a Science Traceability Matrix that
illustrates the main categories of technosignatures we
reviewed.
9.4. Evaluation & Prioritization
Reviewing all these possible technosignatures can
bring a sense of anxiety: which one should we prioritize,
and how? The pragmatic and economic answer is simply
that the research that gets funded gets prioritized.
More fundamentally, as a result of a 2018 NASA
Technosignature Workshop at the Lunar and Planetary
Institute (LPI), nine axes of merit emerged for
technosignature searches (see Sheikh 2020). Of course,
assessments of search strategies along these axes is itself
a matter of debate, in the sense that different researchers
would rate a given strategy differently on the different
axes. They may also apply a different subjective
weight to the axes themselves. One way to aggregate
expert opinions and identify the most salient points
of disagreements or agreements is to use the axes in
combination with the Delphi method (Profitiliotis et al.
2022). Another way to aggregate expert opinions is to
use fuzzy adaptations of Multi-Criteria Decision-Making
(Sánchez-Lozano et al. 2024).
The axes of merit do not explicitly cover the number
of targets, but another scale, the ichnoscale, does
This scale attempts to quantify
(see Figure 34).
a technosignature footprint relative to current Earth
technology (see Socas-Navarro et al. 2021).

Figure 33. Axes of merit for technosignature searches,
from (Sheikh 2020). Note that axes 1–4 (in orange) cover
the more practical aspects of any technosignature searches
(Sheikh 2020).

We note that other assessment scales have been
proposed to rank potential biosignatures (Neveu
et al. 2018; Green 2021; Meadows et al. 2022).
However, further work is needed to create an
encompassing framework for assessing and comparing
both biosignatures and technosignatures.
9.5. Epistemological issues
Defining technology

Like the effort to define “life,” reflection on the nature
of technology goes back to antiquity. It is a prominent
element not only in ancient Greek mythology, notably
in the Prometheus myth (Hesiod 2017; Aeschylus 1961),
but there are also ancient roots of technological thought
in Asia (Hui 2022), as well as in the foundations of
western philosophy in Plato’s Timaeus, Protagoras, and
Phaedrus.
Aristotle introduced the foundational opposition
between physis (nature) and techne, which is the
category of everything artificial, everything whose

67
N=1 and the Wow signal

Figure 34.
Ichnoscale (relative footprint of a given
technosignature in units of current Earth technology) vs.
number of targets for several possible technosignatures.
Filled (empty) circles represent continuous (discontinuous)
observables. Figure from Socas-Navarro et al. (2021).

production is outside it: all the objects that only
exist thanks to human intervention within nature.
We find in his distinction between physis and techne
a criterion that persists in the contemporary search
for technosignatures. The presence of technology is
betrayed by motions, arrangements, or distributions of
matter and energy that suggest the intervention of a
factor external to the pertinent physical regime. In
SETI, we call that factor “intelligence.”
Our implicit or explicit assumptions about human
consciousness and its relation to technology may
place unnecessary limits on our reasoning about
technology, and therefore technosignatures. Setting
those assumptions aside, as in the agnostic search
for anomalies, may allow us to imagine more
technosignatures, and perhaps increase our chances of
detection.
If technology becomes part of more general
informational capabilities of life, the possibilities
for technodiversity at the cosmic scale begin to open
up. Indeed, life on Earth might itself be on the verge
of a technodiversity explosion (Vidal 2015). This
review attempts to capture a glimpse of what such a
technodiversity might be in the universe.
In fine, we can easily transpose the lessons from
efforts to define “life” (Cleland 2019) to efforts to
define “technology,” and conclude that what matters
is not to focus on finding a short, ideal definition
of technology and technosignatures, but rather to
develop theories of technology that make predictions
about observable technosignatures. This has been our
approach throughout this review.

The N = 1 problem in astrobiology refers to the fact
that we have only one data point, life and technology
from Earth, from which we attempt to extrapolate other
lifeforms and intelligence in the universe (see Cleland
2019). Detecting a technosignature only once thus puts
us in a similar epistemological situation of having only
one data point. An event that is non-repeating makes
scientific progress and verification extremely challenging
if not impossible.
The “Wow!” signal detected on August 15, 1977 is
such an example of a non-repeating event (see Figure
35). Its strength, narrow band, and location near
the 21-centimeter hydrogen line all point toward a
possible artificial origin. The signal’s 72-second duration
perfectly matched the observation window of the Big Ear
radio telescope, suggesting it came from a fixed point in
deep space. However, the signal has never been detected
again despite follow-up searches. Of course, scientists
have also considered natural, though rare, phenomena
such as an astronomical maser flare as a potential source
(for a recent update, see Caballero 2022).
The fact that the signal was detected in only one of the
telescope’s two beams might support the hypothesis of a
sweeping beacon that a telescope could have just caught
once, on a brief pass. On the side of the Earth, humanity
itself sent the powerful but brief Arecibo message in
1974 only once, as a symbolic gesture. Similarly,
one can speculate that the “Wow!” signal could have
been a similar “message in a bottle,” a momentary
announcement from another civilization in the cosmos
... before METI became also controversial!
Science fiction

The role of imagination is key to the scientific
process. The core difference between science and science
fiction is that science fiction aims to create emotional
and engaging stories for human entertainment, while
science tries to gain new insights, knowledge, and
understanding, highly constrained by its methods and
criteria. A systematic study of major science fiction
novels to derive technosignature strategies would be
worthwhile, although outside the scope of this paper.
There is a rich interplay and synergy between science
and science fiction (see Nováková et al. 2023): many
new ideas start in science fiction and inspire scientists,
while new scientific theories and discoveries inspire hard
science fiction authors.
However, science fiction is a double-edged sword for
academic SETI. On the negative side, it contributes
to the “giggle factor,” creating implicit associations
between entertainment and serious science. On the
positive side, science fiction addresses the question of
extraterrestrial life and intelligence, which is so popular
and fascinating that it is a huge opportunity for science

68

Figure 35. The “Wow” signal recorded on August 15, 1977
at the Big Ear Ohio State Radio Observatory, immortalized
by Jerry Ehman’s annotation upon reviewing the data
(Charbonneau 2018)

education and outreach to draw people of all ages
towards science.
Epistemology

Most technosignatures reviewed here involve
observing remotely with the help of astronomical
instruments. Instruments like telescopes do not retrieve
information unfiltered (Duhem 1954). Instead, they
have their very own way of accessing the world, i.e.,
are sensitive to a specific wavelength, and modify
photons in specific ways.
This means that any
scientific instrument must “translate” its “perception”
to modalities comprehensible to humans (Ihde 2011).
Such a translation “mediates” our experience, in a
way that constitutes a particular understanding of the
external world.
Let us look again at the Wow! signal. What you see is
the output of the “Big Ear” telescope which transformed
the incoming information to a human-readable form,
in which numbers, letters, and curves indicate signal
strength. To further understand this output, humans
need a particular set of skills, attunement to the way
the instrument presents its data, and knowledge of the

scientific paradigm. For any layperson, the symbolic
output may be relatively meaningless, but for Jerry R.
Ehman, this output generated at that time was truly
astonishing.
Hence, technosignature detection hinges upon the
skillful mastery of scientific instruments by individuals
whose ability to make sense of the output is collectively
acknowledged (Döbler and Carbon 2023). Since we
cannot directly visually perceive most processes in the
universe, we rely instead on inferring their presence from
the mediated information whose visual appearance may
simply be a graph or diagram instead of direct visual
evidence of the extraterrestrial.
Yet, given the uncertainty revolving around scientific
observation, inference, and communication, converging
on exactly one interpretation of the data requires
time to confront and integrate hard work, independent
validation, criticism, and debate amongst scientists.
A classical objection against astrobiology is Simpson’s
(1964) statement that “this ‘science’ has yet to
demonstrate that its subject matter exists!” While
it is true that it lacks a concrete object of study,
one can reply that astrobiology is a scientifically
informed search, an exploratory scientific effort (Tarter
2001a). We can draw a parallel with the discovery of
gravitational waves. They were theorized to exist by
Einstein (1915), but it took another 60 years before
indirect evidence of gravitational wave radiation would
be found (Weisberg et al. 1981), and 40 more years
before direct evidence would be brought thanks to
the construction of gravitational wave detectors (LIGO
Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration et al.
2016). From theory to strong observational proof, a
full century has elapsed! Chyba and Hand (2005) give
other historical examples of searching for non-existent
objects such as black holes, the Higgs boson, or proton
decay. As Wright (2026) notes, the study of SETI is
even better motivated than the search for black holes or
gravitational waves, because technological life on Earth
means N = 1 and not N = 0.
One can reasonably hope that the search for bioand techno- signatures will follow a similar path.
The theoretical part is the sum of interdisciplinary
knowledge that astrobiologists have gathered through
cosmology, astronomy, the origin of life, and
evolutionary theory, leading to the hypothesis that
life is common and detectable.
We have no
agreed-upon evidence today, but might find only
indirect or insuﬀicient evidence at first, that would only
be confirmed by the construction of next-generation
observatories later.
Even if the search space is large, each SETI
experiment provides constraints and upper limits on
the prevalence of a particular technosignature. Such a
hypothesis-driven search is ruling out and closing the net
on possibilities. As such, astrobiology is like any other
science, following the regular hypothetico-deductive

69
method (Popper 1959), and the null results that are
found simply falsify hypotheses.
What is more, philosophers of science have a broader
understanding of what science does beyond studying
concrete observable objects, and understand that it
has various stages, from pre-paradigm, to normal
science and revolutionary science (Kuhn 1996). Lakatos
(1970) argued that at heart scientists conduct research
programs that can either be progressive if they continue
to make new predictions, or degenerative if they rely too
heavily on ad-hoc hypotheses. The undeniable creativity
and diversity of predictions we reviewed clearly shows
that technosignature research programs are progressive.
In addition, if a given SETI experiment is designed
to bring results and synergies with other efforts,
then again, there is benefit for ancillary science, and
thus continuous progress. This can also happen as
a technological driver, for example when the NSA
and SETI researchers shared technological know-how
to detect artificial signals during the Cold War
(Charbonneau 2024).
10. CONCLUSION

A few decades ago, the very existence of exoplanets
was a highly speculative topic. Today, it is normal
science, at the heart of astrobiology. Advances in
technology and observational techniques are hard to
predict, and it could well be that many of the
technosignatures reviewed in this paper will become
easily and routinely observable.
We are aware that we have cast a very wide net on
possible technosignatures. Since the search is ultimately
poorly constrained, it is the most prudent approach.
Some technosignatures like UAPs, Genomic SETI or
wormholes are in a state of either high controversy,
low maturity, or with low observational support, but we
included them because they are still potentially testable.
What emerges from this review is that technosignature
science need not be defined by communication alone. We
believe more progress can be made by attempting to
test a variety of well-articulated proposals, rather than
trying to lock the search into a narrow set of assumptions
and search strategies.
We saw that bio- and techno- signature searches have
natural synergies in the cases of solar system exploration
and exoplanet observations. Technosignature searches
are thus likely to be prioritized around these scales
and targets. We have also identified synergies between
technosignature searches and other fields such as
astronomy. This means that even if technosignature
searches fail, we should still learn something new. As
with many major discoveries of the past, we should
keep in mind that technosignatures could be found
serendipitously, which is why the synergies should also
include an interdisciplinary dimension.
An emerging conclusion is that multiscale,
multimodal, multimessenger, and multisite searches

are the most future-proof search strategies. Indeed, if
an anomalous event is detected with a given modality
or technique (e.g. transit), it can be cross-searched
with other observational modalities (e.g. radio, heat
signatures).
Imagine for example that we would
find a strong atmospheric biosignature; it would be
natural to follow up with searches for waste heat,
communication signals, and transit anomalies. Such
multimodal follow-ups are already being practiced, for
example the Hat Creek Radio Observatory telescope
has been following up candidate megastructures such
as KIC 8462852 (Harp et al. 2016a) and ‘Oumuamua
(Harp et al. 2019), albeit both with null results. The
multisite aspect also helps to confirm the skybound
nature of sources, and RFI mitigation in general.
More fundamentally, we argued that machine
learning, as well as information and complexity
theories, make us see the search for biosignatures and
technosignatures as a unified search for anomalies. This
makes sense because both biological and technological
systems are complex organizations that cannot be fully
described as simple physical systems. Whatever bioor techno- signature will be found first, we must also
remain aware that it is likely just one of many, and the
search for others must continue.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper was started as a collective workshop
at the Penn State SETI Symposium (PSETI 2023).
MS was supported by the Institute for Basic Science
(IBS-R035-C1).

70
11. REFERENCES

AARO (2024). Report on the Historical Record of U.S.

Allen, L., Beijersbergen, M. W., Spreeuw, R. J. C., and

Government Involvement with Unidentified Anomalous

Woerdman, J. P. (1992). Orbital angular momentum of

Phenomena (UAP), Volume I. Technical report.

light and the transformation of Laguerre-Gaussian laser

https://www.aaro.mil/Portals/136/PDFs/AARO_

modes. Physical Review A, 45(11):8185–8189.

Historical_Record_Report_Vol_1_2024.pdf.
Abeysekara, A. U., Archambault, S., Archer, A., Benbow,
W., Bird, R., Buchovecky, M., Buckley, J. H., Byrum, K.,
Cardenzana, J. V., Cerruti, M., Chen, X., Christiansen,
J. L., Ciupik, L., Cui, W., Dickinson, H. J., Eisch, J. D.,
Errando, M., Falcone, A., Fegan, D. J., (...), and Zitzer,
B. (2016). A Search for Brief Optical Flashes Associated
with the SETI Target KIC 8462852. The Astrophysical
Journal, 818:L33.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016ApJ...818L..33A.
doi: 10.3847/2041-8205/818/2/L33.
Abramowicz, M., Bejger, M., Gourgoulhon, É., and Straub,

https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.45.8185.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.45.8185.
Anchordoqui, L. and Chudnovsky, E. (2020). Can
Self-Replicating Species Flourish in the Interior of a
Star? Letters in High Energy Physics, 2020(166):1–4.
http://journals.andromedapublisher.com/index.php/
LHEP/article/download/166/85/. doi:
10.31526/lhep.2020.166.
Anderson, D. P., Korpela, E. J., Werthimer, D., Cobb, J.,
and Allen, B. (2025). SETI@home: Data Analysis and
Findings. The Astronomical Journal, 170(2):111.

O. (2020). A Galactic Centre Gravitational-Wave

https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/ade5ab. doi:

Messenger. Scientific Reports, 10:7054. doi:

10.3847/1538-3881/ade5ab.

10.1038/s41598-020-63206-1.
Aeschylus (1961). Prometheus Bound. Penguin Books,
Baltimore.
AGAGE (2025). AGAGE - Advanced Global Atmospheric
Gases Experiment.
https://www-air.larc.nasa.gov/missions/agage/.
Agol, E. (2011). Transit Surveys for Earths in the
Habitable Zones of White Dwarfs. The Astrophysical
Journal Letters, 731(2):L31.

Annis, J. (1999). Placing a limit on star-fed Kardashev
type III civilisations. Journal of the British
Interplanetary Society, 52:33–36.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1999JBIS...52...33A.
Arkhipov, A. (1995). A Search for Alien Artifacts on the
Moon. 74:259.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1995ASPC...74..259A.
Arkhipov, A. V. (1998). New Approaches to Problem of

https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/2041-8205/731/2/L31. doi:

Search of Extraterrestrial Intelligence. Russian Radio

10.1088/2041-8205/731/2/L31.

Physics and Radio Astronomy, 3:5.

Aharonson, O., Russell, C. T., Head, J. W., Wieczorek, M.,
Garrick-Bethell, I., Weiss, B. P., Smith, D. E., Rowe, K.,

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1998RRPRA...3....5A.
Arnold, L. (2013). Transmitting signals over interstellar

Grosz, A., Amrusi, S., Novoselsky, A., Nahaman, N.,

distances: Three approaches compared in the context of

Grossman, Y., Shimoni, Y., and Gomez, A. (2020). The

the Drake equation. International Journal of

science mission of SpaceIL’s Beresheet lander. Planetary

Astrobiology, 12:212–217.

and Space Science, 194:105115.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013IJAsB..12..212A.

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0032063320303287. doi: 10.1016/j.pss.2020.105115.
Alcubierre, M. (1994). The warp drive: Hyper-fast travel
within general relativity. Classical and Quantum Gravity,
11(5):L73. https://doi.org/10.1088/0264-9381/11/5/001.
doi: 10.1088/0264-9381/11/5/001.
Alexandre, L. (2023). La Guerre Des Intelligences À
L’heure De ChatGPT. JC Lattès.

doi: 10.1017/S1473550413000050.
Arnold, L. F. A. (2005). Transit Light-Curve Signatures of
Artificial Objects. The Astrophysical Journal,
627:534–539.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.astro-ph/0503580. doi:
10.1086/430437.
Azarian, B. (2022). The Romance of Reality: How the

https://clemvidal.substack.com/p/chatgpt-the-

Universe Organizes Itself to Create Life, Consciousness,

noosphere-and-extraterrestrial.

and Cosmic Complexity. BenBella Books, Dallas, TX.

71
Bailer-Jones, C. A. L. (2022). Stars That Approach within

Bartlett, S. and Wong, M. L. (2020). Defining Lyfe in the

One Parsec of the Sun: New and More Accurate

Universe: From Three Privileged Functions to Four

Encounters Identified in Gaia Data Release 3. The

Pillars. Life, 10(4):42.

Astrophysical Journal Letters, 935(1):L9.

https://www.mdpi.com/2075-1729/10/4/42. doi:

https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/2041-8213/ac816a. doi:

10.3390/life10040042.

10.3847/2041-8213/ac816a.
Baker-McEvilly, B., Bhadauria, S., Canales, D., and Frueh,

Beane, S. R., Davoudi, Z., and J. Savage, M. (2014).
Constraints on the universe as a numerical simulation.

C. (2024). A comprehensive review on Cislunar

The European Physical Journal A, 50(9):148.

expansion and space domain awareness. Progress in

https://arxiv.org/abs/1210.1847. doi:

Aerospace Sciences, 147:101019.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0376042124000459. doi: 10.1016/j.paerosci.2024.101019.
Ball, J. A. (1973). The Zoo Hypothesis. Icarus,

10.1140/epja/i2014-14148-0.
Beatty, T. G. (2022). The detectability of nightside city
lights on exoplanets. Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 513:2652–2662. https:

19:347–349.

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022MNRAS.513.2652B.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1973Icar...19..347B.

doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac469.

doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(73)90111-5.
Bandt, C. and Pompe, B. (2002). Permutation Entropy: A

Beech, M. (1990). Blue stragglers as indicators of
extraterrestrial civilisations? Earth, Moon, and Planets,

Natural Complexity Measure for Time Series. Physical

49(2):177–186.

Review Letters, 88(17):174102. https:

http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF00053979.

//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.88.174102. doi:

doi: 10.1007/BF00053979.

10.1103/PhysRevLett.88.174102.
Bannister, M. T., Bhandare, A., Dybczyński, P. A.,

Beech, M. (2008). Rejuvenating the Sun and Avoiding
Other Global Catastrophes. Springer.

Fitzsimmons, A., Guilbert-Lepoutre, A., Jedicke, R.,

Bekenstein, J. D. (1981). Universal upper bound on the

Knight, M. M., Meech, K. J., McNeill, A., Pfalzner, S.,

entropy-to-energy ratio for bounded systems. Physical

Raymond, S. N., Snodgrass, C., Trilling, D. E., Ye, Q.,

Review D, 23(2):287–298.

and The ‘Oumuamua ISSI Team (2019). The Natural

https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.23.287. doi:

History of ‘Oumuamua. Nature Astronomy,

10.1103/PhysRevD.23.287.

3(7):594–602. https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.01910. doi:
10.1038/s41550-019-0816-x.
Barrow, J. D. (1998). Impossibility: The Limits of Science
and the Science of Limits. Oxford University Press, USA.
Barrow, J. D. (2007). Living in a Simulated Universe. In
Carr, B., editor, Universe of Multiverse?, pages 481–486.
Bartlett, S., Eckford, A. W., Egbert, M., Lingam, M.,

Benford, G., Benford, J., and Benford, D. (2010).
Searching for Cost-Optimized Interstellar Beacons.
Astrobiology, 10:491–498.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010AsBio..10..491B.
doi: 10.1089/ast.2009.0394.
Benford, J. (2019). Looking for Lurkers: Co-orbiters as
SETI Observables. The Astronomical Journal, 158:150.

Kolchinsky, A., Frank, A., and Ghoshal, G. (2025). The

https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.09582. doi:

Physics of Life: Exploring Information as a Distinctive

10.3847/1538-3881/ab3e35.

Feature of Living Systems.

Benford, J. (2021). A Drake Equation for Alien Artifacts.

http://arxiv.org/abs/2501.08683. doi:

Astrobiology, 21:757–763.

10.48550/arXiv.2501.08683.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021AsBio..21..757B.

Bartlett, S., Li, J., Gu, L., Sinapayen, L., Fan, S., Natraj,
V., Jiang, J. H., Crisp, D., and Yung, Y. L. (2022).

doi: 10.1089/ast.2020.2364.
Berdyugina, S. V. and Kuhn, J. R. (2019). Surface

Assessing planetary complexity and potential agnostic

Imaging of Proxima b and Other Exoplanets: Albedo

biosignatures using epsilon machines. Nature Astronomy,

Maps, Biosignatures, and Technosignatures. The

6(3):387–392.

Astronomical Journal, 158:246.

https://www.nature.com/articles/s41550-021-01559-x.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019AJ....158..246B.

doi: 10.1038/s41550-021-01559-x.

doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab2df3.

72
Berera, A. and Calderón-Figueroa, J. (2022). Viability of
quantum communication across interstellar distances.
Physical Review D, 105:123033. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022PhRvD.105l3033B.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.105.123033.
Bhattacharyya, S. C. (2011). Energy Economics: Concepts,
Issues, Markets and Governance. Springer, London.
Bialy, S. and Loeb, A. (2018). Could Solar Radiation
Pressure Explain ‘Oumuamua’s Peculiar Acceleration?

Bostrom, N. (2003b). Astronomical Waste: The
Opportunity Cost of Delayed Technological Development.
Utilitas, 15(3):308–314. doi: 10.1017/S0953820800004076.
Bottke, W. F., Brož, M., O’Brien, D. P., Campo Bagatin,
A., Morbidelli, A., and Marchi, S. (2015). The collisional
evolution of the main asteroid belt. Asteroids IV,
1:701–724.
https://www-n.oca.eu/morby/papers/Rev38.pdf.
Boyajian, T. S., LaCourse, D. M., Rappaport, S. A.,

The Astrophysical Journal, 868:L1.

Fabrycky, D., Fischer, D. A., Gandolfi, D., Kennedy,

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018ApJ...868L...1B.

G. M., Korhonen, H., Liu, M. C., Moor, A., Olah, K.,

doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aaeda8.

Vida, K., Wyatt, M. C., Best, W. M. J., Brewer, J.,

Blair, D. G. and Zadnik, M. G. (1993). A List of Possible

Ciesla, F., Csák, B., Deeg, H. J., Dupuy, T. J., (...), and

Interstellar Communication Channel Frequencies for

Szewczyk, A. (2016). Planet Hunters IX. KIC 8462852 –

SETI. Astronomy and Astrophysics, 278(2):669–672.

where’s the flux? Monthly Notices of the Royal

https://adsabs.harvard.edu/full/1993A%26A...278..669B.

Astronomical Society, 457(4):3988–4004.

Blandford, R. D. and Znajek, R. L. (1977).
Electromagnetic extraction of energy from Kerr black
holes. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 179:433–456.
http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1977MNRAS.179..433B.
Bobrick, A. and Martire, G. (2021). Introducing physical
warp drives. Classical and Quantum Gravity,
38(10):105009.
https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6382/abdf6e. doi:
10.1088/1361-6382/abdf6e.
Bodu, R., Bouzigues, H., Morin, N., and Pfiffelman, J.
(1972). Sur l’existence d’anomalies isotopiques
rencontrées dans l’uranium du gisement d’Oklo (Gabon)
[On the existence of isotopic anomalies encountered in
the uranium of the Oklo deposit (Gabon)]. Comptes
Rendus de l’Académie des Sciences, Série
D(275):1731–1732. https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:
/12148/bpt6k5496492x/f845.item.
Bonnell, J. T. and Klebesadel, R. W. (1996). A brief
history of the discovery of cosmic gamma-ray bursts.
AIP Conference Proceedings, 384(1):977–980.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.51630. doi: 10.1063/1.51630.
Bordag, M., Mohideen, U., and Mostepanenko, V. M.

https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stw218. doi:
10.1093/mnras/stw218.
Boyce, M. S. (1984). Restitution of r- and K-Selection as a
Model of Density-Dependent Natural Selection. Annual
Review of Ecology and Systematics, 15:427–447.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/2096955.
Bracewell, R. N. (1960). Communications from Superior
Galactic Communities. Nature, 186:670–671.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1960Natur.186..670B.
doi: 10.1038/186670a0.
Bracewell, R. N. (1974). Interstellar Probes.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1974icsp.book..102B.
Bradbury, R. J. (1999). Matrioshka brains. Preprint.
https://gwern.net/doc/ai/scaling/hardware/1999bradbury-matrioshkabrains.pdf.
Bradbury, R. J. (2001). Dyson shells: A retrospective.
4273:56–62.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2001SPIE.4273...56B.
doi: 10.1117/12.435373.
Bradbury, R. J., Cirkovic, M. M., and Dvorsky, G. (2011).
Dysonian Approach to SETI: A Fruitful Middle Ground?
Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, 64:156–165.

(2001). New developments in the Casimir effect. Physics

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011JBIS...64..156B.

Reports, 353(1):1–205. https://www.sciencedirect.com/

Breeden, J. L. (2013). Gravitational Assist Via Near-Sun

science/article/pii/S0370157301000151. doi:
10.1016/S0370-1573(01)00015-1.
Bostrom, N. (2003a). Are We Living in a Computer

Chaotic Trajectories of Binary Objects. Journal of the
British Interplanetary Society, 66:190–195.
Breeden, J. L. (2014). SETI implications of gravitational

Simulation? The Philosophical Quarterly,

assist via chaotic trajectories of binary objects. Acta

53(211):243–255.

Astronautica, 93:106–111. https://www.sciencedirect.

https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9213.00309. doi:

com/science/article/pii/S0094576513002324. doi:

10.1111/1467-9213.00309.

10.1016/j.actaastro.2013.06.031.

73
Bremermann, H. J. (1982). Minimum Energy
Requirements of Information Transfer and Computing.
International Journal of Theoretical Physics, 21:203–217.
doi: 10.1007/BF01857726.
Brin, D. (2019). The “Barn Door” Argument, The
Precautionary Principle, and METI as “Prayer”—an
Appraisal of the Top Three Rationalizations for “Active
SETI”. Theology and Science, 17(1):16–28.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14746700.2018.1557391. doi:
10.1080/14746700.2018.1557391.
Brin, G. D. (1983). The Great Silence - the Controversy
Concerning Extraterrestrial Intelligent Life. Quarterly
Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society, 24:283–309.
https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1983QJRAS..24..283B.
Bronnikov, K. A. (1973). Scalar-tensor theory and scalar
charge. Acta Phys. Polon. B, 4:251–266.
Brooks, C., Janin, E., Siebert, G., Mathis, C., Peleg, O.,
and Walker, S. I. (2025). A Firefly-inspired Model for
Deciphering the Alien.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.06139v1.
Brosch, N. (1985). The nature of Hoag’s object : The
perfect ringed galaxy. Astronomy and Astrophysics,
153:199–206.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1985A&A...153..199B.
Bruehl, S. and Villarroel, B. (2025). Some Transients in
the Palomar Observatory Sky Survey (POSS-I) May Be
Associated with Above-Ground Nuclear Testing and
Reports of Unidentified Anomalous Phenomena.
https://www.researchsquare.com/article/rs-6347224/v1.
doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-6347224/v1.
Bugiolacchi, R., Bamford, S., Tar, P., Thacker, N.,
Crawford, I. A., Joy, K. H., Grindrod, P. M., and Lintott,
C. (2016). The Moon Zoo citizen science project:
Preliminary results for the Apollo 17 landing site.
Icarus, 271:30–48. https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0019103516000324. doi:
10.1016/j.icarus.2016.01.021.
Burleigh, S., Cerf, V. G., Crowcroft, J., and Tsaoussidis, V.
(2014). Space for Internet and Internet for space. Ad
Hoc Networks, 23:80–86. https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S157087051400122X. doi:
10.1016/j.adhoc.2014.06.005.
Burleigh, S., Hooke, A., Torgerson, L., Fall, K., Cerf, V.,
Durst, B., Scott, K., and Weiss, H. (2003).
Delay-tolerant networking: An approach to
interplanetary Internet. IEEE Communications
Magazine, 41(6):128–136.
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/1204759.
doi: 10.1109/MCOM.2003.1204759.

Burns, J. O., MacDowall, R., Bale, S., Hallinan, G.,
Bassett, N., and Hegedus, A. (2021). Low Radio
Frequency Observations from the Moon Enabled by
NASA Landed Payload Missions. The Planetary Science
Journal, 2(2):44. https:
//iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/PSJ/abdfc3/meta.
doi: 10.3847/PSJ/abdfc3.
Bussard, R. W. (1960). Galactic matter and interstellar
flight. Astronautica acta, 6(4):179–194. https://www.
machinman.net/intersideral/references/bussard.pdf.
Caballero, A. (2022). An approximation to determine the
source of the WOW! Signal. International Journal of
Astrobiology, 21:129–136.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022IJAsB..21..129C.
doi: 10.1017/S1473550422000015.
Campbell, J. B. (2006). Archaeology and direct imaging of
exoplanets. In IAU Colloquium 200: Direct Imaging of
Exoplanets: Science & Techniques, pages 247–250.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2006dies.conf..247C.
doi: 10.1017/S1743921306009392.
Campbell, T., Owhadi, H., Sauvageau, J., and Watkinson,
D. (2017). On testing the simulation theory.
International Journal of Quantum Foundations, 3:78–99.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.0058.
Caplan, M. E. (2019). Stellar engines: Design
considerations for maximizing acceleration. Acta
Astronautica, 165:96–104.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019AcAau.165...96C.
doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2019.08.027.
Cardoso, V., Dias, Ó. J. C., Lemos, J. P. S., and Yoshida,
S. (2004). Black-hole bomb and superradiant
instabilities. Physical Review D, 70(4):044039.
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.70.044039.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.70.044039.
Carlotto, M. J. (2007). Detecting Patterns of a
Technological Intelligence in Remotely Sensed Imagery.
Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, 60:28–39.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2007JBIS...60...28C.
Carlotto, M. J., Ridge, F. L., and Sirisena, A. L. (2016).
Image Analysis of Unusual Structures on the Far Side of
the Moon in the Crater Paracelsus C. J Space Explor,
5(2):102.
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Mark-Carlotto/
publication/310506051_Image_Analysis_of_Unusual_
Structures_on_the_Far_Side_of_the_Moon_in_the_
Crater_Paracelsus_C/links/58309f9108ae004f74c0f310/
Image-Analysis-of-Unusual-Structures-on-the-Far-Sideof-the-Moon-in-the-Crater-Paracelsus-C.pdf.

74
Carlotto, M. J. and Stein, M. C. (1990). A method for
searching for artificial objects on planetary surfaces.
Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, 43:209–216.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1990JBIS...43..209C.
Carrigan, Jr., R. A. (2009). IRAS-Based Whole-Sky Upper
Limit on Dyson Spheres. The Astrophysical Journal,
698:2075–2086.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2009ApJ...698.2075C.
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/698/2/2075.
Carrigan, Jr., R. A. (2010). Starry Messages - Searching
for Signatures of Interstellar Archaeology. Journal of the
British Interplanetary Society, 63:90–103.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010JBIS...63...90C.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1001.5455.
Carroll-Nellenback, J., Frank, A., Wright, J., and Scharf, C.
(2019). The Fermi Paradox and the Aurora Effect:
Exo-civilization Settlement, Expansion, and Steady
States. The Astronomical Journal, 158:117. doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/ab31a3.
Carstairs, I. R. (2002). Spreading the Net. Astronomy &
Geophysics, 43(6):6.26–6.29.
https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1468-4004.2002.43626.x. doi:
10.1046/j.1468-4004.2002.43626.x.
Casimir, H. B. (1948). On the Attraction between Two
Perfectly Conducting Plates. Proc. Kon. Ned. Akad.
Wet., 51:793.
https://cir.nii.ac.jp/crid/1571417124286361984.
Castellano, T., Doyle, L., and McIntosh, D. (2004). The
Visibility of Earth Transits. In Symposium-International
Astronomical Union, volume 202, pages 445–447.
Cambridge University Press.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004IAUS..202..445C.
Catling, D. C., Krissansen-Totton, J., and Robinson, T. D.
(2025). Potential Technosignature from Anomalously
Low Deuterium/Hydrogen in Planetary Water Depleted
by Nuclear Fusion Technology. The Astrophysical
Journal, 979(2):137.
https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ad99a9. doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ad99a9.
Cen, J., Yuan, P., and Xue, S. (2014). Observation of the
Optical and Spectral Characteristics of Ball Lightning.
Physical Review Letters, 112(3):035001. https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.112.035001.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.112.035001.
Cerf, V., Burleigh, S., Hooke, A., Torgerson, L., Durst, R.,
Scott, K., Fall, K., and Weiss, H. (2007). Delay-tolerant
networking architecture. Technical report.
https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4838.

Chaisson, E. J. (1988). Relatively Speaking: Relativity,
Black Holes, and the Fate of the Universe. Norton, New
York, 1st ed edition.
Charbonneau, R. (2018). The Mysterious Wow! Signal.
https://aas.org/posts/news/2018/08/monthastronomical-history.
Charbonneau, R. (2024). Mixed Signals: Alien
Communication Across the Iron Curtain. Polity, 1st
edition edition.
Chennamangalam, J., Siemion, A. P. V., Lorimer, D. R.,
and Werthimer, D. (2015). Jumping the energetics
queue: Modulation of pulsar signals by extraterrestrial
civilizations. New Astronomy, 34:245–249.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015NewA...34..245C.
doi: 10.1016/j.newast.2014.07.011.
Chyba, C. F. and Hand, K. P. (2005). Astrobiology: The
Study of the Living Universe. Annual Review of
Astronomy and Astrophysics, 43(Volume 43, 2005):31–74.
https://www.annualreviews.org/content/journals/10.
1146/annurev.astro.43.051804.102202. doi:
10.1146/annurev.astro.43.051804.102202.
Cifone, M. C. (2024). Editorial of the first issue. Limina The Journal of UAP Studies, 1(1):3–7.
Ćirković, M. M. (2006). Macroengineering in the Galactic
Context: A New Agenda for Astrobiology. arXiv
e-prints, pages astro–ph/0606102.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2006astro.ph..6102C.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.astro-ph/0606102.
Ćirković, M. M. (2012). The Astrobiological Landscape.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Ćirković, M. M. (2015). Kardashev’s Classification at 50+:
A Fine Vehicle With Room for Improvement. Serbian
Astronomical Journal, 191:1–15.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015SerAJ.191....1C.
doi: 10.2298/SAJ1591001C.
Ćirković, M. M. (2023). A note on the Vukotić-Gordon
mini-earths. Serbian Astronomical Journal, (207):53–61.
https://doiserbia.nb.rs/Article.aspx?id=1450698X2307053C. doi: 10.2298/SAJ2307053C.
Ćirković, M. M. and Bradbury, R. J. (2006). Galactic
gradients, postbiological evolution and the apparent
failure of SETI. New Astronomy, 11(8):628–639. http://
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1384107606000492.
doi: 10.1016/j.newast.2006.04.003.
Ćirković, M. M., Vukotić, B., and Stojanović, M. (2019).
Persistence of Technosignatures: A Comment on Lingam
and Loeb. Astrobiology, 19:1300–1302.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019AsBio..19.1300C.
doi: 10.1089/ast.2019.2052.

75
Clarke, A. C. (1968). 2001: A Space Odyssey. Hutchinson,
London.
Cleland, C. E. (2019). The Quest for a Universal Theory of
Life: Searching for Life As We Don’t Know It.
Cambridge Astrobiology. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge. https:
//www.cambridge.org/core/books/quest-for-a-universaltheory-of-life/D28E15D2B316E60B802112B6DB28526B.
doi: 10.1017/9781139046893.
Cleland, C. E. and Copley, S. D. (2005). The Possibility of
Alternative Microbial Life on Earth. International
Journal of Astrobiology, 4(3-4):165–173. doi:
10.1017/S147355040500279X.
Clement, M. S., Raymond, S. N., Veras, D., and Kipping,
D. (2022). Mathematical encoding within multiresonant
planetary systems as SETI beacons. Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 513:4945–4950. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022MNRAS.513.4945C.
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1234.
Clough, K., Dietrich, T., and Khan, S. (2024). What no
one has seen before: Gravitational waveforms from warp
drive collapse. The Open Journal of Astrophysics, 7.
https://astro.theoj.org/article/121868-what-no-one-hasseen-before-gravitational-waveforms-from-warp-drivecollapse. doi: 10.33232/001c.121868.
Cocconi, G. and Morrison, P. (1959). Searching for
Interstellar Communications. Nature, 184:844–846.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1959Natur.184..844C.
doi: 10.1038/184844a0.
Condon, E. U., editor (1969). Final Report of the Scientific
Study of Unidentified Flying Objects. Dutton, New York
City.
Corbet, R. H. D. (1999). The Use of Gamma-Ray Bursts
as Direction and Time Markers in SETI Strategies.
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific,
111:881–885. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1999PASP..111..881C. doi:
10.1086/316395.
Cordes, J. and Sullivan, III, W. (1995). Astrophysical
Coding: A New Approach to SETI Signals. I. Signal
Design and Wave Propagation. 74:325.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1995ASPC...74..325C.

Coustenis, A., Hedman, N., Doran, P. T., Al Shehhi, O.,
Ammannito, E., Fujimoto, M., Grasset, O., Groen, F.,
Hayes, A. G., Ilyin, V., Kumar, K. P., Morisset, C.-E.,
Mustin, C., Olsson-Francis, K., Peng, J.,
Prieto-Ballesteros, O., Raulin, F., Rettberg, P., Sinibaldi,
S., (...), and Zaitsev, M. (2023). Planetary protection:
An international concern and responsibility. Frontiers in
Astronomy and Space Sciences, 10. doi:
10.3389/fspas.2023.1172546.
Cowan, G. A. (1976). A Natural Fission Reactor.
Scientific American, 235(1):36–47.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24950391.
Craig, R. T. (1999). Communication Theory as a Field.
Communication Theory, 9(2):119–161.
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.14682885.1999.tb00355.x. doi:
10.1111/j.1468-2885.1999.tb00355.x.
Crane, L. (2010). Possible Implications of the Quantum
Theory of Gravity: An Introduction to the
Meduso-Anthropic Principle. Foundations of Science,
15(4):369–373. http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9402104.
doi: 10.1007/s10699-010-9182-y.
Crane, L. and Westmoreland, S. (2009). Are Black Hole
Starships Possible. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2009arXiv0908.1803C. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.0908.1803.
Crick, F. H. C. and Orgel, L. E. (1973). Directed
panspermia. Icarus, 19:341–346.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1973Icar...19..341C.
doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(73)90110-3.
Criswell, D. R. (1985). Solar System Industrialization:
Implications for Interstellar Migrations. In Interstellar
Migration and the Human Experience, pages 50–87.
University of California Press Berkeley, CA.
Cros, C. (1869). Étude sur les moyens de communication
avec les planètes ... Extrait du Cosmos, etc.
https://www.google.com/books/edition/%C3%89tude_
sur_les_moyens_de_communication_a/
a3SfQDEn14wC?hl=en&gbpv=0.
Crowe, M. J. (1986). The Extraterrestrial Life Debate,
1750-1900: The Idea of a Plurality of Worlds from Kant
to Lowell. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
[Cambridgeshire] ; New York.
Crowe, M. J. (2008). The Extraterrestrial Life Debate,
Antiquity to 1915: A Source Book. University of Notre
Dame, Notre Dame (Ind.).
Crutchfield, J. P. (2012). Between order and chaos. Nature
Physics, 8(1):17–24.
https://www.nature.com/articles/nphys2190. doi:
10.1038/nphys2190.

76
Davenport, J. R. A., Sheikh, S. Z., Croft, S., Lacki, B. C.,
Wright, J. T., Lintott, C., Frank, A., Lazio, T. J. W.,
Chandler, C. O., Siemion, A. P. V., DiKerby, S., White,
E., Lopez, V. G., Yu, E. E., Frissell, M. K., Yoachim, P.,
Morato, N., Singh, D., Zhang, J., and Seligman, D. Z.
(2025). Technosignature Searches of Interstellar Objects.
http://arxiv.org/abs/2508.16825. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2508.16825.
Davies, P. (2010). The eerie silence. Physics World,
23:28–33. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010PhyW...23c..28D. doi:
10.1088/2058-7058/23/03/39.
Davies, P. C., Benner, S. A., Cleland, C. E., Lineweaver,
C. H., McKay, C. P., and Wolfe-Simon, F. (2009).
Signatures of a Shadow Biosphere. Astrobiology,
9(2):241–249. https:
//www.liebertpub.com/doi/abs/10.1089/ast.2008.0251.
doi: 10.1089/ast.2008.0251.
Davies, P. C. W. (2012). Footprints of alien technology.
Acta Astronautica, 73:250–257.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012AcAau..73..250D.
doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2011.06.022.
Davies, P. C. W. and Wagner, R. V. (2013). Searching for
alien artifacts on the moon. Acta Astronautica,
89:261–265.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013AcAau..89..261D.
doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2011.10.022.
Davis, R. (2024). Finding the ET Signal from the Cosmic
Noise. http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.04405. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2204.04405.
DeBoer, D. R., Ashe, C. K., Johnson, O. A., Keane, E. F.,
Lesh, A. C., Marshall, E. J., Prabu, S., Reenock, K. L.,
Slosar, A., Tremblay, C. D., Turner, J. D., Warnick,
K. F., Siemion, A. P. V., Drew, J., and Worden, S. P.
(2025). Lunar Farside Technosignature & Transients
Telescope (LFT3). White paper, —.
https://lft3.space/whitepaper.pdf.
Defense-Intelligence-Agency (2000). Project Condign:
Unidentified Aerial Phenomena in the UK Air Defence
Region: Volumes 1-3.
http://archive.org/details/condign-vol-2-1-258.
Denzler, B. (2003). The Lure of the Edge: Scientific
Passions, Religious Beliefs, and the Pursuit of UFOs.
University of California Press, Berkeley, pbk. ed. edition.
Des Marais, D. J., Nuth, J. A., Allamandola, L. J., Boss,
A. P., Farmer, J. D., Hoehler, T. M., Jakosky, B. M.,
Meadows, V. S., Pohorille, A., Runnegar, B., and
Spormann, A. M. (2008). The NASA Astrobiology
Roadmap. Astrobiology, 8(4):715–730. doi:
10.1089/ast.2008.0819.

Di Stefano, R. and Ray, A. (2016). Globular Clusters as
Cradles of Life and Advanced Civilizations. The
Astrophysical Journal, 827:54.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016ApJ...827...54D.
doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/827/1/54.
Dick, S. (2008). The postbiological universe. Acta
Astronautica, 62(8):499–504. http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S009457650800043X. doi:
10.1016/j.actaastro.2008.01.025.
Dick, S. J. (1982). Plurality of Worlds: The Origins of the
Extraterrestrial Life Debate from Democritus to Kant.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge [Cambridgeshire]
; New York.
Dick, S. J. (1996). The Biological Universe: The
Twentieth-Century Extraterrestrial Life Debate and the
Limits of Science. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, New York.
Dick, S. J. (2003). Cultural evolution, the postbiological
universe and SETI. International Journal of
Astrobiology, 2:65–74.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2003IJAsB...2...65D.
doi: 10.1017/S147355040300137X.
Dick, S. J. (2009). Bringing Culture to Cosmos: The
Postbiological Universe. In Dick, S. J. and Lupisella,
M. L., editors, Cosmos and Culture: Cultural Evolution
in a Cosmic Context, pages 463–487. Government
Printing Oﬀice, NASA SP-2009-4802, Washington D.C.
http://history.nasa.gov/SP-4802.pdf.
Döbler, N. A. and Carbon, C.-C. (2023). Affordances in
outer space: Forms of life, material engagement, and
meaning within space exploration and SETI. Acta
Astronautica, 210:350–363. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023AcAau.210..350D. doi:
10.1016/j.actaastro.2023.05.034.
Dong, M.-X., Zhang, W.-H., Zeng, L., Ye, Y.-H., Li, D.-C.,
Guo, G.-C., Ding, D.-S., and Shi, B.-S. (2023). Highly
Eﬀicient Storage of 25-Dimensional Photonic Qudit in a
Cold-Atom-Based Quantum Memory. Physical Review
Letters, 131(24):240801. https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.131.240801.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.131.240801.
Doxiadis, C. A. (1962). Ecumenopolis: Toward a Universal
City. Ekistics, 13(75):3–18.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/43617611.
Doyle, L. R., McCowan, B., and Hanser, S. F. (2002).
Information Theory Applied to Dolphin Whistle
Vocalizations with Possible Application to SETI Signals.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2002iaf..confE.372D.

77
Doyle, L. R., McCowan, B., Johnston, S., and Hanser, S. F.

Dyson, F. J. (1960a). Response: Artificial Biosphere.

(2011). Information theory, animal communication, and

Science, 132(3421):252–253. https:

the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. Acta

//www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.132.3421.252.b.

Astronautica, 68:406–417.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011AcAau..68..406D.
doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2009.11.018.
Drake, F. (1988). Stars as Gravitational Lenses. In Marx,
G., editor, Bioastronomy-The Next Steps, volume 144,
pages 391–394, Balaton, Hungary. Kluwer.
Drake, F. D. (1965). The Radio Search for Intelligent
Extraterrestrial Life. In Mamikunian, G. and Briggs,
M. H., editors, Current Aspects of Exobiology, pages
323–345. Pergamon. doi:
10.1016/B978-1-4832-0047-7.50015-0.
Droste, E. S., Adcock, K. E., Ashfold, M. J., Chou, C.,
Fleming, Z., Fraser, P. J., Gooch, L. J., Hind, A. J.,
Langenfelds, R. L., Leedham Elvidge, E. C., Mohd Hanif,
N., O’Doherty, S., Oram, D. E., Ou-Yang, C.-F., Panagi,
M., Reeves, C. E., Sturges, W. T., and Laube, J. C.
(2020). Trends and emissions of six perfluorocarbons in

doi: 10.1126/science.132.3421.252.b.
Dyson, F. J. (1960b). Search for Artificial Stellar Sources
of Infrared Radiation. Science, 131:1667–1668.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1960Sci...131.1667D.
doi: 10.1126/science.131.3414.1667.
Dyson, F. J., Kardashev, N., Ginzburg, V. L., and Marx,
G. (1973). Astroengineering Activity: The Possibility of
ETI in Present Astrophysical Phenomena. In Sagan, C.,
editor, Communication with Extraterrestrial Intelligence
(CETI). MIT Press, Cambridge.
Edmondson, W. H. (2010). Targets and SETI: Shared
motivations, life signatures and asymmetric SETI. Acta
Astronautica, 67:1410–1418. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010AcAau..67.1410E. doi:
10.1016/j.actaastro.2010.01.017.
Edmondson, W. H. and Stevens, I. R. (2003). The

the Northern Hemisphere and Southern Hemisphere.

utilization of pulsars as SETI beacons. International

Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 20(8):4787–4807.

Journal of Astrobiology, 2:231–271.

https://acp.copernicus.org/articles/20/4787/2020/. doi:

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2003IJAsB...2..231E.

10.5194/acp-20-4787-2020.

doi: 10.1017/S1473550403001666.

Dubey, D., Kopparapu, R., Ercolano, B., and

Eghigian, G. (2024). After the Flying Saucers Came: A

Molaverdikhani, K. (2025). Polycyclic Aromatic

Global History of the UFO Phenomenon. Oxford

Hydrocarbons as an Extraterrestrial Atmospheric

University Press, New York, NY.

Technosignature. The Planetary Science Journal, 6(1):4.
https:
//iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/PSJ/ad98eb/meta.
doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ad98eb.
Duhem, P. M. M. (1954). The Aim and Structure of
Physical Theory. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Dvali, G. and Osmanov, Z. N. (2023). Black holes as tools
for quantum computing by advanced extraterrestrial
civilizations. International Journal of Astrobiology,
22(6):617–640. https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.09575. doi:
10.1017/S1473550423000186.
Dyson, F. (1963). Gravitational machines. In Interstellar

Einstein, A. (1915). Die Feldgleichungen der Gravitation.
Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie
der Wissenschaften, pages 844–847.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1915SPAW.......844E.
Einstein, A. (1936). Lens-Like Action of a Star by the
Deviation of Light in the Gravitational Field. Science,
84(2188):506–507. https:
//www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.84.2188.506. doi:
10.1126/science.84.2188.506.
Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., and Rosen, N. (1935). Can
Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be

Communication, pages 115–120. New York, benjamin

Considered Complete? Physical Review, 47(10):777–780.

press edition. http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10470.

https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.47.777. doi:

Dyson, F. (1966). The Search for Extraterrestrial
Technology. In Marshak, R. E., Blaker, W., and Bethe,

10.1103/PhysRev.47.777.
Einstein, A. and Rosen, N. (1935). The Particle Problem

H. A., editors, Physics of the Moon and the Planets,

in the General Theory of Relativity. Physical Review,

pages 641–655. Interscience Publishers, University of

48(1):73–77.

Michigan. https:

https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.48.73. doi:

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1966pmp..book..641D.

10.1103/PhysRev.48.73.

78
Ekers, R. D., Culler, K., Billingham, J., and Scheffer, L.
(2002). SETI 2020 : A Roadmap for the Search for
Extraterrestrial Intelligence / Produced for the SETI
Institute by the SETI Science & Technology Working
Group.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2002SETI.book.....E.
Ellery, A. (2016). Solar power satellites for clean energy
enabled through disruptive technologies. In Proc 23rd
World Energy Congress (Award Winning Papers), pages
133–147. https://www.carleton.ca/ceser/wp-content/
uploads/Solar-power-satellites-for-clean-energy.pdf.
Ellery, A. (2017). Space Exploration Through
Self-Replication Technology Compensates for Discounting
in Net Present Value Cost-Benefit Analysis: A Business
Case? New Space. https:
//www.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/space.2017.0017.
doi: 10.1089/space.2017.0017.
Ellery, A. (2022). Self-replicating probes are imminent –
implications for SETI. International Journal of
Astrobiology, 21:212–242.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022IJAsB..21..212E.
doi: 10.1017/S1473550422000234.
Ellery, A., Tough, A., and Darling, D. (2003). SETI - A
Scientific Critique and a Proposal for Further
Observational Modes. Journal of the British
Interplanetary Society, 56:262–287.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2003JBIS...56..262E.
Ellis, H. G. (1973). Ether flow through a drainhole: A
particle model in general relativity. Journal of
Mathematical Physics, 14(1):104–118.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1666161. doi:
10.1063/1.1666161.
Elvis, M. (2022). Research programmes arising from
’Oumuamua considered as an alien craft. International
Journal of Astrobiology, 21:63–77.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022IJAsB..21...63E.
doi: 10.1017/S147355042100032X.
Embaid, B. P. (2022). The Puzzle of Meteoritic Minerals
Heideite and Brezinaite; Are they Iron-based
Superconductors? Are they Technosignatures?
http://arxiv.org/abs/2209.05679. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2209.05679.

Enriquez, J. E., Siemion, A., Foster, G., Gajjar, V.,
Hellbourg, G., Hickish, J., Isaacson, H., Price, D. C.,
Croft, S., DeBoer, D., Lebofsky, M., MacMahon, D.
H. E., and Werthimer, D. (2017). The Breakthrough
Listen Search for Intelligent Life: 1.1-1.9 GHz
Observations of 692 Nearby Stars. The Astrophysical
Journal, 849:104.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017ApJ...849..104E.
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa8d1b.
Ezell, C. and Loeb, A. (2023). Detection Rate of
<50-meter Interstellar Objects with LSST.
http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.14766. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2303.14766.
Fall, K. (2003). A Delay-Tolerant Network Architecture for
Challenged Internets. In Proceedings of the 2003
Conference on Applications, Technologies, Architectures,
and Protocols for Computer Communications, pages
27–34, Karlsruhe Germany. ACM.
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/863955.863960. doi:
10.1145/863955.863960.
Fan, P., Wright, J. T., and Lazio, T. J. W. (2025).
Detecting Extraterrestrial Civilizations that Employ an
Earth-level Deep Space Network. The Astrophysical
Journal Letters, 990(1):L1.
https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/2041-8213/adf6b0. doi:
10.3847/2041-8213/adf6b0.
Fields, B. and Goodman, J. C. (2025). A 2821 Star Optical
SETI Survey using ESO HARPS archival data.
http://arxiv.org/abs/2508.08628. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2508.08628.
Fields, B., Gupta, S., and Sandora, M. (2023). Information
gain as a tool for assessing biosignature missions.
International Journal of Astrobiology, 22(5):583–607.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.06509. doi:
10.1017/S1473550423000150.
Fishback, J. F. (1969). Relativistic interstellar spaceflight.
Astronautica Acta, 15:25–35.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1969AsAc...15...25F.
Fisher, T., Janin, E., and Walker, S. I. (2023). A Complex
Systems Approach to Exoplanet Atmospheric Chemistry:
New Prospects for Ruling Out the Possibility of Alien
Life-As-We-Know-It. http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.05359.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.05359.
Fisher, T., Kim, H., Millsaps, C., Line, M., and Walker,
S. I. (2022). Inferring Exoplanet Disequilibria with
Multivariate Information in Atmospheric Reaction
Networks. The Astronomical Journal, 164(2):53.
https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/ac6594. doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/ac6594.

79
Fisher, T. M. (2023). Atmospheric Chemical Reaction
Networks as Tools for Understanding Planetary Processes
and the Influence of Biospheres on Their Host Worlds.
PhD thesis, Arizona State University.
https://keep.lib.asu.edu/items/190697.

Freitas, Jr., R. A. (1983b). The search for extraterrestrial

Flores Martinez, C. L. (2014). SETI in the Light of Cosmic
Convergent Evolution. Acta Astronautica,
104(1):341–349.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/265854623_
SETI_in_the_light_of_cosmic_convergent_evolution.
doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2014.08.013.

Extraterrestrial Artifacts (SETA). Acta Astronautica,

Floridi, L., editor (2003). The Blackwell Guide to the
Philosophy of Computing and Information. Blackwell
Publishing.
Fogg, M. J. (1989). Solar exchange as a means of ensuring
the long term habitability of the Earth. Speculations in
Science and Technology, 12(2):153.
Forgan, D. H. and Elvis, M. (2011). Extrasolar asteroid
mining as forensic evidence for extraterrestrial
intelligence. International Journal of Astrobiology,
10:307–313.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011IJAsB..10..307F.
doi: 10.1017/S1473550411000127.
Forward, R. L. (1984). Roundtrip interstellar travel using
laser-pushed lightsails. Journal of Spacecraft and
Rockets, 21(2):187–195. https://doi.org/10.2514/3.8632.
doi: 10.2514/3.8632.
Frank, A. (2023). The Little Book of Aliens. Harper.
Frank, A., Gleiser, M., and Thompson, E. (2024). The
Blind Spot: Why Science Cannot Ignore Human
Experience. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

artifacts (SETA). Journal of the British Interplanetary
Society, 36:501–506.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1983JBIS...36..501F.
Freitas, Jr., R. A. and Valdes, F. (1985). The Search for
12:1027–1034. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1985AcAau..12.1027F. doi:
10.1016/0094-5765(85)90031-1.
Fuchs, J., Helmerich, C., Bobrick, A., Sellers, L., Melcher,
B., and Martire, G. (2024). Constant Velocity Physical
Warp Drive Solution. Classical and Quantum Gravity,
41(9):095013.
https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6382/ad26aa. doi:
10.1088/1361-6382/ad26aa.
Fudenberg, D. and Tirole, J. (1983). Sequential Bargaining
with Incomplete Information. The Review of Economic
Studies, 50(2):221–247.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2297414. doi: 10.2307/2297414.
Fuller, R. W. and Wheeler, J. A. (1962). Causality and
Multiply Connected Space-Time. Physical Review,
128(2):919–929.
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.128.919. doi:
10.1103/PhysRev.128.919.
Gaidos, E. (2017). Transit detection of a ’starshade’ at the
inner lagrange point of an exoplanet. Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 469:4455–4464. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017MNRAS.469.4455G.
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1078.
Gajjar, V., LeDuc, D., Chen, J., Siemion, A. P. V., Sheikh,

Frank, A., Grinspoon, D., and Walker, S. (2022).
Intelligence as a planetary scale process. International
Journal of Astrobiology, 21:47–61.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022IJAsB..21...47F.
doi: 10.1017/S147355042100029X.

S. Z., Brzycki, B., Croft, S., Czech, D., DeBoer, D.,

Frautschi, S. (1982). Entropy in an expanding universe.
Science, 217(4560):593–599.
http://www.informationphilosopher.com/solutions/
scientists/layzer/Frautschi_Science_1982.pdf.

Using Neural Networks. The Astrophysical Journal,

DeMarines, J., Drew, J., Isaacson, H., Lacki, B. C.,
Lebofsky, M., MacMahon, D. H. E., Ng, C., de Pater, I.,
Perez, K. I., Price, D. C., (...), and Worden, S. P. (2022).
Searching for Broadband Pulsed Beacons from 1883 Stars
932:81. https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/15384357/ac6dd5. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac6dd5.
Gajjar, V., Perez, K. I., Siemion, A. P. V., Foster, G.,

Freitas, Jr., R. A. (1980). A self-reproducing interstellar
probe. Journal of the British Interplanetary Society,
33:251–264.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1980JBIS...33..251F.

Brzycki, B., Chatterjee, S., Chen, Y., Cordes, J. M.,

Freitas, Jr., R. A. (1983a). If they are here, where are
they? Observational and search considerations. Icarus,
55:337–343.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1983Icar...55..337F.
doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(83)90086-6.

Pete Worden, S. (2021). The Breakthrough Listen

Croft, S., Czech, D., DeBoer, D., DeMarines, J., Drew,
J., Gowanlock, M., Isaacson, H., Lacki, B. C., Lebofsky,
M., MacMahon, D. H. E., Morrison, I. S., (...), and
Search For Intelligent Life Near the Galactic Center. I.
The Astronomical Journal, 162:33.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021AJ....162...33G.
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abfd36.

80
Gallaudet, T. (2024). Beneath the Surface: We May Learn

Glauser, A. M., Quanz, S. P., Hansen, J., Dannert, F.,

More about UAP by Looking in the Ocean. Technical

Ireland, M., Linz, H., Absil, O., Alei, E., Angerhausen,

report, Sol Foundation.

D., Birbacher, T., Defrère, D., Fortier, A., Huber, P. A.,

https://thesolfoundation.org/wp-

Kammerer, J., Laugier, R., Lichtenberg, T., Noack, L.,

content/uploads/2023/07/Sol_WhitePaper_Vol1N1.pdf.

Ranganathan, M., Rugheimer, S., (...), and Wyatt, M.

Gardner, J. N. (2003). Biocosm. The New Scientific

(2024). The Large Interferometer For Exoplanets

Theory of Evolution: Intelligent Life Is the Architect of

(LIFE): A space mission for mid-infrared nulling

the Universe. Inner Ocean Publishing.

interferometry. In Optical and Infrared Interferometry

Gardner, J. N. (2004). The Physical Constants as
Biosignature: An Anthropic Retrodiction of the Selfish
Biocosm Hypothesis. International Journal of
Astrobiology, 3(03):229–236. doi:
10.1017/S1473550404002162.
Garrett, M. A. (2025). Blink and you’ll miss it - How
Technological Acceleration Shrinks SETI’s Narrow
Detection Window. Acta Astronautica.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2509.23632. doi:
10.1016/j.actaastro.2025.09.076.
Garrett, M. A. and Siemion, A. P. V. (2022). Constraints
on extragalactic transmitters via Breakthrough Listen.
https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022arXiv220908147G.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2209.08147.
Gertz, J. (2016). ET Probes: Looking Here as Well as
There. Journal of the British Interplanetary Society,
69:88–91.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016JBIS...69...88G.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1609.04635.
Gertz, J. (2019). There’s No Place Like Home (In Our Own

and Imaging IX, volume 13095, pages 354–374. SPIE.
doi: 10.1117/12.3019090.
Gleiser, M. and Sowinski, D. (2018). Configurational
Information Approach to Instantons and False Vacuum
Decay in D -Dimensional Spacetime. Physical Review D,
98(5):056026.
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.98.056026.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.98.056026.
Graff, G. M. (2023). UFO: The Inside Story of the US
Government’s Search for Alien Life Here—and Out
There. Avid Reader Press / Simon & Schuster, New
York London Toronto.
Gray, R. H. (2020). The Extended Kardashev Scale. The
Astronomical Journal, 159(5):228.
https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/ab792b. doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/ab792b.
Green, J. (2021). Searching for technosignatures through
continual evolution of the Parkes Radio Telescope.
43:2000.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021cosp...43E2000G.
Grießmeier, J.-M. (2018). The Search for Radio Emission
from Giant Exoplanets. Verlag der Österreichischen

Solar System): Searching for ET Near White Dwarfs.

Akademie der Wissenschaften.

Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, 72:386–395.

https://austriaca.at?arp=0x0039b71f. doi:

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019JBIS...72..386G.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2001.00673.
Giles, D., Cody, A. M., Yaptangco, D. C., Tong, Y., and

10.1553/PRE8s285.
Griﬀith, R. L., Wright, J. T., Maldonado, J., Povich, M. S.,
Sigurđsson, S., and Mullan, B. (2015). The Ĝ Infrared

Croft, S. (2024). Anomaly Detection with TESS: A

Search for Extraterrestrial Civilizations with Large

Search for Megastructures and Non-Spherical Occulters.

Energy Supplies. III. The Reddest Extended Sources in

In American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts,

WISE. The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series,

volume 56, pages 356–03. https://ui.adsabs.harvard.

217:25.

edu/abs/2024AAS...24335603G/abstract.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015ApJS..217...25G.

Giles, D. and Walkowicz, L. (2019). Systematic
Serendipity: A Test of Unsupervised Machine Learning as

doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/217/2/25.
Grimaldi, C. (2021). Demography of galactic

a Method for Anomaly Detection. Monthly Notices of

technosignatures. Monthly Notices of the Royal

the Royal Astronomical Society, 484:834–849. https:

Astronomical Society, 500:2278–2288. https:

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019MNRAS.484..834G.

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021MNRAS.500.2278G.

doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty3461.

doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa3450.

81
Guillochon, J. and Loeb, A. (2015). SETI via Leakage
from Light Sails in Exoplanetary Systems. The
Astrophysical Journal, 811:L20.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015ApJ...811L..20G.
doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/811/2/L20.
Hajduková, M., Stober, G., Barghini, D., Koten, P.,
Vaubaillon, J., Sterken, V. J., Ďurišová, S., Jackson, A.,
and Desch, S. (2024). No evidence for interstellar
fireballs in the CNEOS database. Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 691:A8. https://www.aanda.org/articles/
aa/abs/2024/11/aa49569-24/aa49569-24.html. doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202449569.
Haliki, E. (2019). Broadcast network model of pulsars as
beacons of extraterrestrial civilizations. International
Journal of Astrobiology, 18:455–462.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019IJAsB..18..455H.
doi: 10.1017/S1473550418000459.
Hambly, N. C. and Blair, A. (2024). On the nature of
apparent transient sources on the National Geographic
Society–Palomar Observatory Sky Survey glass copy
plates. RAS Techniques and Instruments, 3(1):73–79.
https://doi.org/10.1093/rasti/rzae004. doi:
10.1093/rasti/rzae004.
Hamieh, S. (2021). On the Simulation Hypothesis and Its
Implications. Journal of Modern Physics, 12(05):541.
http://www.scirp.org/journal/Paperabs.aspx?PaperID=
108316. doi: 10.4236/jmp.2021.125036.
Hanna, D. S., Ball, J., Covault, C. E., Carson, J. E.,
Driscoll, D. D., Fortin, P., Gingrich, D. M., Jarvis, A.,
Kildea, J., Lindner, T., Mueller, C., Mukherjee, R., Ong,
R. A., Ragan, K., Williams, D. A., and Zweerink, J.
(2009). OSETI with STACEE: A Search for Nanosecond
Optical Transients from Nearby Stars. Astrobiology,
9:345–357.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2009AsBio...9..345H.
doi: 10.1089/ast.2008.0256.
Hansen, B. M. S. (2022). Unbound Close Stellar
Encounters in the Solar Neighborhood. The Astronomical
Journal, 163(2):44. http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.00852.
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac3a8b.
Hansen, B. M. S. and Zuckerman, B. (2021). Minimal
Conditions for Survival of Technological Civilizations in
the Face of Stellar Evolution. The Astronomical Journal,
161:145.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021AJ....161..145H.
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abd547.

Haqq-Misra, J., Fauchez, T. J., Schwieterman, E. W., and
Kopparapu, R. (2022a). Disruption of a Planetary
Nitrogen Cycle as Evidence of Extraterrestrial
Agriculture. The Astrophysical Journal, 929:L28.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022ApJ...929L..28H.
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac65ff.
Haqq-Misra, J., Kopparapu, R., Fauchez, T. J., Frank, A.,
Wright, J. T., and Lingam, M. (2022b). Detectability of
Chlorofluorocarbons in the Atmospheres of Habitable
M-dwarf Planets. The Planetary Science Journal, 3:60.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022PSJ.....3...60H.
doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ac5404.
Haqq-Misra, J. and Kopparapu, R. K. (2012). On the
likelihood of non-terrestrial artifacts in the Solar System.
Acta Astronautica, 72:15–20.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012AcAau..72...15H.
doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2011.10.010.
Haqq-Misra, J., Sheikh, S., Lingam, M., Kopparapu, R.,
Frank, A., Wright, J., Mamajek, E., Siegler, N., Price,
D., and the NExSS Working Group on Technosignatures
(2022c). Opportunities for Technosignature Science in
the Astro2020 Report. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022arXiv220308968H. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2203.08968.
Haqq-Misra, J., Vidal, C., and Profitiliotis, G. (2025).
Projections of Earth’s technosphere: Luminosity and
mass as limits to growth. Acta Astronautica,
229:831–838. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0094576525000505. doi:
10.1016/j.actaastro.2025.01.048.
Haramia, C. (2026). Ethics and Extraterrestrial
Communication: The Moral Responsibilities of Cosmic
Messengers. Routledge, to appear edition.
Haramia, C. and and DeMarines, J. (2019). The
Imperative to Develop an Ethically-Informed METI
Analysis. Theology and Science, 17(1):38–48.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14746700.2019.1557800. doi:
10.1080/14746700.2019.1557800.
Harp, G. R., Richards, J., Jenniskens, P., Shostak, S., and
Tarter, J. C. (2019). Radio SETI observations of the
interstellar object ’OUMUAMUA. Acta Astronautica,
155:51–54.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019AcAau.155...51H.
doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2018.10.046.
Harp, G. R., Richards, J., Shostak, S., Tarter, J. C.,
Vakoch, D. A., and Munson, C. (2016a). Radio SETI
Observations of the Anomalous Star KIC 8462852. The
Astrophysical Journal, 825:155.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016ApJ...825..155H.
doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/825/2/155.

82
Harp, G. R., Richards, J., Tarter, J. C., Dreher, J., Jordan,
J., Shostak, S., Smolek, K., Kilsdonk, T., Wilcox, B. R.,
Wimberly, M. K. R., Ross, J., Barott, W. C., Ackermann,
R. F., and Blair, S. (2016b). SETI Observations of
Exoplanets with the Allen Telescope Array. The
Astronomical Journal, 152:181.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016AJ....152..181H.
doi: 10.3847/0004-6256/152/6/181.
Harris, M. J. (1986). On the detectability of antimatter
propulsion spacecraft. Astrophysics and Space Science,
123(2):297–303. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00653949.
doi: 10.1007/BF00653949.
Harris, M. J. (1991). SETI Through the Gamma-Ray
Window: A Search for Interstellar Spacecraft. In
Heidmann, J. and Klein, M. J., editors, Bioastronomy,
pages 300–305, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer.
Harrison, E. R. (1995). The Natural Selection of Universes
Containing Intelligent Life. Quarterly Journal of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 36(3):193–203.
http://adsabs.harvard.edu/full/1996QJRAS..37..369B.
Harrop, B. L. and Schulze-Makuch, D. (2010). The Solar
Wind Power Satellite as an alternative to a traditional
Dyson Sphere and its implications for remote detection.
International Journal of Astrobiology, 9:89–99.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010IJAsB...9...89H.
doi: 10.1017/S1473550410000066.

Hein, A. M., Eubanks, T. M., Lingam, M., Hibberd, A.,
Fries, D., Schneider, J., Kervella, P., Kennedy, R.,
Perakis, N., and Dachwald, B. (2022). Interstellar Now!
Missions to Explore Nearby Interstellar Objects.
Advances in Space Research, 69(1):402–414.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S027311772100538X. doi: 10.1016/j.asr.2021.06.052.
Heller, R. (2017). Relativistic generalization of the
incentive trap of interstellar travel with application to
Breakthrough Starshot. Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 470(3):3664–3671.
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/articlelookup/doi/10.1093/mnras/stx1493. doi:
10.1093/mnras/stx1493.
Heller, R. and Pudritz, R. E. (2016). The Search for
Extraterrestrial Intelligence in Earth’s Solar Transit
Zone. Astrobiology, 16:259–270.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016AsBio..16..259H.
doi: 10.1089/ast.2015.1358.
Hesiod (2017). Theogony: and Works and days.
Northwestern world classics. Northwestern University
Press, Evanston, Illinois.
Hippke, M. (2018a). Benchmarking information carriers.
Acta Astronautica, 151:53–62.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018AcAau.151...53H.
doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2018.05.038.

Hart, M. H. (1975). Explanation for the Absence of
Extraterrestrials on Earth. Quarterly Journal of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 16:128. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1975QJRAS..16..128H.

Hippke, M. (2018b). Interstellar communication: The colors
of optical SETI. Journal of Astrophysics and Astronomy,
39:73. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1804.01249. doi:
10.1007/s12036-018-9566-x.

Harwit, M. (1981). Cosmic Discovery: The Search, Scope,
and Heritage of Astronomy. Basic Books, New York.
https://archive.org/details/cosmicdiscoverys00harw_0/
page/n7/mode/2up.

Hippke, M. (2020). Searching for a message in the angular
power spectrum of the cosmic microwave background.
https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020arXiv201114435H. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2011.14435.

Haykin, S. S. (2009). Communication Systems. Wiley,
Hoboken, NJ, 5th ed edition.
Heidmann, J. (1988). Pulsar-aided strategies for SETI.
Academie des Sciences Paris Comptes Rendus Serie B
Sciences Physiques, 306:1441–1445. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1988CRASB.306.1441H.

Hippke, M. (2021). Searching for Interstellar Quantum
Communications. The Astronomical Journal, 162:1.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021AJ....162....1H.
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abf7b7.

Heidmann, J. (1992). Pulsar-aided SETI within a hundred
light years. Acta Astronautica, 26:129–132.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1992AcAau..26..129H.
doi: 10.1016/0094-5765(92)90054-M.

Hippke, M. and Forgan, D. H. (2017a). Interstellar
communication. III. Optimal frequency to maximize data
rate. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017arXiv171105761H. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1711.05761.

Heidmann, J., Biraud, F., and Tarter, J. (1992).
Pulsar-aided SETI experimental observations. Acta
Astronautica, 26:205–209.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1992AcAau..26..205H.
doi: 10.1016/0094-5765(92)90097-3.

Hippke, M. and Forgan, D. H. (2017b). Interstellar
communication. VI. Searching X-ray spectra for
narrowband communication. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017arXiv171206639H. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1712.06639.

83
Hippke, M., Leyland, P., and Learned, J. G. (2018).
Benchmarking inscribed matter probes. Acta
Astronautica, 151:32–36.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018AcAau.151...32H.
doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2018.05.037.
Hogarth, M. L. (1992). Does general relativity allow an
observer to view an eternity in a finite time?
Foundations of Physics Letters, 5(2):173–181.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00682813. doi:
10.1007/BF00682813.
Holmes, D. L. (1991). Archaeology in space: Encountering
Alien Trash and other remains. In Heidmann, J. and
Klein, M. J., editors, Bioastronomy, pages 327–332,
Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer.
Hort, E., Sheikh, S., Farah, W., and Tusay, N. (2024).
SETI Search of the Anti-Solar Point Using the Allen
Telescope Array. In American Astronomical Society
Meeting Abstracts, volume 56, pages 109–03. https://ui.
adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024AAS...24310903H/abstract.
Howard, A. W., Horowitz, P., Wilkinson, D. T., Coldwell,
C. M., Groth, E. J., Jarosik, N., Latham, D. W.,
Stefanik, R. P., Willman, Jr., A. J., Wolff, J., and Zajac,
J. M. (2004). Search for Nanosecond Optical Pulses from
Nearby Solar-Type Stars. The Astrophysical Journal,
613:1270–1284.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004ApJ...613.1270H.
doi: 10.1086/423300.
Hsiao, T. Y.-Y., Goto, T., Hashimoto, T., Santos, D. J. D.,
On, A. Y. L., Kilerci-Eser, E., Wong, Y. H. V., Kim,
S. J., Wu, C. K. W., Ho, S. C. C., and Lu, T.-Y. (2021).
A Dyson sphere around a black hole. Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 506:1723–1732. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021MNRAS.506.1723H.
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab1832.
Hsu, S. and Zee, A. (2006). Message in the sky. Modern
Physics Letters A, 21(19):1495–1500. https://www.
worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/S0217732306020834.
doi: 10.1142/S0217732306020834.

Hyman, S. Ó., Daniel, K. J., and Schaffner, D. A. (2025).
PECCARY: A Novel Approach for Characterizing
Orbital Complexity, Stochasticity, and Regularity. The
Astrophysical Journal, 987(2):195.
https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/adda3e. doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/adda3e.
Hyung, E., Cherston, J., Jacobsen, S. B., and Loeb, A. A.
(2025). An investigation of the relationship between
morphology and chemistry of the D-type spherules from
the recovery expedition of the CNEOS 2014-01-08 bolide:
Implications for origins. Chemical Geology, 677:122627.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0009254125000178. doi:
10.1016/j.chemgeo.2025.122627.
Ihde, D. (2011). Stretching the In-between: Embodiment
and Beyond. Foundations of Science, 16(2):109–118.
doi: 10.1007/s10699-010-9187-6.
Imara, N. and Di Stefano, R. (2018). Searching for
Exoplanets around X-Ray Binaries with Accreting White
Dwarfs, Neutron Stars, and Black Holes. The
Astrophysical Journal, 859:40.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018ApJ...859...40I.
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aab903.
Inoue, M. and Yokoo, H. (2011). Type III Dyson Sphere of
Highly Advanced Civilisations around a Super Massive
Black Hole. Journal of the British Interplanetary
Society, 64:59–62.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011JBIS...64...59I.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1112.5519.
IPCC (2014–2025). IPCC | Data.
https://www.ipcc-data.org/.
Isaacson, H., Siemion, A. P. V., Marcy, G. W., Lebofsky,
M., Price, D. C., MacMahon, D., Croft, S., DeBoer, D.,

Huber, P. (2010). Submarine neutrino communication.
Physics Letters B, 692(4):268–271. doi:
10.1016/j.physletb.2010.08.003.

Hickish, J., Werthimer, D., Sheikh, S., Hellbourg, G., and

Hui, Y. (2022). The Question Concerning Technology in
China: An Essay in Cosmotechnics. Urbanomic,
Falmouth.

Galaxies. Publications of the Astronomical Society of the

Huston, M. and Wright, J. (2022). Evolutionary and
Observational Consequences of Dyson Sphere Feedback.
The Astrophysical Journal, 924:78.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022ApJ...924...78H.
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac3421.

Enriquez, J. E. (2017). The Breakthrough Listen Search
for Intelligent Life: Target Selection of Nearby Stars and
Pacific, 129:054501. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017PASP..129e4501I. doi:
10.1088/1538-3873/aa5800.
ISO (1994). Information technology – open systems
interconnection – basic reference model: The basic model.
https://www.iso.org/standard/20269.html.

84
Ivezić, Ž., Kahn, S. M., Tyson, J. A., Abel, B., Acosta, E.,
Allsman, R., Alonso, D., AlSayyad, Y., Anderson, S. F.,
Andrew, J., P. Angel, J. R., Angeli, G. Z., Ansari, R.,
Antilogus, P., Araujo, C., Armstrong, R., Arndt, K. T.,
Astier, P., Aubourg, É., (...), and Zhan, H. (2019).
LSST: From Science Drivers to Reference Design and
Anticipated Data Products. The Astrophysical Journal,
873(2):111.
https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ab042c. doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ab042c.
Jackson, A. A. and Benford, G. (2018). A Gravitational
Wave Transmitter.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1806.02334. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1806.02334.
Jacobs, D. M. (1975). The UFO Controversy in America.
Indiana University Press, Bloomington.
Jacobson-Bell, B., Croft, S., Choza, C., Andersson, A.,
Bautista, D., Gajjar, V., Lebofsky, M., MacMahon, D.
H. E., Painter, C., and Siemion, A. P. V. (2025).
Anomaly Detection and Radio-frequency Interference
Classification with Unsupervised Learning in
Narrowband Radio Technosignature Searches. The
Astronomical Journal, 169(4):206.
https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/adb8e7. doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/adb8e7.
Jaiswal, B. (2023). Specular Reflections from Artificial
Surfaces as Technosignature. Astrobiology, 23(3):291–294.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.07859. doi:
10.1089/ast.2022.0101.
Johnson, O. A., Gajjar, V., Keane, E. F., McKenna, D. J.,
Giese, C., McKeon, B., Carozzi, T. D., Alcaria, C.,
Brennan, A., Brzycki, B., Croft, S., Drew, J., Elkins, R.,
Gallagher, P. T., Kelly, R., Lebofsky, M., MacMahon, D.
H. E., McCauley, J., de Pater, I., (...), and Worden, S. P.
(2023). A Simultaneous Dual-site Technosignature
Search Using International LOFAR Stations. The
Astronomical Journal, 166(5):193.
https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/acf9f5. doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/acf9f5.
Jones, E. M. (1976). Colonization of the Galaxy. Icarus,
28:421.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1976Icar...28..421J.
doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(76)90156-1.
Jugaku, J. and Nishimura, S. (2004). A Search for Dyson
Spheres Around Late-type Stars in the Solar
Neighborhood. 213:437.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004IAUS..213..437J.

Kaltenegger, L. and Faherty, J. K. (2021). Past, present
and future stars that can see Earth as a transiting
exoplanet. Nature, 594:505–507.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021Natur.594..505K.
doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03596-y.
Kaltenegger, L. and Pepper, J. (2020). Which stars can see
Earth as a transiting exoplanet? Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 499:L111–L115. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020MNRAS.499L.111K.
doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slaa161.
Kardashev, N. S. (1964). Transmission of Information by
Extraterrestrial Civilizations. Soviet Astronomy,
8(2):217–221.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1964SvA.....8..217K.
Kardashev, N. S. (1979). Optimal wavelength region for
communication with extraterrestrial intelligence: λ = 1.5
mm. Nature, 278:28–30.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1979Natur.278...28K.
doi: 10.1038/278028a0.
Katz, J. I. (2021). ‘Oumuamua is not Artificial. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021arXiv210207871K.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2102.07871.
Kayali, O., Haliki, E., Bas, K., and Nemiroff, R. J. (2025).
Search for Dyson rings around pulsars: Unexpected light
curves. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 536(2):1447–1454.
https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stae2701. doi:
10.1093/mnras/stae2701.
Kerby, S. and Wright, J. T. (2021). Stellar Gravitational
Lens Engineering for Interstellar Communication and
Artifact SETI. The Astronomical Journal, 162:252.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021AJ....162..252K.
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac2820.
Kipping, D. (2018). The Halo Drive: Fuel-Free Relativistic
Propulsion of Large Masses via Recycled Boomerang
Photons. Journal of the British Interplanetary Society,
71(12):458–468. http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.03423. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1903.03423.
Kipping, D. M. and Teachey, A. (2016). A cloaking device
for transiting planets. Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 459:1233–1241. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016MNRAS.459.1233K.
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw672.
Kitajima, K. and Inutsuka, S.-i. (2023). An Origin of
Narrow Extended Structure in the Interstellar Medium:
An Interstellar Contrail Created by a Fast-Moving
Massive Object. The Astrophysical Journal, 945(1):39.
http://arxiv.org/abs/2302.06771. doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/acb7ea.

85
Klebesadel, R. W., Strong, I. B., and Olson, R. A. (1973).

Korpela, E. J., Anderson, D. P., Cobb, J., Lebofsky, M.,

Observations of Gamma-Ray Bursts of Cosmic Origin.

Liu, W., and Werthimer, D. (2025). SETI@home: Data

The Astrophysical Journal, 182:L85.

Acquisition and Front-end Processing*. The

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1973ApJ...182L..85K.

Astronomical Journal, 170(2):112.

doi: 10.1086/181225.

https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/ade5a7. doi:

Klesman, A. (2017). Now is your chance to fund a
groundbreaking SETI project.

10.3847/1538-3881/ade5a7.
Korzoun, N., Benbow, W., Brown, A., Foote, G. M.,

https://www.astronomy.com/science/now-is-your-

Hanlon, W., Hervet, O., Hoang, J., Holder, J., Horowitz,

chance-to-fund-a-groundbreaking-seti-project/.

P., Liu, W., Maire, J., Rault-Wang, N., Werthimer, D.,

Klinkhamer, F. (2023). Defect Wormhole: A Traversable

Wiley, J., Williams, D. A., and Wright, S. A. (2024).

Wormhole Without Exotic Matter. Acta Physica

PeV Gamma-ray Astronomy With Panoramic Optical

Polonica B, 54(5):1. http://www.actaphys.uj.edu.pl/

SETI Telescopes. In Proceedings of 38th International

findarticle?series=Reg&vol=54&aid=5-A3. doi:

Cosmic Ray Conference — PoS(ICRC2023), volume 444,

10.5506/APhysPolB.54.5-A3.

page 787. SISSA Medialab. https://pos.sissa.it/444/787.

Knuth, K. (2019). Constraints on Societies Engaged in
Relativistic Interstellar Travel.

doi: 10.22323/1.444.0787.
Ksanfomality, L. V. and Tavrov, A. V. (2017). Heritage of

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xXswO3yqzc0.

the Kepler mission: Special object KIC 8462852 and

Knuth, K. H., Ailleris, P., Agrama, H. A., Ansbro, E.,

criticism of the cometary hypothesis. Solar System

Budinger, P. A., Cai, T., Canuti, T., Cifone, M. C.,

Research, 51:422–435.

Cornet, W. B., Courtade, F., Dolan, R., Domine, L., Dini,

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017SoSyR..51..422K.

L., Friscourt, B., Graves, R., Haines, R. F., Hoffman, R.,

doi: 10.1134/S0038094617050057.

Kayal, H., Little, S., (...), and Watters, W. A. (2025).

Kuhn, J. R. and Berdyugina, S. V. (2015). Global warming

The new science of Unidentified Aerospace-Undersea

as a detectable thermodynamic marker of Earth-like

Phenomena (UAP). Progress in Aerospace Sciences,

extrasolar civilizations: The case for a telescope like

156:101097. http://arxiv.org/abs/2502.06794. doi:

Colossus. International Journal of Astrobiology,

10.1016/j.paerosci.2025.101097.
Knuth, K. H., Powell, R. M., and Reali, P. A. (2019).
Estimating Flight Characteristics of Anomalous
Unidentified Aerial Vehicles. Entropy, 21(10):939.
https://www.mdpi.com/1099-4300/21/10/939. doi:
10.3390/e21100939.
Kolchinsky, A. and Wolpert, D. H. (2018). Semantic

14:401–410.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015IJAsB..14..401K.
doi: 10.1017/S1473550414000585.
Kuhn, T. S. (1996). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 3rd ed edition.
Kulkarni, N., Lubin, P., and Zhang, Q. (2018). Relativistic
Spacecraft Propelled by Directed Energy. The

information, autonomous agency and non-equilibrium

Astronomical Journal, 155(4):155.

statistical physics. Interface Focus, 8(6):20180041.

https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/aaafd2. doi:

https://doi.org/10.1098/rsfs.2018.0041. doi:
10.1098/rsfs.2018.0041.
Kopparapu, R., Arney, G., Haqq-Misra, J., Lustig-Yaeger,
J., and Villanueva, G. (2021). Nitrogen Dioxide
Pollution as a Signature of Extraterrestrial Technology.

10.3847/1538-3881/aaafd2.
Kullback, S. and Leibler, R. A. (1951). On information and
suﬀiciency. The annals of mathematical statistics,
22(1):79–86. https://www.jstor.org/stable/2236703.
Kurtz, D. and Wegner, G. (1979). The nature of

The Astrophysical Journal, 908:164.

Przybylski’s star: An Ap star model inferred from the

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021ApJ...908..164K.

light variations and temperature. The Astrophysical

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abd7f7.

Journal, 232:510–519.

Kopparapu, R., Kofman, V., Haqq-Misra, J., Kopparapu,
V., and Lingam, M. (2024). Detectability of Solar Panels
as a Technosignature. The Astrophysical Journal,

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1979ApJ...232..510K.
doi: 10.1086/157310.
Lacki, B. C. (2015). SETI at Planck Energy: When

967(2):119.

Particle Physicists Become Cosmic Engineers. https:

https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ad43d7. doi:

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015arXiv150301509L. doi:

10.3847/1538-4357/ad43d7.

10.48550/arXiv.1503.01509.

86
Lacki, B. C. (2016). Type III Societies (Apparently) Do
Not Exist. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016arXiv160407844L. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1604.07844.
Lacki, B. C. (2019). A Shiny New Method for SETI:
Specular Reflections from Interplanetary Artifacts.
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific,
131:084401. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019PASP..131h4401L.
doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab1304.
Lacki, B. C., Brzycki, B., Croft, S., Czech, D., DeBoer, D.,
DeMarines, J., Gajjar, V., Isaacson, H., Lebofsky, M.,
MacMahon, D. H. E., Price, D. C., Sheikh, S. Z., Siemion,
A. P. V., Drew, J., and Worden, S. P. (2021). One of
Everything: The Breakthrough Listen Exotica Catalog.
The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 257:42.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021ApJS..257...42L.
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac168a.
LaFond, J., Wright, J. T., and Huston, M. J. (2021).
Furthering a Comprehensive SETI Bibliography. Journal
of the British Interplanetary Society, 74:252–255.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021JBIS...74..252L.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2107.02887.
Lakatos, I. (1970). Falsification and the Methodology of
Scientific Research Programmes. In Musgrave, A. and
Lakatos, I., editors, Criticism and the Growth of
Knowledge: Proceedings of the International Colloquium
in the Philosophy of Science, London, 1965, volume 4,
pages 91–196. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
doi: 10.1017/CBO9781139171434.009.
Last, C. (2017). Big Historical Foundations for Deep
Future Speculations: Cosmic Evolution, Atechnogenesis,
and Technocultural Civilization. Foundations of Science,
22(1):39–124. https:
//cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2012/12/last-c-2015-bighistorical-foundations-for-deep-future-speculations5.pdf.
doi: 10.1007/s10699-015-9434-y.
Lazio, T. J. W., Djorgovski, S. G., Howard, A., Cutler, C.,
Sheikh, S. Z., Cavuoti, S., Herzing, D., Wagstaff, K.,
Wright, J. T., Gajjar, V., Hand, K., Rebbapragada, U.,
Allen, B., Cartmill, E., Foster, J., Gelino, D., Graham,
M. J., Longo, G., Mahabal, A. A., (...), and Sussman, G.
(2023). Data-Driven Approaches to Searches for the
Technosignatures of Advanced Civilizations. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023arXiv230815518L. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2308.15518.
Learned, J. G., Kudritzki, R.-P., Pakvasa, S., and Zee, A.
(2008). The Cepheid Galactic Internet.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2008arXiv0809.0339L.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.0809.0339.

Learned, J. G., Pakvasa, S., Simmons, W. A., and Tata, X.
(1994). Timing Data Communication with Neutrinos - a
New Approach to SETI. Quarterly Journal of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 35:321. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1994QJRAS..35..321L.
Learned, J. G., Sandip Pakvasa, and Zee, A. (2009).
Galactic neutrino communication. Physics Letters B,
671:15–19.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2009PhLB..671...15L.
doi: 10.1016/j.physletb.2008.11.057.
Lebofsky, M., Croft, S., Siemion, A. P. V., Price, D. C.,
Enriquez, J. E., Isaacson, H., MacMahon, D. H. E.,
Anderson, D., Brzycki, B., Cobb, J., Czech, D., DeBoer,
D., DeMarines, J., Drew, J., Foster, G., Gajjar, V.,
Gizani, N., Hellbourg, G., Korpela, E. J., (...), and
Zhang, Y. G. (2019). The Breakthrough Listen Search
for Intelligent Life: Public Data, Formats, Reduction, and
Archiving. Publications of the Astronomical Society of
the Pacific, 131:124505. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019PASP..131l4505L. doi:
10.1088/1538-3873/ab3e82.
Lentz, E. W. (2021). Breaking the warp barrier: Hyper-fast
solitons in Einstein–Maxwell-plasma theory. Classical
and Quantum Gravity, 38(7):075015.
https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6382/abe692. doi:
10.1088/1361-6382/abe692.
Lentz, E. W. and Felton, R. C. (2024). Motivating
Emissions from Positive Energy Warp Bubbles. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024arXiv240519381L. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2405.19381.
Lesnikowski, A., Bickel, V. T., and Angerhausen, D. (2020).
Unsupervised Distribution Learning for Lunar Surface
Anomaly Detection. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020arXiv200104634L. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2001.04634.
Li, J.-K., Chen, Y., Tao, Z.-Z., Luan, X.-H., Zhang, T.-J.,
Huang, B.-L., Sun, X.-H., and Gajjar, V. (2023).
Polarization Criteria in Targeted SETI Observation.
https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023arXiv230515715L. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2305.15715.
Li, M. and Margot, J.-L. (2024). Are we alone in the
universe? - A Citizen Science Collaboration. Bulletin of
the AAS, 56(2).
https://baas.aas.org/pub/2024n2i159p06/release/1.

87
LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration,

Lipman, D., Isaacson, H., Siemion, A. P. V., Lebofsky, M.,

Abbott, B. P., Abbott, R., Abbott, T. D., Abernathy,

Danny C. Price, MacMahon, D., Croft, S., DeBoer, D.,

M. R., Acernese, F., Ackley, K., Adams, C., Adams, T.,

Hickish, J., Werthimer, D., Hellbourg, G., Enriquez,

Addesso, P., Adhikari, R. X., Adya, V. B., Affeldt, C.,

J. E., and Gizani, N. (2019). The Breakthrough Listen

Agathos, M., Agatsuma, K., Aggarwal, N., Aguiar,

Search for Intelligent Life: Searching Boyajian’s Star for

O. D., Aiello, L., Ain, A., (...), and Zweizig, J. (2016).

Laser Line Emission. Publications of the Astronomical

Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black

Society of the Pacific, 131:034202. https:

Hole Merger. Physical Review Letters, 116(6):061102.

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019PASP..131c4202L.

https:

doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aafe86.

//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102.

Liu, C. (2015). Dark Forest. Head of Zeus, London.

doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102.

Lloyd, S. (2000). Ultimate physical limits to computation.

Lin, H. W., Gonzalez Abad, G., and Loeb, A. (2014).

Nature, 406(6799):1047–1054.

Detecting Industrial Pollution in the Atmospheres of

https://www.nature.com/articles/35023282. doi:

Earth-like Exoplanets. The Astrophysical Journal,

10.1038/35023282.

792:L7.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014ApJ...792L...7L.
doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/792/1/L7.
Lineweaver, C. H., Fenner, Y., and Gibson, B. K. (2004).
The Galactic Habitable Zone and the Age Distribution of
Complex Life in the Milky Way. Science, 303:59–62.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004Sci...303...59L.
doi: 10.1126/science.1092322.
Lingam, M., Haqq-Misra, J., Wright, J. T., Huston, M. J.,
Frank, A., and Kopparapu, R. (2023). Technosignatures:
Frameworks for Their Assessment. The Astrophysical
Journal, 943:27.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023ApJ...943...27L.
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acaca0.
Lingam, M. and Loeb, A. (2017). Fast Radio Bursts from
Extragalactic Light Sails. The Astrophysical Journal,
837:L23.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017ApJ...837L..23L.
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aa633e.
Lingam, M. and Loeb, A. (2019). Relative Likelihood of
Success in the Search for Primitive versus Intelligent
Extraterrestrial Life. Astrobiology, 19:28–39.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019AsBio..19...28L.
doi: 10.1089/ast.2018.1936.
Lingam, M. and Loeb, A. (2020). Constraints on the

Lloyd, S. (2005). Programming the Universe: A Quantum
Computer Scientist Takes on the Cosmos. Vintage
Books.
Lockley, A. and Visioni, D. (2021). Detection of
pre-industrial societies on exoplanets. International
Journal of Astrobiology, 20:73–80.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021IJAsB..20...73L.
doi: 10.1017/S1473550420000361.
Loeb, A. (2022a). On the Possibility of an Artificial Origin
for ‘Oumuamua. Astrobiology, 22:1392–1399.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022AsBio..22.1392L.
doi: 10.1089/ast.2021.0193.
Loeb, A. (2022b). Overview of the Galileo Project.
http://arxiv.org/abs/2209.02479. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2209.02479.
Loeb, A. (2023). Interstellar Objects from Broken Dyson
Spheres. Research Notes of the AAS, 7(3):43.
https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/2515-5172/acc10d. doi:
10.3847/2515-5172/acc10d.
Loeb, A. (2024). Illumination of a Planet by a Black Hole
Moon as a Technological Signature. Research Notes of
the AAS, 8(8):200.
https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/2515-5172/ad6e7a. doi:
10.3847/2515-5172/ad6e7a.
Loeb, A., Adamson, T., Bergstrom, S., Cloete, R., Cohen,
S., Conrad, K., Domine, L., Fu, H., Hoskinson, C.,

Abundance of 0.01 c Stellar Engines in the Milky Way.

Hyung, E., Jacobsen, S., Kelly, M., Kohn, J., Lard, E.,

The Astrophysical Journal, 905:175.

Lam, S., Laukien, F., Lem, J., McCallum, R., Millsap,

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020ApJ...905..175L.

R., (...), and Wynn, J. (2023). Discovery of Spherules of

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abc69c.

Likely Extrasolar Composition in the Pacific Ocean Site

Lingam, M. and Loeb, A. (2021). Life in the Cosmos:

of the CNEOS 2014-01-08 (IM1) Bolide.

From Biosignatures to Technosignatures. Harvard

http://arxiv.org/abs/2308.15623. doi:

University Press.

10.48550/arXiv.2308.15623.

88
Loeb, A. and Cloete, R. (2025). Is the ”Dark Comet” 2005
VL1 the Venera 2 Spacecraft?
http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.03552. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2503.03552.
Loeb, A. and Turner, E. L. (2012). Detection Technique
for Artificially Illuminated Objects in the Outer Solar
System and Beyond. Astrobiology, 12:290–294.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012AsBio..12..290L.
doi: 10.1089/ast.2011.0758.
Long Now Foundation (2025). Long Now Foundation.
https://longnow.org/.
Loveland, R. and Sime, R. (2024). Anomaly Detection
Methods for Finding Technosignatures. In ICPRAM,
pages 633–640. https:
//www.scitepress.org/Papers/2024/123064/123064.pdf.
Lubin, P. (2016). The search for directed intelligence.
REACH, 1:20–45. https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2352309315300146. doi:
10.1016/j.reach.2016.05.003.
Lubin, P. (2022). The Path to Transformational Space
Exploration. World Scientific Publishing Company,
Hackensack, New Jersey.
Lubin, P., Hughes, G. B., Eskenazi, M., Kosmo, K.,
Johansson, I. E., Griswold, J., Pryor, M., O’Neill, H.,
Meinhold, P., Suen, J., Riley, J., Zhang, Q., Walsh, K.,
Melis, C., Kangas, M., Motta, C., and Brashears, T.
(2016). Directed energy missions for planetary defense.
Advances in Space Research, 58(6):1093–1116.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0273117716302071. doi: 10.1016/j.asr.2016.05.021.
Lustig-Yaeger, J., Meadows, V. S., Crisp, D., Line, M. R.,
and Robinson, T. D. (2023). Earth as a Transiting
Exoplanet: A Validation of Transmission Spectroscopy
and Atmospheric Retrieval Methodologies for Terrestrial
Exoplanets. The Planetary Science Journal, 4(9):170.
https:
//iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/PSJ/acf3e5/meta.
doi: 10.3847/PSJ/acf3e5.
Maccone, C. (2009). Deep Space Flight and
Communications: Exploiting the Sun as a Gravitational
Lens. Springer.
Maccone, C. (2012). SETI among galaxies by virtue of
black holes. Acta Astronautica, 78:109–120. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012AcAau..78..109M. doi:
10.1016/j.actaastro.2011.10.011.
Maccone, C. (2013a). Galactic Internet made possible by
star gravitational lensing. Acta Astronautica,
82:246–250. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013AcAau..82..246M. doi:
10.1016/j.actaastro.2012.07.015.

Maccone, C. (2013b). Sun Focus Comes First, Interstellar
Comes Second. Journal of the British Interplanetary
Society, 66:25–37.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013JBIS...66...25M.
Madhusudhan, N., Constantinou, S., Holmberg, M., Sarkar,
S., Piette, A. A. A., and Moses, J. I. (2025). New
Constraints on DMS and DMDS in the Atmosphere of
K2-18 b from JWST MIRI. The Astrophysical Journal
Letters, 983(2):L40.
https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/2041-8213/adc1c8. doi:
10.3847/2041-8213/adc1c8.
Maire, J., Wright, S. A., Holder, J., Anderson, D., Benbow,
W., Brown, A., Cosens, M., Foote, G., Hanlon, W. F.,
Hervet, O., Horowitz, P., Howard, A. W., Lee, R., Liu,
W., Raffanti, R., Rault-Wang, N., Stone, R. P. S.,
Werthimer, D., Wiley, J., and Williams, D. A. (2022).
Panoramic SETI: Program update and high-energy
astrophysics applications. 12184:121848B. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022SPIE12184E..8BM.
doi: 10.1117/12.2630772.
Maire, J., Wright, S. A., Werthimer, D., Treffers, R. R.,
Marcy, G. W., Stone, R. P. S., Drake, F., and Siemion,
A. (2014). A near-infrared SETI experiment: Probability
distribution of false coincidences. 9147:91474K. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014SPIE.9147E..4KM.
doi: 10.1117/12.2056372.
Makovetskii, P. V. (1976). Structure of call signals of
extraterrestrial civilizations. Soviet Astronomy, 20:123.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1976SvA....20..123M.
Maldacena, J. and Susskind, L. (2013). Cool horizons for
entangled black holes. Fortschritte der Physik,
61(9):781–811. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1002/prop.201300020. doi: 10.1002/prop.201300020.
Maldonado-Lang, P. and Vidal, C. (2025). Emergent
Complexity in Nuclear Reaction Networks: A Study of
Stellar Nucleosynthesis through Chemical Organization
Theory. In ALIFE 2025: Ciphers of Life: Proceedings of
the Artificial Life Conference 2025. MIT Press.
https://dx.doi.org/10.1162/ISAL.a.914. doi:
10.1162/ISAL.a.914.
Mallove, E. F. and Matloff, G. L. (1989). The Starflight
Handbook: A Pioneer’s Guide to Interstellar Travel.
Wiley Science Editions. Wiley, New York.
Mamajek, E. E., Barenfeld, S. A., Ivanov, V. D., Kniazev,
A. Y., Väisänen, P., Beletsky, Y., and Boﬀin, H. M. J.
(2015). The Closest Known Flyby of a Star to the Solar
System. The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 800(1):L17.
https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/2041-8205/800/1/L17. doi:
10.1088/2041-8205/800/1/L17.

89
Marcy, G. W. (2021). A search for optical laser emission

McDonald, J. (1972). Science in Default: Twenty-Two

from Proxima Centauri. Monthly Notices of the Royal

Years of Inadequate UFO Investigations. In Sagan, C.

Astronomical Society, 505:3537–3548. https:

and Page, T., editors, UFO’s: A Scientific Debate, pages

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021MNRAS.505.3537M.

52–55, Cornell University.

doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab1440.

https://www.narcap.org/s/scienceindefault.pdf.

Marcy, G. W. and Tellis, N. K. (2023). A search for
transient, monochromatic light from the Galactic plane.

McLaughlin, W. I. (1977). On the Timing of an Interstellar
Communication. Icarus, 32:464–470.

Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1977Icar...32..464M.

520:2121–2137. https:

doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(77)90019-7.

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023MNRAS.520.2121M.
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad227.
Margolus, N. and Levitin, L. B. (1998). The maximum
speed of dynamical evolution. Physica D: Nonlinear
Phenomena, 120(1):188–195. https://www.sciencedirect.

McLaughlin, W. I. (1986). A SETI experiment. Journal of
the British Interplanetary Society, 39:325.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1986JBIS...39..325M.
McMonigal, B., Lewis, G. F., and O’Byrne, P. (2012).
Alcubierre warp drive: On the matter of matter. Physical

com/science/article/pii/S0167278998000542. doi:

Review D, 85(6):064024.

10.1016/S0167-2789(98)00054-2.

https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.85.064024.

Margot, J., Pinchuk, P., Lynch, R., and UCLA Spring 2018
SETI Class (2020). A Search for Technosignatures

doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.85.064024.
Meadows, V., Graham, H., Abrahamsson, V., Adam, Z.,

around 16 Sun-like Stars Near the Plane of the Galaxy

Amador-French, E., Arney, G., Barge, L., Barlow, E.,

with the Green Bank Telescope at 1.15-1.73 GHz.

Berea, A., Bose, M., Bower, D., Chan, M., Cleaves, J.,

235:227.06. https:

Corpolongo, A., Currie, M., Domagal-Goldman, S.,

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020AAS...23522706M.

Dong, C., Eigenbrode, J., Enright, A., (...), and Young,

Martínez-Galarza, J. R., Bianco, F. B., Crake, D.,

L. (2022). Community Report from the Biosignatures

Tirumala, K., Mahabal, A. A., Graham, M. J., and Giles,

Standards of Evidence Workshop.

D. (2021). A method for finding anomalous astronomical

http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.14293. doi:

light curves and their analogues. Monthly Notices of the

10.48550/arXiv.2210.14293.

Royal Astronomical Society, 508:5734–5756. https:

Meiser, L. C., Nguyen, B. H., Chen, Y.-J., Nivala, J.,

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021MNRAS.508.5734M.

Strauss, K., Ceze, L., and Grass, R. N. (2022). Synthetic

doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab2588.

DNA applications in information technology. Nature

Matloff, G. and Bangs, C. (2019). Stellar Engineering.
SCB Distributors.
Matloff, G. L. (1986). World ships and white dwarfs.
Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, 39:114.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1986JBIS...39..114M.
Matloff, G. L. (2004). A Proposed Infrared Search for
Artificial Kuiper Belt Objects. Journal of the British

Communications, 13(1):352.
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-021-27846-9.
doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-27846-9.
Meshik, A. P., Hohenberg, C. M., and Pravdivtseva, O. V.
(2004). Record of Cycling Operation of the Natural
Nuclear Reactor in the Oklo/Okelobondo Area in Gabon.
Physical Review Letters, 93(18):182302. https:

Interplanetary Society, 57:283–287.

//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.93.182302. doi:

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004JBIS...57..283M.

10.1103/PhysRevLett.93.182302.

Matloff, G. L. (2016). Starlight, Starbright: Are Stars
Conscious? Curtis Press.
Matloff, G. L. (2017). Stellar Consciousness: Can

Messerschmitt, D. G. (2012). Interstellar communication:
The case for spread spectrum. Acta Astronautica,
81:227–238. https:

Panpsychism Emerge as an Observational Science.

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012AcAau..81..227M. doi:

Edgescience, 29:9–14.

10.1016/j.actaastro.2012.07.024.

Mautner, M. and Matloff, G. L. (1979). Directed

Millis, M. and Davis, E. (2009). Frontiers of Propulsion

panspermia - A technical and ethical evaluation of

Science. AIAA, Reston, Virginia, illustrated edition

seeding nearby solar systems. Journal of the British

edition.

Interplanetary Society, 32:419–423.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1979JBIS...32..419M.

Misner, C. W., Thorne, K. S., and Wheeler, J. A. (1973).
Gravitation. WH Freeman & co, San Francisco.

90
Mohr, P. J., Taylor, B. N., and Newell, D. B. (2008).
CODATA recommended values of the fundamental
physical constants: 2006a). Journal of Physical and
Chemical Reference Data, 37(3):1187–1284.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2844785. doi:
10.1063/1.2844785.
Morris, M. S., Thorne, K. S., and Yurtsever, U. (1988).
Wormholes, Time Machines, and the Weak Energy
Condition. Physical Review Letters, 61(13):1446–1449.
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.61.1446.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.61.1446.
Morrison, P. (1962). Interstellar communication. In
Bulletin of The Philosophical Society of Washington,
volume 16 of 1, pages 58–82, Washington D.C.
https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/
2h7xappgnit8rgvrngcrh/Volume16.pdf?rlkey=xwjbidwd62zrq4peqxev8vzuw&e=1&dl=0.
Mumma, M. J. (1990). Astrophysics from the Moon. In
Kondo, Y., editor, Observatories in Earth Orbit and
Beyond, pages 381–390, Dordrecht. Springer Netherlands.
Nakamura, H. (1986). SV40 DNA - a message from ε Eri?
Acta Astronautica, 13:573–578.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1986AcAau..13..573N.
doi: 10.1016/0094-5765(86)90059-7.
NASA Technosignatures Workshop Participants (2018).
NASA and the Search for Technosignatures: A Report
from the NASA Technosignatures Workshop. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018arXiv181208681N. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1812.08681.
Nepal, S., Chiappini, C., Queiroz, A. B., Guiglion, G.,
Montalbán, J., Steinmetz, M., Miglio, A., and Khalatyan,
A. (2024). Discovery of the local counterpart of disc
galaxies at z > 4: The oldest thin disc of the Milky Way
using Gaia-RVS. Astronomy & Astrophysics, 688:A167.
https://www.aanda.org/articles/aa/abs/2024/08/
aa49445-24/aa49445-24.html. doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202449445.
Neuilly, M., Bussac, J., Fréjacques, C., Nief, G., Vendryès,
G., and Yvon, J. (1972). Sur l’existence dans un passé
reculé d’une réaction en chaîne naturelle de fissions, dans
le gisement d’uranium d’Oklo (Gabon) [On the existence
in the distant past of a natural fission chain reaction in
the Oklo uranium deposit (Gabon)]. Comptes Rendus de
l’Académie des Sciences, Série D(275):1847–1850. https:
//gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k5496492x/f845.item.
Neveu, M., Hays, L. E., Voytek, M. A., New, M. H., and
Schulte, M. D. (2018). The Ladder of Life Detection.
Astrobiology, 18(11):1375–1402. https:
//www.liebertpub.com/doi/full/10.1089/ast.2017.1773.
doi: 10.1089/ast.2017.1773.

Newman, M. E. J. (2018). Network structure from rich but
noisy data. Nature Physics, 14(6):542–545.
https://par.nsf.gov/servlets/purl/10064883. doi:
10.1038/s41567-018-0076-1.
Newman, P. A., Oman, L. D., Douglass, A. R., Fleming,
E. L., Frith, S. M., Hurwitz, M. M., Kawa, S. R.,
Jackman, C. H., Krotkov, N. A., Nash, E. R., Nielsen,
J. E., Pawson, S., Stolarski, R. S., and Velders, G. J. M.
(2009). What would have happened to the ozone layer if
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) had not been regulated?
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 9(6):2113–2128.
https://acp.copernicus.org/articles/9/2113/2009/. doi:
10.5194/acp-9-2113-2009.
Newman, W. I. and Sagan, C. (1981). Galactic
civilizations: Population dynamics and interstellar
diffusion. Icarus, 46:293–327.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1981Icar...46..293N.
doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(81)90135-4.
Nicholson, W. L. (2009). Ancient Micronauts:
Interplanetary Transport of Microbes by Cosmic
Impacts. Trends in Microbiology, 17(6):243–250. doi:
10.1016/j.tim.2009.03.004.
Nilipour, A., Davenport, J., and Croft, S. (2023). Signal
Synchronization Strategies and Time Domain SETI with
Gaia DR3. 55:309.06. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023AAS...24130906N.
Nishino, Y. and Seto, N. (2018). The Search for
Extra-Galactic Intelligence Signals Synchronized with
Binary Neutron Star Mergers. The Astrophysical
Journal, 862:L21.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018ApJ...862L..21N.
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aad33d.
NOAA (2025). NOAA Global Monitoring Laboratory.
https://gml.noaa.gov/index.html.
Nolan, G. P., Vallee, J. F., Jiang, S., and Lemke, L. G.
(2022). Improved instrumental techniques, including
isotopic analysis, applicable to the characterization of
unusual materials with potential relevance to aerospace
forensics. Progress in Aerospace Sciences, 128:100788.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0376042121000907. doi: 10.1016/j.paerosci.2021.100788.
Normier, A., Boujibar, A., Boulesteix, D., Sivula, O.,
Crawford, I. A., Gros, C., Horikami, C., Tachibana, K.,
Ali Firaq, R., Degrange, V., Giammichele, N., Léna, P.,
Mazaré, N., Nicollier, C., Profitiliotis, G., Rutunda, E.,
and Vakoch, D. (2025). A call to address humanity’s
cosmic footprint. Nature Astronomy, 9(7):934–935.
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41550-025-02606-7.
doi: 10.1038/s41550-025-02606-7.

91
Nováková, J., Kowal, M. R., Watts, P., Mohamed, P.,

Osmanov, Z. (2016). On the search for artificial Dyson-like

Bacon, E., Czerneda, J. E., Buckell, T. S., and Baxter, S.

structures around pulsars. International Journal of

(2023). Life Beyond Us: An Original Anthology of SF

Astrobiology, 15:127–132.

Stories and Science Essays. Laksa Media Groups Inc.,

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016IJAsB..15..127O.

Calgary.
Oberhaus, D. (2019). A Crashed Israeli Spacecraft Spilled

doi: 10.1017/S1473550415000257.
Osmanov, Z. and Berezhiani, V. I. (2018). On the

Tardigrades on the Moon. Wired.

possibility of the Dyson spheres observable beyond the

https://www.wired.com/story/a-crashed-israeli-lunar-

infrared spectrum. International Journal of Astrobiology,

lander-spilled-tardigrades-on-the-moon/.

17:356–360.

Oliver, B. M. and Billingham, J. (1971). Project Cyclops:
A Design Study of a System for Detecting
Extraterrestrial Intelligent Life. The 1971 NASA/ASEE

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018IJAsB..17..356O.
doi: 10.1017/S1473550418000174.
Osmanov, Z. N. (2021). From the SpaceX Starlink

Summer Fac. Fellowship Program (NASA-CR-114445.

megaconstellation to the search for Type-I civilizations.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1971asee.nasa.....O.

Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, 74:193–195.

Olson, S. J. (2015). Homogeneous cosmology with
aggressively expanding civilizations. Classical and
Quantum Gravity, 32:215025. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015CQGra..32u5025O.
doi: 10.1088/0264-9381/32/21/215025.
Olson, S. J. (2016). On the visible size and geometry of
aggressively expanding civilizations at cosmological
distances. Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle
Physics, 2016:021.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016JCAP...04..021O.
doi: 10.1088/1475-7516/2016/04/021.
Olson, S. J. (2017). Estimates for the number of visible
galaxy-spanning civilizations and the cosmological
expansion of life. International Journal of Astrobiology,
16:176–184.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017IJAsB..16..176O.
doi: 10.1017/S1473550416000082.
Olson, S. J. (2018). Expanding cosmological civilizations

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021JBIS...74..193O.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2103.07227.
Pace, G. W. (1979). The use of binary stars as time
markers in interstellar communication. Journal of the
British Interplanetary Society, 32:215–218.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1979JBIS...32..215P.
Pace, G. W. and Walker, J. C. G. (1975). Time markers in
interstellar communication. Nature, 254:400.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1975Natur.254..400P.
doi: 10.1038/254400a0.
Papagiannis, M. D. (1978). Are We all Alone, or could
They be in the Asteroid Belt ? Quarterly Journal of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 19:277. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1978QJRAS..19..277P.
Papagiannis, M. D. (1983). The Importance of Exploring
the Asteroid Belt. Acta Astronautica, 10:709–712. doi:
10.1016/0094-5765(83)90071-1.
Parkin, K. L. G. (2018). The Breakthrough Starshot
system model. Acta Astronautica, 152:370–384.

on the back of an envelope. https:

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018arXiv180506329O.

S0094576518310543. doi:

doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1805.06329.
Olsson-Francis, K. and Cockell, C. S. (2010). Experimental

10.1016/j.actaastro.2018.08.035.
Patterson, B. D. and Abela, R. (2010). Novel opportunities

methods for studying microbial survival in

for time-resolved absorption spectroscopy at the X-ray

extraterrestrial environments. Journal of Microbiological

free electron laser. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics,

Methods, 80(1):1–13. https://www.sciencedirect.com/

12(21):5647–5652. https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/

science/article/pii/S0167701209003145. doi:

articlelanding/2010/cp/c003406a. doi:

10.1016/j.mimet.2009.10.004.

10.1039/C003406A.

Opatrný, T., Richterek, L., and Bakala, P. (2017). Life

PBBA (1951–1953). Project Blue Book. Technical report,

under a black sun. American Journal of Physics,

Air Technical Intelligence Center, Wright-Patterson Air

85:14–22. https:

Force Base, Ohio.

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017AmJPh..85...14O. doi:

https://web.archive.org/web/20071011185942/http:

10.1119/1.4966905.

//bluebookarchive.org/download.aspx.

92
Pendry, J. B. (1983). Quantum limits to the flow of
information and entropy. Journal of Physics A:
Mathematical and General, 16(10):2161.
https://doi.org/10.1088/0305-4470/16/10/012. doi:
10.1088/0305-4470/16/10/012.
Penny, A. J. (2013). The SETI episode in the 1967
discovery of pulsars. European Physical Journal H,
38:535–547.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013EPJH...38..535P.
doi: 10.1140/epjh/e2012-30052-6.
Penrose, R. (1969). Gravitational Collapse: The Role of
General Relativity. Riv. Nuovo Cim, 1:252–276.
Petkowski, J. J., Seager, S., and Bains, W. (2024). Reasons
why life on Earth rarely makes fluorine-containing
compounds and their implications for the search for life
beyond Earth. Scientific Reports, 14(1):15575.
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-024-66265-w.
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-66265-w.
Pitowsky, I. (1990). The Physical Church Thesis and
Physical Computational Complexity. Iyyun: The
Jerusalem Philosophical Quarterly, 39:81–99.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/23350656.
Planck, M. (1900). Ueber irreversible Strahlungsvorgänge.
Annalen der Physik, 306:69–122.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1900AnP...306...69P.
doi: 10.1002/andp.19003060105.
Plane, J. M. C. (2012). Cosmic dust in the earth’s
atmosphere. Chemical Society Reviews,
41(19):6507–6518. https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/
articlelanding/2012/cs/c2cs35132c. doi:
10.1039/C2CS35132C.
Ponnaganti, R. N., Safonova, M., and Sivaram, C. (2024).
Making Habitable Worlds: Planets Versus
Megastructures. Proceedings of the International
Astronomical Union, 20(S387):134–141. doi:
10.1017/S174392132400187X.
Popper, K. R. (1959). The Logic of Scientific Discovery.
Routledge. https:
//archive.org/details/PopperLogicScientificDiscovery.
Price, M. E. (2019). Cosmological Natural Selection and
the Function of Life. In Georgiev, G. Y., Smart, J. M.,
Flores Martinez, C. L., and Price, M. E., editors,
Evolution, Development and Complexity, Springer
Proceedings in Complexity, pages 3–22, Cham. Springer
International Publishing.
Profitiliotis, G., Sheikh, S. Z., and Vidal, C. (2022). A
Delphi Approach to Technosignatures Prioritization. In
The Astrobiology Science Conference (AbSciCon) 2022,
pages 105–05.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022absc.conf10505P.

Prusti, T., de Bruijne, J. H. J., Brown, A. G. A., Vallenari,
A., Babusiaux, C., Bailer-Jones, C. a. L., Bastian, U.,
Biermann, M., Evans, D. W., Eyer, L., Jansen, F., Jordi,
C., Klioner, S. A., Lammers, U., Lindegren, L., Luri, X.,
Mignard, F., Milligan, D. J., Panem, C., (...), and
Zschocke, S. (2016). The Gaia mission. Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 595:A1. https://www.aanda.org/articles/
aa/abs/2016/11/aa29272-16/aa29272-16.html. doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/201629272.
Przybylski, A. (1961). HD 101065-a G0 Star with High
Metal Content. Nature, 189:739.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1961Natur.189..739P.
doi: 10.1038/189739a0.
Rădulescu, G. (2025). Soviet Interstellar Communications
in the Early 1960s. Journal of Astronomical History and
Heritage, 28(3):576–585.
https://www.sciengine.com/10.3724/SP.J.14402807.2025.03.03. doi: 10.3724/SP.J.1440-2807.2025.03.03.
Rao, U. and Fehn, U. (1999). Sources and reservoirs of
anthropogenic iodine-129 in western New York.
Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 63(13):1927–1938.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0016703799001337. doi:
10.1016/S0016-7037(99)00133-7.
Raulin-Cerceau, F. (2010). The pioneers of interplanetary
communication: From Gauss to Tesla. Acta
Astronautica, 67:1391–1398. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010AcAau..67.1391R. doi:
10.1016/j.actaastro.2010.05.017.
Raup, D. M. (1992). Nonconscious intelligence in the
Universe. Acta Astronautica, 26:257–261.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1992AcAau..26..257R.
doi: 10.1016/0094-5765(92)90108-U.
Raymond, S. N., Veras, D., Clement, M. S., Izidoro, A.,
Kipping, D., and Meadows, V. (2023). Constellations of
co-orbital planets: Horseshoe dynamics, long-term
stability, transit timing variations, and potential as SETI
beacons. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 521:2002–2011. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023MNRAS.521.2002R.
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad643.
Reed, N. W., Shearer, R. L., McGlynn, S. E., Wing, B. A.,
Tolbert, M. A., and Browne, E. C. (2024). Abiotic
Production of Dimethyl Sulfide, Carbonyl Sulfide, and
Other Organosulfur Gases via Photochemistry:
Implications for Biosignatures and Metabolic Potential.
The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 973(2):L38.
https://doi.org/10.3847/2041-8213/ad74da. doi:
10.3847/2041-8213/ad74da.

93
Reeves, H. (1985). Atoms of Silence: An Exploration of

Rozwadowska, K., Vissani, F., and Cappellaro, E. (2021).

Cosmic Evolution. MIT Press, Cambridge,

On the rate of core collapse supernovae in the milky way.

Massachusetts.

New Astronomy, 83:101498. https://www.sciencedirect.

Reines, A. E. and Marcy, G. W. (2002). Optical Search for
Extraterrestrial Intelligence: A Spectroscopic Search for
Laser Emission from Nearby Stars. Publications of the

com/science/article/pii/S138410762030289X. doi:
10.1016/j.newast.2020.101498.
Sagan, C. (1963). Direct contact among galactic

Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 114:416–426. https:

civilizations by relativistic interstellar spaceflight.

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2002PASP..114..416R. doi:

Planetary and Space Science, 11(5):485–498.

10.1086/342496.
Reyes, A. and Wright, J. (2019). Towards a Comprehensive
Bibliography for SETI. Journal of the British
Interplanetary Society, 72:186–189.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019JBIS...72..186R.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1908.02587.
Ringel, Z. and Kovrizhin, D. L. (2017). Quantized
gravitational responses, the sign problem, and quantum
complexity. Science Advances, 3(9):e1701758. https:

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
0032063363900722. doi: 10.1016/0032-0633(63)90072-2.
Sagan, C. and Page, T., editors (1972). UFO’s: A
Scientific Debate. Ithaca [N.Y.].
Sagan, C., Thompson, W. R., Carlson, R., Gurnett, D., and
Hord, C. (1993). A search for life on Earth from the
Galileo spacecraft. Nature, 365(6448):715–721. doi:
10.1038/365715a0.
Sagan, C. and Walker, R. G. (1966). The Infrared
Detectability of Dyson Civilizations. The Astrophysical

//www.science.org/doi/full/10.1126/sciadv.1701758. doi:

Journal, 144:1216–1218.

10.1126/sciadv.1701758.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1966ApJ...144.1216S.

Ritchie, H., Rosado, P., and Roser, M. (2020). Energy
Production and Consumption. https:
//ourworldindata.org/energy-production-consumption.
Robles, J. A., Lineweaver, C. H., Grether, D., Flynn, C.,

doi: 10.1086/148718.
Sallmen, S., Korpela, E. J., and Crawford-Taylor, K.
(2019). Improved Analysis of Clarke Exobelt
Detectability. The Astronomical Journal, 158:258.

Egan, C. A., Pracy, M. B., Holmberg, J., and Gardner,

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019AJ....158..258S.

E. (2008). A comprehensive comparison of the Sun to

doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab5300.

other stars: Searching for self-selection effects. The

Sánchez-Lozano, J. M., Peña-Asensio, E., and

Astrophysical Journal, 684(1):691–706.

Socas-Navarro, H. (2024). Deciding Technosignature

http://arxiv.org/abs/0805.2962. doi: 10.1086/589985.

Search Strategies: Multi-Criteria Fuzzy Logic to Find

Rodeghier, M. (2024). Editorial of the first issue. Limina The Journal of UAP Studies, 1(1):8–10.
Romanovskaya, I. K. (2022a). The Cosmic Hitchhikers
Hypothesis: Extraterrestrial Civilizations Using
Free-Floating Planets for Interstellar Colonization. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022arXiv220203364R. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2202.03364.
Romanovskaya, I. K. (2022b). Migrating extraterrestrial
civilizations and interstellar colonization: Implications for

Extraterrestrial Intelligence. Aerospace, 11(1):88.
https://www.mdpi.com/2226-4310/11/1/88. doi:
10.3390/aerospace11010088.
Sandford, E. and Kipping, D. (2019). Shadow Imaging of
Transiting Objects. The Astronomical Journal,
157(2):42. https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/aaf565.
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aaf565.
Schattschneider, P. and Jackson, A. A. (2022). The
Fishback ramjet revisited. Acta Astronautica,
191:227–234. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/

SETI and SETA. International Journal of Astrobiology,

article/pii/S0094576521005804. doi:

21:163–187.

10.1016/j.actaastro.2021.10.039.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022IJAsB..21..163R.
doi: 10.1017/S1473550422000143.
Rose, C. and Wright, G. (2004). Inscribed matter as an

Schelling, T. C. (1960). The Strategy of Conflict. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge.
Schmidt, E. G. (2022). A Search for Analogs of KIC

energy-eﬀicient means of communication with an

8462852 (Boyajian’s Star): A Second List of Candidates.

extraterrestrial civilization. Nature, 431:47–49.

The Astronomical Journal, 163:10.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004Natur.431...47R.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022AJ....163...10S.

doi: 10.1038/nature02884.

doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac3416.

94
Schmidt, G. A. and Frank, A. (2019). The Silurian

Seligman, D. Z., Farnocchia, D., Micheli, M., Hainaut,

hypothesis: Would it be possible to detect an industrial

O. R., Hsieh, H. H., Feinstein, A. D., Chesley, S. R.,

civilization in the geological record? International

Taylor, A. G., Masiero, J., and Meech, K. J. (2024). Two

Journal of Astrobiology, 18:142–150.

distinct populations of dark comets delineated by orbits

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019IJAsB..18..142S.

and sizes. Proceedings of the National Academy of

doi: 10.1017/S1473550418000095.
Schnabel, R., Bowen, W. P., Treps, N., Ralph, T. C.,
Bachor, H.-A., and Lam, P. K. (2003).
Stokes-operator-squeezed continuous-variable polarization
states. Physical Review A, 67(1):012316.
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.67.012316.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.67.012316.
Schwartz, R. N. and Townes, C. H. (1961). Interstellar and
Interplanetary Communication by Optical Masers.
Nature, 190:205–208.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1961Natur.190..205S.
doi: 10.1038/190205a0.
Schwieterman, E. W., Fauchez, T. J., Haqq-Misra, J.,

Sciences, 121(51):e2406424121. https:
//www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.2406424121. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2406424121.
Sellers, L., Bobrick, A., Martire, G., Andrews, M., and
Paulini, M. (2022). Searching for Intelligent Life in
Gravitational Wave Signals Part I: Present Capabilities
and Future Horizons. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022arXiv221202065S. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2212.02065.
Semiz, İ. and Oğur, S. (2015). Dyson Spheres around
White Dwarfs. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015arXiv150304376S. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1503.04376.
Seto, N. (2021). Search for Galactic Civilizations Using

Kopparapu, R. K., Angerhausen, D., Pidhorodetska, D.,

Historical Supernovae. The Astrophysical Journal,

Leung, M., Sneed, E. L., and Ducrot, E. (2024).

917:96.

Artificial Greenhouse Gases as Exoplanet

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021ApJ...917...96S.

Technosignatures. The Astrophysical Journal, 969:20.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024ApJ...969...20S.
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad4ce8.
Scoggins, M. T. and Kipping, D. (2023). Lazarus stars:
Numerical investigations of stellar evolution with
star-lifting as a life extension strategy. Monthly Notices
of the Royal Astronomical Society, 523:3251–3257. https:

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac0c7b.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of
communication. The Bell System Technical Journal,
27(3):379–423.
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/6773024.
doi: 10.1002/j.1538-7305.1948.tb01338.x.
Shannon, C. E. (1951). The redundancy of English. In

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023MNRAS.523.3251S.

Cybernetics; Transactions of the 7th Conference, New

doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad1617.

York: Josiah Macy, Jr. Foundation, pages 248–272.

Scoles, S. (2025). Voyage to Nowhere: An expensive and
ambitious plan for interstellar travel has quietly
disappeared. Scientific American, 333(3):24.
https://doi.org/10.1038/scientificamerican102025KwiBSQBKqsA2rfG3xLk5u.
Seager, S., Petkowski, J. J., Huang, J., Zhan, Z., Ravela, S.,
and Bains, W. (2023). Fully fluorinated non-carbon
compounds NF3 and SF6 as ideal technosignature gases.
Scientific Reports, 13(1):13576.

https://jontalle.web.engr.illinois.edu/uploads/537.F18/
Papers/Shannon50b.pdf.
shCherbak, V. I. and Makukov, M. A. (2013). The “Wow!
signal” of the terrestrial genetic code. Icarus,
224(1):228–242. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0019103513000791. doi:
10.1016/j.icarus.2013.02.017.
Sheehan, W. and Dobbins, T. (2003). The Spokes of
Venus: An Illusion Explained. Journal for the History of
Astronomy, 34(1):53–63.

https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-023-39972-z.

https://doi.org/10.1177/002182860303400103. doi:

doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-39972-z.

10.1177/002182860303400103.

Segal, G., Parkinson, D., and Bartlett, S. (2024).

Sheikh, S. Z. (2020). The Nine Axes of Merit for

Planetary Complexity Revealed by the Joint Differential

Technosignature Searches. International Journal of

Entropy of Eigencolors. The Astronomical Journal,

Astrobiology, 19:237–243.

167(3):114. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/ad20cf.

https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.02683. doi:

doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad20cf.

10.1017/S1473550419000284.

95
Sheikh, S. Z., Huston, M. J., Fan, P., Wright, J. T., Beatty,

Simpson, G. G. (1964). The Nonprevalence of Humanoids.

T., Martini, C., Kopparapu, R., and Frank, A. (2025).

Science, 143(3608):769–775. https://www.science.org/

Earth Detecting Earth: At What Distance Could Earth’s

doi/abs/10.1126/science.143.3608.769. doi:

Constellation of Technosignatures Be Detected with

10.1126/science.143.3608.769.

Present-day Technology? The Astronomical Journal,

Singer, C. E. (1980). Interstellar Propulsion Using a Pellet

169(2):118.

Stream for Momentum Transfer. Journal of the British

https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/ada3c7. doi:

Interplanetary Society, 33:107.

10.3847/1538-3881/ada3c7.
Sheikh, S. Z., Siemion, A., Enriquez, J. E., Price, D. C.,
Isaacson, H., Lebofsky, M., Gajjar, V., and Kalas, P.
(2020). The Breakthrough Listen Search for Intelligent
Life: A 3.95-8.00 GHz Search for Radio Technosignatures
in the Restricted Earth Transit Zone. The Astronomical
Journal, 160:29.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1980JBIS...33..107S.
Singer, C. E. (1981). Questions concerning pellet-stream
propulsion. Journal of the British Interplanetary Society,
34:117. https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1981JBIS...
34..117S/abstract.
Singer, S. F. (1967). On the origin of the Martian satellites

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020AJ....160...29S.

Phobos and Deimos. In Moon and Planets, page 317.

doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab9361.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1967mopl.conf..317S.

Sheikh, S. Z., Smith, S., Price, D. C., DeBoer, D., Lacki,

Singla, M., Chakrabarty, A., and Sengupta, S. (2023).

B. C., Czech, D. J., Croft, S., Gajjar, V., Isaacson, H.,

Effect of Multiple Scattering on the Transmission Spectra

Lebofsky, M., MacMahon, D. H. E., Ng, C., Perez, K. I.,

and the Polarization Phase Curves for Earth-like

Siemion, A. P. V., Webb, C. I., Zic, A., Drew, J., and

Exoplanets. The Astrophysical Journal, 944(2):155.

Worden, S. P. (2021). Analysis of the Breakthrough

https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/acb495. doi:

Listen signal of interest blc1 with a technosignature

10.3847/1538-4357/acb495.

verification framework. Nature Astronomy, 5:1153–1162.

Siraj, A. and Loeb, A. (2020). The Case for an Early Solar

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021NatAs...5.1153S.

Binary Companion. The Astrophysical Journal Letters,

doi: 10.1038/s41550-021-01508-8.

899(2):L24. https://doi.org/10.3847/2041-8213/abac66.

Shkadov, L. M. (1987). Possibility of controlling solar
system motion in the Galaxy. Brighton International
Astronautical Federation Congress.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1987brig.iafcR....S.
Shklovskii, I. S. and Sagan, C. (1966). Intelligent Life in
the Universe. Holden-Day, San Francisco.
Shostak, G. S. and Tarter, J. (1985). ”Signal” search for
intelligence in the galactic nucleus with the array of the
lowlands. Acta Astronautica, 12:369–372.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1985AcAau..12..369S.
doi: 10.1016/0094-5765(85)90071-2.
Shostak, S. (2020). SETI: The argument for artefact
searches. International Journal of Astrobiology,

doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/abac66.
Siraj, A. and Loeb, A. (2022). Interstellar Meteors Are
Outliers in Material Strength. The Astrophysical Journal
Letters, 941(2):L28.
https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/2041-8213/aca8a0. doi:
10.3847/2041-8213/aca8a0.
Siraj, A., Loeb, A., Moro-Martín, A., Elowitz, M., White,
A., Watters, W. A., Melnick, G. J., Cloete, R., Grindlay,
J., and Laukien, F. (2023). Physical Considerations for
an Intercept Mission to a 1I/’Oumuamua-Like
Interstellar Object. Journal of Astronomical
Instrumentation, 12(01):2340001. https://www.

19:456–461.

worldscientific.com/doi/10.1142/S2251171723400019.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020IJAsB..19..456S.

doi: 10.1142/S2251171723400019.

doi: 10.1017/S1473550420000233.
Siegel, E. (2024). Ask Ethan: Could we determine if

Skoglund, C. I. and Mustill, A. J. (2025). Starshades as
technosignatures in direct imaging phase curves:

UAPs/UFOs are aliens? https://bigthink.com/starts-

Application to the Habitable Worlds Observatory targets.

with-a-bang/determine-uap-ufo-aliens/.

Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,

Sigurdsson, S. (1992). Planets in Globular Clusters? The

544(1):572–586.

Astrophysical Journal, 399:L95.

https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/staf1657. doi:

https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.01263. doi: 10.1086/186615.

10.1093/mnras/staf1657.

96
Smart, J. M. (2009). Evo Devo Universe? A Framework for

Socas-Navarro, H., Haqq-Misra, J., Wright, J. T.,

Speculations on Cosmic Culture. In Dick, S. J. and

Kopparapu, R., Benford, J., Davis, R., and TechnoClimes

Lupisella, M. L., editors, Cosmos and Culture: Cultural

2020 workshop participants (2021). Concepts for future

Evolution in a Cosmic Context, pages 201–295.

missions to search for technosignatures. Acta

Government Printing Oﬀice, NASA SP-2009-4802,

Astronautica, 182:446–453. https:

Washington D.C. http://accelerating.org/downloads/
SmartEvoDevoUniv2008.pdf.
Smart, J. M. (2012). The transcension hypothesis:
Suﬀiciently advanced civilizations invariably leave our
universe, and implications for METI and SETI. Acta

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021AcAau.182..446S. doi:
10.1016/j.actaastro.2021.02.029.
Solano, E., Marcy, G. W., Villarroel, B., Geier, S.,
Streblyanska, A., Lombardi, G., Bär, R. E., and Andruk,

Astronautica, 78:55–68.

V. N. (2024). A bright triple transient that vanished

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012AcAau..78...55S.

within 50 min. Monthly Notices of the Royal

doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2011.11.006.

Astronomical Society, 527(3):6312–6320.

Smith, H. B. and Mathis, C. (2023). Life detection in a
universe of false positives. BioEssays, 45(12):2300050.
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/bies.
202300050. doi: 10.1002/bies.202300050.

https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stad3422. doi:
10.1093/mnras/stad3422.
Sowinski, D., Holler, S., Wong, M., Segal, G., Parkinson,
D., Cleaves, H. J., Sinhadc, P., Prabhu, A., Bartlett, S.,

Smith, K. and Hancock, P. A. (1995). Situation Awareness

and Vidal, C. (2025). Causal Leverage Density: A

Is Adaptive, Externally Directed Consciousness. Human

Universal Framework for Semantic Information. In

Factors, 37(1):137–148.

ALIFE 2025: Proceedings of the 2025 Artificial Life

https://doi.org/10.1518/001872095779049444. doi:
10.1518/001872095779049444.
Smith, S., Price, D. C., Sheikh, S. Z., Czech, D. J., Croft,
S., DeBoer, D., Gajjar, V., Isaacson, H., Lacki, B. C.,
Lebofsky, M., MacMahon, D. H. E., Ng, C., Perez, K. I.,

Conference. MIT Press. https:
//direct.mit.edu/isal/proceedings/isal2025/37/1/134209.
doi: 10.1162/ISAL.a.871.
Sowinski, D. R., Carroll-Nellenback, J., Markwick, R. N.,

Siemion, A. P. V., Webb, C. I., Drew, J., Worden, S. P.,

Piñero, J., Gleiser, M., Kolchinsky, A., Ghoshal, G., and

and Zic, A. (2021). A radio technosignature search

Frank, A. (2023). Semantic Information in a Model of

towards Proxima Centauri resulting in a signal of

Resource Gathering Agents. PRX Life, 1(2):023003.

interest. Nature Astronomy, 5:1148–1152.

https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.03286. doi:

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021NatAs...5.1148S.

10.1103/PRXLife.1.023003.

doi: 10.1038/s41550-021-01479-w.
Smolin, L. (1992). Did the universe evolve? Classical and
Quantum Gravity, 9(1):173.
http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/02649381/9/1/016/meta.
Sneed, E., Tusay, N., Sheikh, S., Cabrales, B., and Wright,
J. (2023). A Search for Spillover Radio Technosignatures
During Exoplanet Occultations. 55:309.03. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023AAS...24130903S.
Socas-Navarro, H. (2018). Possible Photometric Signatures

Spergel, D., Berea, A., Bianco, F. B., Brothers, R.,
Bontempi, P., Buss, J., Drake, N., Gold, M., Grinspoon,
D., Kelly, S., Mountain, M., Randolph, W., Scott, W.,
Semeter, J., Toner, K., and Wright, S. (2023). NASA
Unidentified Anomalous Phenomena: Independent Study
Team Report. NASA.
https://science.nasa.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/
uap-independent-study-team-final-report.pdf.
Staff at the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center

of Moderately Advanced Civilizations: The Clarke

(1975). The Arecibo message of November, 1974. Icarus,

Exobelt. The Astrophysical Journal, 855:110.

26:462–466.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018ApJ...855..110S.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1975Icar...26..462.

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaae66.

doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(75)90116-5.

97
Stancil, D. D., Adamson, P., Alania, M., Aliaga, L.,
Andrews, M., Del Castillo, C. A., Bagby, L., Bazo Alba,
J. L., Bodek, A., Boehnlein, D., Bradford, R., Brooks,
W. K., Budd, H., Butkevich, A., Caicedo, D. a. M.,
Capista, D. P., Castromonte, C. M., Chamorro, A.,
Charlton, E., (...), and Ziemer, B. P. (2012).
Demonstration of communication using neutrinos.
Modern Physics Letters A, 27(12):1250077.
https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/
S0217732312500770. doi: 10.1142/S0217732312500770.
Stanton, R. H. (2025). Unexplained starlight pulses found
in optical SETI searches. Acta Astronautica,
233:302–314. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0094576525002449. doi:
10.1016/j.actaastro.2025.04.044.
Stevens, A., Forgan, D., and James, J. O. (2016).
Observational signatures of self-destructive civilizations.
International Journal of Astrobiology, 15:333–344.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016IJAsB..15..333S.
doi: 10.1017/S1473550415000397.
Stewart, J. E. (2010). The Meaning of Life in a Developing
Universe. Foundations of Science, 15(4):395–409.
http://cogprints.org/6655/. doi:
10.1007/s10699-010-9184-9.
Stokes, G. G. (1851). On the composition and resolution of
streams of polarized light from different sources.
Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society,
9:399. https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1851TCaPS...
9..399S/abstract.
Stone, R. P. S., Wright, S. A., Drake, F., Muñoz, M.,
Treffers, R., and Werthimer, D. (2005). Lick
Observatory Optical SETI: Targeted Search and New
Directions. Astrobiology, 5:604–611.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2005AsBio...5..604S.
doi: 10.1089/ast.2005.5.604.
Stothers, R. (2007). Unidentified flying objects in classical
antiquity. Classical Journal, 103(1):79–92.
https://muse.jhu.edu/pub/1/article/806504/summary?
casa_token=97A330JnXiEAAAAA:GNJZxZDl77zZaJqVKMd64Ki9ln8xUs38_ojquQocYhwqj5wQ8amRSv8MBYf1aFRCx68vh9PM4.
Sturges, W. T., Oram, D. E., Laube, J. C., Reeves, C. E.,
Newland, M. J., Hogan, C., Martinerie, P., Witrant, E.,
Brenninkmeijer, C. a. M., Schuck, T. J., and Fraser, P. J.
(2012). Emissions halted of the potent greenhouse gas
SF5 CF3 . Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics,
12(8):3653–3658.
https://acp.copernicus.org/articles/12/3653/2012/. doi:
10.5194/acp-12-3653-2012.

Sturrock, P. A. (1999). The UFO Enigma: A New Review
of the Physical Evidence. Aspect, New York, NY, first
edition edition.
Suazo, M. (2024a). Project Hephaistos – III.
Characterizing anomalous infrared sources identified as
Dyson Sphere candidates. https:
//urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:uu:diva-525986.
Suazo, M. (2024b). Searching for Dyson Spheres in the
Milky Way. PhD thesis, Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis,
Uppsala. UppsalaUniversity.
Suazo, M., Zackrisson, E., Mahto, P. K., Lundell, F.,
Nettelblad, C., Korn, A. J., Wright, J. T., and
Majumdar, S. (2024). Project Hephaistos - II. Dyson
sphere candidates from Gaia DR3, 2MASS, and WISE.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
531:695–707. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024MNRAS.531..695S.
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae1186.
Suazo, M., Zackrisson, E., Wright, J. T., Korn, A. J., and
Huston, M. (2022). Project Hephaistos - I. Upper limits
on partial Dyson spheres in the Milky Way. Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
512:2988–3000. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022MNRAS.512.2988S.
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac280.
Sullivan, III, W. and Cordes, J. (1995). Astrophysical
Coding: A New Approach to SETI Signals. II.
Information About the Sender’s Environment. 74:337.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1995ASPC...74..337S.
Sullivan, III, W. T. and Mighell, K. J. (1984). A milky way
search strategy for extraterrestial intelligence. Icarus,
60:675–684.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1984Icar...60..675S.
doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(84)90172-6.
Svoronos, A. A. (2020). The Star Tug: An active stellar
engine capable of accelerating a star to relativistic
velocities. Acta Astronautica, 176:306–312.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0094576520304239. doi:
10.1016/j.actaastro.2020.07.005.
Szydagis, M., Knuth, K. H., Kugielsky, B. W., and Levy, C.
(2025). Initial Results From the First Field Expedition
of UAPx to Study Unidentified Anomalous Phenomena.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences, to appear.
http://arxiv.org/abs/2312.00558. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2312.00558.
Tabor, E. and Loeb, A. (2021). Detectability of Artificial
Lights from Proxima b.
http://arxiv.org/abs/2105.08081. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2105.08081.

98
Tang, T. B. (1976). Supernovae as time markers in

Temple, R. and Wickramasinghe, C. (2019). Kordylewski

interstellar communication. Journal of the British

Dust Clouds: Could They Be Cosmic “Superbrains”?

Interplanetary Society, 29:469.

Advances in Astrophysics, 4(4).

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1976JBIS...29..469T.

http://www.isaacpub.org/images/PaperPDF/AdAp_

Tarter, J. (2001a). The Search for Extraterrestrial
Intelligence (SETI). Annual Review of Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 39(Volume 39, 2001):511–548.
https://www.annualreviews.org/content/journals/10.
1146/annurev.astro.39.1.511. doi:
10.1146/annurev.astro.39.1.511.
Tarter, J., Backus, P., Blair, S., Cordes, J., Harp, G.,
Henry, R. C., Horowitz, P., Howard, A. W., Kilsdonk, T.,

100136_2019102413254120877.pdf. doi:
10.22606/adap.2019.44001.
Teo, E. (1998). Rotating traversable wormholes. Physical
Review D, 58(2):024014.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.gr-qc/9803098. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.58.024014.
Tesla, N. (1901). Talking with planets. Collier’s Weekly,

Korpela, E. J., Lasio, J., Levin, S., Shostack, G. S., and

26:4–5. https://patriots4truth.org/wp-content/uploads/

Werthimer, D. (2009). Advancing the Search for

2021/06/talking-with-the-planets-by-nicola-tesla.pdf.

Extraterrestrial Intelligence. 2010:294.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2009astro2010S.294T.
Tarter, J. and Steel, S. (2024). Searching for
extraterrestrial intelligence across a century. Journal of
Physics: Conference Series, 2877(1):012051.
https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/2877/1/012051.
doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/2877/1/012051.
Tarter, J. C. (2001b). SETI 2020: A roadmap for future
SETI observing projects. 4273:93–103.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2001SPIE.4273...93T.
doi: 10.1117/12.435361.
Tarter, J. C. (2007). The evolution of life in the Universe:
Are we alone? Highlights of Astronomy, 14:14–29.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2007HiA....14...14T.
doi: 10.1017/S1743921307009829.
Tarter, J. C., Agrawal, A., Ackermann, R., Backus, P.,
Blair, S. K., Bradford, M. T., Harp, G. R., Jordan, J.,
Kilsdonk, T., Smolek, K. E., Richards, J., Ross, J.,

Thoning, K., Dlugokencky, E., Lan, X., and NOAA Global
Monitoring Laboratory (2022). Trends in
globally-averaged CH4, N2O, and SF6.
https://gml.noaa.gov/ccgg/trends_doi.html. doi:
10.15138/P8XG-AA10.
Timmaraju, V., Siegler, N., and Mamajek, E. (2022).
Technosignatures Gap List Study. 44:2824.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022cosp...44.2824T.
Tipler, F. J. (1980). Extraterrestrial intelligent beings do
not exist. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 21:267–281. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1980QJRAS..21..267T.
Tong, Y., Cody, A. M., and Giles, D. (2023). Random
Forest Classification and Analysis of Eclipses in
Anomalous TESS Sources. In American Astronomical
Society Meeting Abstracts, volume 55, page 105.16. https:

Shostak, G. S., and Vakoch, D. (2010). SETI turns 50:

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023AAS...24110516T.

Five decades of progress in the search for extraterrestrial

Tough, A. (2001). Widening the range of search strategies.

intelligence. 7819:781902. https:

In The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) in

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010SPIE.7819E..02T. doi:

the Optical Spectrum III, volume 4273, pages 207–212.

10.1117/12.863128.

SPIE. https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-

Tellis, N. K. and Marcy, G. W. (2015). A Search for
Optical Laser Emission Using Keck HIRES. Publications
of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 127:540. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015PASP..127..540T. doi:
10.1086/681966.
Tellis, N. K. and Marcy, G. W. (2017). A Search for Laser

proceedings-of-spie/4273/0000/Widening-the-range-ofsearch-strategies/10.1117/12.435362.full. doi:
10.1117/12.435362.
Townes, C. H. (1983). At What Wavelengths Should We
Search for Signals from Extraterrestrial Intelligence?

Emission with Megawatt Thresholds from 5600 FGKM

Proceedings of the National Academy of Science,

Stars. The Astronomical Journal, 153:251.

80:1147–1151. https:

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017AJ....153..251T.

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1983PNAS...80.1147T. doi:

doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa6d12.

10.1073/pnas.80.4.1147.

99
Tremblay, C. D., Chaudhary, S., Li, M. G., Sheikh, S. Z.,

Turyshev, S. G. and Toth, V. T. (2020). Image formation

Myburgh, T., Czech, D., MacMahon, D. E., Demorest,

process with the solar gravitational lens. Physical Review

P. B., Donnachie, R. A., Siemion, A. P. V., Gajjar, V.,

D, 101(4):044048.

Lebofsky, M., Wandia, K., Perez, K. I., and

https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.101.044048.

Madhusudhan, N. (2026). A Narrowband

doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.101.044048.

Technosignature Search Toward the Hycean Candidate
K2-18b Using the VLA and MeerKAT.
http://arxiv.org/abs/2602.09553. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2602.09553.
Tremblay, C. D. and Tingay, S. J. (2024). An Extragalactic
Widefield Search for Technosignatures with the
Murchison Widefield Array. The Astrophysical Journal,
972(1):76.
https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ad6b11. doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ad6b11.
Turing, A. M. (1937). On Computable Numbers, with an
Application to the Entscheidungsproblem. Proceedings of
the London Mathematical Society, s2-42(1):230–265.

Tusay, N., Huston, M. J., Dedrick, C. M., Kerby, S.,
Palumbo, III, M. L., Croft, S., Wright, J. T., Robertson,
P., Sheikh, S., Duffy, L., Foote, G., Hyde, A., Lafond, J.,
Mullikin, E., Parts, W., Sandhaus, P., Smith, H. H.,
Sneed, E. L., Czech, D., (...), and Breakthrough Listen
(2022). A Search for Radio Technosignatures at the
Solar Gravitational Lens Targeting Alpha Centauri. The
Astronomical Journal, 164:116.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022AJ....164..116T.
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac8358.
Uno, Y., Hashimoto, T., Goto, T., Ho, S. C. C., Hsu, T.-Y.,
and Burns, R. (2023). Upper limits on transmitter rate

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1112/plms/

of extragalactic civilizations placed by Breakthrough

s2-42.1.230. doi: 10.1112/plms/s2-42.1.230.

Listen observations. Monthly Notices of the Royal

Turnbull, M. C. and Tarter, J. C. (2003a). Target Selection

Astronomical Society, 522:4649–4653. https:

for SETI. I. A Catalog of Nearby Habitable Stellar

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023MNRAS.522.4649U.

Systems. The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series,

doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad993.

145:181–198.

Vakoch, D. A. (2011). Asymmetry in Active SETI: A case

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2003ApJS..145..181T.

for transmissions from Earth. Acta Astronautica,

doi: 10.1086/345779.

68:476–488.

Turnbull, M. C. and Tarter, J. C. (2003b). Target
Selection for SETI. II. Tycho-2 Dwarfs, Old Open
Clusters, and the Nearest 100 Stars. The Astrophysical

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011AcAau..68..476V.
doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2010.03.008.
Vakoch, D. A., editor (2014). Archaeology, Anthropology,

Journal Supplement Series, 149:423–436.

and Interstellar Communication - NASA.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2003ApJS..149..423T.

https://www.nasa.gov/history/history-publications-and-

doi: 10.1086/379320.

resources/nasa-history-series/archaeology-anthropology-

Turner, J. D., Zarka, P., Grießmeier, J.-M., Lazio, J.,
Cecconi, B., Enriquez, J. E., Girard, J. N.,
Jayawardhana, R., Lamy, L., Nichols, J. D., and
de Pater, I. (2021). The search for radio emission from
the exoplanetary systems 55 Cancri, υ Andromedae, and
τ Boötis using LOFAR beam-formed observations.
Astronomy & Astrophysics, 645:A59.

and-interstellar-communication/.
Vakoch, D. A. and Dowd, M. F., editors (2015). The Drake
Equation: Estimating the Prevalence of Extraterrestrial
Life through the Ages. Number 8 in Cambridge
Astrobiology. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Vakoch, D. A. and Punske, J., editors (2023).

https://www.aanda.org/articles/aa/abs/2021/01/

Xenolinguistics: Towards a Science of Extraterrestrial

aa37201-19/aa37201-19.html. doi:

Language. Routledge, Abingdon, Oxon ; New York, NY.

10.1051/0004-6361/201937201.
Turyshev, S. G. (2024). Search for gravitationally lensed

Valdes, F. and Freitas, Jr., R. A. (1980). Comparison of
reproducing and nonreproducing starprobe strategies for

interstellar transmissions. Physical Review D,

galactic exploration. Journal of the British

110(8):084010. https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.01201. doi:

Interplanetary Society, 33:402–406.

10.1103/PhysRevD.110.084010.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1980JBIS...33..402V.

100
Vallenari, A., Brown, A. G. A., Prusti, T., de Bruijne, J.

Vidal, C. (2024). The Spider Stellar Engine: A Fully

H. J., Arenou, F., Babusiaux, C., Biermann, M., Creevey,

Steerable Extraterrestrial Design? Journal of the British

O. L., Ducourant, C., Evans, D. W., Eyer, L., Guerra, R.,

Interplanetary Society, 77(5):156–166.

Hutton, A., Jordi, C., Klioner, S. A., Lammers, U. L.,

https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.05038. doi:

Lindegren, L., Luri, X., Mignard, F., (...), and Zwitter,

10.48550/arXiv.2411.05038.

T. (2023). Gaia Data Release 3 - Summary of the
content and survey properties. Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 674:A1. https://www.aanda.org/articles/
aa/abs/2023/06/aa43940-22/aa43940-22.html. doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202243940.
Vannah, S., Gleiser, M., and Kaltenegger, L. (2024). An

Vidal, C. (2025). Pulsar Positioning System: Why it
Matters for all Classes of Technosignatures.
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.16793980. doi:
10.5281/zenodo.16793981.
Vidal, C. and Bibas, D. (2025). Life in the Clouds of

information theory approach to identifying signs of life on

Venus: The Phosphine Debate and Its Scientific, Social,

transiting planets. Monthly Notices of the Royal

and Psychological Impact. In Landt, H., Dominik, M.,

Astronomical Society: Letters, 528(1):L4–L9.

and Oliver, C., editors, IAU Symposium IAUS 387,

https://doi.org/10.1093/mnrasl/slad156. doi:

volume To appear. Cambridge University Press.

10.1093/mnrasl/slad156.

https://zenodo.org/records/13301306. doi:

Vannah, S., Stiehl, I. D., and Gleiser, M. (2025). An
Informational–Entropic Approach to Exoplanet
Characterization. Entropy, 27(4):385.
https://www.mdpi.com/1099-4300/27/4/385. doi:
10.3390/e27040385.
Vidal, C. (2011). Black Holes: Attractors for Intelligence?
In Towards a Scientific and Societal Agenda on
Extra-Terrestrial Life, 4-5 Oct 2010, Buckinghamshire,

10.5281/zenodo.13301306.
Villarroel, B. (2024). Searches for Near-Earth
Extraterrestrial Artifacts with the VASCO and ExoProbe
Projects. In LPI Contributions, volume 3068, page 2004.
https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024LPICo3068.2004V.
Villarroel, B., Marcy, G. W., Geier, S., Streblyanska, A.,

Kavli Royal Society International Centre.

Solano, E., Andruk, V. N., Shultz, M. E., Gupta, A. C.,

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1104.4362.

and Mattsson, L. (2021). Exploring nine simultaneously

Vidal, C. (2014). The Beginning and the End: The

occurring transients on April 12th 1950. Scientific

Meaning of Life in a Cosmological Perspective. Springer.

Reports, 11:12794. https:

https://arxiv.org/abs/1301.1648.

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021NatSR..1112794V.

Vidal, C. (2015). From Biodiversity to Technodiversity. La
Revue du Cube, (9):65–67.

doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-92162-7.
Villarroel, B., Mattsson, L., Guergouri, H., Solano, E.,

https://zenodo.org/record/2599723. doi:

Geier, S., Dom, O. N., and Ward, M. J. (2022a). A glint

10.5281/zenodo.2599723.

in the eye: Photographic plate archive searches for

Vidal, C. (2016). Stellivore extraterrestrials? Binary stars

non-terrestrial artefacts. Acta Astronautica, 194:106–113.

as living systems. Acta Astronautica, 128:251–256. https:

https:

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016AcAau.128..251V. doi:

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022AcAau.194..106V. doi:

10.1016/j.actaastro.2016.06.038.
Vidal, C. (2017). Millisecond pulsars as standards: Timing,
positioning and communication. Proceedings of the
International Astronomical Union, 13(S337):418–419.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1711.06036. doi:
10.1017/S1743921317008596.

10.1016/j.actaastro.2022.01.039.
Villarroel, B., Solano, E., Guergouri, H., Streblyanska, A.,
Bruehl, S., Andruk, V. M., Mattsson, L., Bär, R. E.,
Mimouni, J., Geier, S., Gupta, A. C., Okororie, V.,
Laggoune, K., Shultz, M. E., and Freitas, R. A. (2025a).

Vidal, C. (2019). Pulsar Positioning System: A Quest for

Aligned, Multiple-transient Events in the First Palomar

Evidence of Extraterrestrial Engineering. International

Sky Survey. Publications of the Astronomical Society of

Journal of Astrobiology, 18:213–234.

the Pacific, 137(10):104504.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019IJAsB..18..213V.

https://doi.org/10.1088/1538-3873/ae0afe. doi:

doi: 10.1017/S147355041700043X.

10.1088/1538-3873/ae0afe.

101
Villarroel, B., Solano, E., Guergouri, H., Streblyanska, A.,

Wang, H. and Akan, O. B. (2025). Gravitational

Mattsson, L., Bär, R. E., Mimouni, J., Geier, S., Gupta,

Communication: Fundamentals, State-of-the-Art and

A. C., Okororie, V., Laggoune, K., Shultz, M. E., Freitas,

Future Vision. IEEE Communications Surveys &

Jr., R. A., and Ward, M. J. (2022b). Is there a

Tutorials, pages 1–1.

background population of high-albedo objects in

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2501.03251. doi:

geosynchronous orbits around Earth? https:

10.1109/COMST.2025.3601088.

//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022arXiv220406091V. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2204.06091.
Villarroel, B., Watters, W. A., Streblyanska, A., Solano, E.,
Geier, S., and Mattsson, L. (2025b). A Cost-Effective
Search for Extraterrestrial Probes in the Solar System.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, page
staf1158. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/staf1158. doi:
10.1093/mnras/staf1158.
Visser, M. (1989). Traversable wormholes: Some simple
examples. Physical Review D, 39(10):3182–3184.
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.39.3182.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.39.3182.

Wang, J., Yang, J.-Y., Fazal, I. M., Ahmed, N., Yan, Y.,
Huang, H., Ren, Y., Yue, Y., Dolinar, S., Tur, M., and
Willner, A. E. (2012). Terabit free-space data
transmission employing orbital angular momentum
multiplexing. Nature Photonics, 6(7):488–496. doi:
10.1038/nphoton.2012.138.
Warneke, B., Last, M., Liebowitz, B., and Pister, K. (2001).
Smart Dust: Communicating with a cubic-millimeter
computer. Computer, 34(1):44–51.
https://doi.org/10.1109/2.895117. doi:
10.1109/2.895117.
Watters, W. A., Dominé, L., Little, S., Pratt, C., and
Knuth, K. H. (2026). Critical Evaluation of Studies

Visser, M. (1996). Lorentzian Wormholes: From Einstein

Alleging Evidence for Technosignatures in the POSS1-E

to Hawking. AIP Series in Computational and Applied

Photographic Plates. http://arxiv.org/abs/2601.21946.

Mathematical Physics. Springer, New York Berlin

doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2601.21946.

Heidelberg.
Von Eshleman, R. (1979). Gravitational Lens of the Sun:

Watters, W. A., Loeb, A., Laukien, F., Cloete, R.,
Delacroix, A., Dobroshinsky, S., Horvath, B., Kelderman,

Its Potential for Observations and Communications over

E., Little, S., Masson, E., Mead, A., Randall, M.,

Interstellar Distances. Science, 205(4411):1133–1135.

Schultz, F., Szenher, M., Vervelidou, F., White, A.,

doi: 10.1126/science.205.4411.1133.

Ahlström, A., Cleland, C., Dockal, S., (...), and Zorzano,

Von Neumann, J. (1966). Theory of Self-Reproducing
Automata. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
Voros, J. (2013). Galactic-scale macro-engineering:
Looking for signs of other intelligent species, as an
exercise in hope for our own. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014arXiv1412.4011V. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1412.4011.
Vukotić, B. and Gordon, R. (2022). Habitable Mini-Earths
with Black Hole Cores. In Technosignatures for
Detecting Intelligent Life in Our Universe, chapter 5,
pages 69–83. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/
9781119640738.ch5. doi: 10.1002/9781119640738.ch5.
Wang, D., Wang, E., and Wang, R. (2025).

M.-P. (2023). The Scientific Investigation of Unidentified
Aerial Phenomena (UAP) Using Multimodal
Ground-Based Observatories. Journal of Astronomical
Instrumentation, 12(01):2340006. https://www.
worldscientific.com/doi/10.1142/S2251171723400068.
doi: 10.1142/S2251171723400068.
Weisberg, J. M., Taylor, J. H., and Fowler, L. A. (1981).
Gravitational Waves from an Orbiting Pulsar. Scientific
American, 245(4):74–83.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24964580.
Weiss, R. F., Mühle, J., Salameh, P. K., and Harth, C. M.
(2008). Nitrogen trifluoride in the global atmosphere.
Geophysical Research Letters, 35(20). https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2008GL035913.
doi: 10.1029/2008GL035913.

Delay/Disruption Tolerant Networking Performance

Wesson, P. S. (1975). The interrelationship between cosmic

Characterization in Cislunar Relay Communication

dust and the microwave background. Astrophysics and

Architecture. Sensors, 25(1):195.

Space Science, 36(2):363–382.

https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/25/1/195. doi:

https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00645261. doi:

10.3390/s25010195.

10.1007/BF00645261.

102
Wheeler, A. and Kipping, D. (2019). The weird detector:
Flagging periodic, coherent signals of arbitrary shape in
time-series photometry. Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 485:5498–5510. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019MNRAS.485.5498W.
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz775.
Whitmire, D. P. and Wright, D. P. (1980). Nuclear waste
spectrum as evidence of technological extraterrestrial
civilizations. Icarus, 42:149–156.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1980Icar...42..149W.
doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(80)90253-5.
Whitworth, B. (2008). The Physical World as a Virtual
Reality. http://arxiv.org/abs/0801.0337. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.0801.0337.
Wolfram, S. (2002). A New Kind of Science. Wolfram
Media Inc., Champaign, IL.
Wolpert, D. H. (2024). Implications of computer science
theory for the simulation hypothesis.
http://arxiv.org/abs/2404.16050. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2404.16050.
Wong, M. L., Duckett, M., Hernandez, E. S., Rajaei, V.,
and Smith, K. J. (2024). The Process We Call Earth:
Relationships Between Dynamic Feedbacks and the
Search for Gaiasignatures in a New Paradigm of
Earthlikeness. Perspectives of Earth and Space
Scientists, 5(1):e2023CN000223. https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2023CN000223. doi:
10.1029/2023CN000223.
Wong, M. L., Prabhu, A., Williams, J., Morrison, S. M.,
and Hazen, R. M. (2023). Toward Network-Based
Planetary Biosignatures: Atmospheric Chemistry as
Unipartite, Unweighted, Undirected Networks. Journal
of Geophysical Research: Planets, 128(6):e2022JE007658.
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/
2022JE007658. doi: 10.1029/2022JE007658.
Woodward, J. F. (2011). Making Stargates: The Physics of
Traversable Absurdly Benign Wormholes. Physics
Procedia, 20:24–46. https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1875389211005724. doi:
10.1016/j.phpro.2011.08.003.
Worden, S. P., Drew, J., and Klupar, P. (2018).
Philanthropic Space Science: The Breakthrough
Initiatives. New Space, 6(4):262–268. https:
//www.liebertpub.com/doi/abs/10.1089/space.2018.0027.
doi: 10.1089/space.2018.0027.

Worden, S. P., Drew, J., Siemion, A., Werthimer, D.,
DeBoer, D., Croft, S., MacMahon, D., Lebofsky, M.,
Isaacson, H., Hickish, J., Price, D., Gajjar, V., and
Wright, J. T. (2017). Breakthrough Listen - A new
search for life in the universe. Acta Astronautica,
139:98–101. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017AcAau.139...98W. doi:
10.1016/j.actaastro.2017.06.008.
Wright, J. (2017). Przybylski’s Star | AstroWright.
https://sites.psu.edu/astrowright/przybylskis-star/.
Wright, J. T. (2018a). Prior indigenous technological
species. International Journal of Astrobiology, 17:96–100.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018IJAsB..17...96W.
doi: 10.1017/S1473550417000143.
Wright, J. T. (2018b). A Reassessment of Families of
Solutions to the Puzzle of Boyajian’s Star. Research
Notes of the American Astronomical Society, 2:16. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018RNAAS...2...16W.
doi: 10.3847/2515-5172/aaa83e.
Wright, J. T. (2020a). Dyson Spheres. Serbian
Astronomical Journal, 200:1–18.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020SerAJ.200....1W.
doi: 10.2298/SAJ2000001W.
Wright, J. T. (2020b). Planck frequencies as Schelling
points in SETI. International Journal of Astrobiology,
19:446–455. https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.01817. doi:
10.1017/S1473550420000221.
Wright, J. T. (2022). SETI in 2020. Acta Astronautica,
190:24–29. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022AcAau.190...24W. doi:
10.1016/j.actaastro.2021.09.024.
Wright, J. T. (2026). The Search for Extraterrestrial
Intelligence: Theory and Practice. IOP Publishing.
Wright, J. T., Carroll-Nellenback, J., Frank, A., and Scharf,
C. (2021). The Dynamics of the Transition from
Kardashev Type II to Type III Galaxies Favor
Technosignature Searches in the Central Regions of
Galaxies. Research Notes of the American Astronomical
Society, 5:141. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021RNAAS...5..141W.
doi: 10.3847/2515-5172/ac0910.
Wright, J. T., Cartier, K. M. S., Zhao, M., Jontof-Hutter,
D., and Ford, E. B. (2016). The Search for
Extraterrestrial Civilizations with Large Energy Supplies.
IV. The Signatures and Information Content of
Transiting Megastructures. The Astrophysical Journal,
816:17.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016ApJ...816...17W.
doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/816/1/17.

103
Wright, J. T., Griﬀith, R. L., Sigurdsson, S., Povich, M. S.,

Yasser, S. (2020). Aliens, The Fermi Paradox, And The

and Mullan, B. (2014a). The Ĝ Infrared Search for

Dark Forest Theory.

Extraterrestrial Civilizations with Large Energy Supplies.

https://www.projectnash.com/aliens-the-fermi-paradox-

II. Framework, Strategy, and First Result. The

and-the-dark-forest-theory/.

Astrophysical Journal, 792:27.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014ApJ...792...27W.
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/792/1/27.
Wright, J. T., Guillochon, J., and Wilson, S. (2019). On
the Origin of the Term “Cosmic Haystack”. Research
Notes of the American Astronomical Society, 3:155.
https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019RNAAS...3..155W.
doi: 10.3847/2515-5172/ab4d57.
Wright, J. T., Haqq-Misra, J., Frank, A., Kopparapu, R.,
Lingam, M., and Sheikh, S. Z. (2022). The Case for
Technosignatures: Why They May Be Abundant,
Long-lived, Highly Detectable, and Unambiguous. The

Yingling, M. E. and Yingling, C. W. (2024). Academic
freedom and the unknown: Credibility, criticism, and
inquiry among the professoriate. Humanities and Social
Sciences Communications, 11(1):1–18.
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41599-024-03351-4.
doi: 10.1057/s41599-024-03351-4.
Yokoo, H. and Oshima, T. (1979). Is bacteriophage φX174
DNA a message from an extraterrestrial intelligence?
Icarus, 38:148–153.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1979Icar...38..148Y.
doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(79)90094-0.
Yu, C. (2015). The Dark Forest Rule: One Solution to the

Astrophysical Journal, 927:L30. https:

Fermi Paradox. Journal of the British Interplanetary

//iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/2041-8213/ac5824.

Society, 68:142–144.

doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac5824.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015JBIS...68..142Y.

Wright, J. T., Kanodia, S., and Lubar, E. (2018). How

Yurtsever, U. and Wilkinson, S. (2018). Limits and

Much SETI Has Been Done? Finding Needles in the

Signatures of Relativistic Spaceflight. Acta Astronautica,

n-dimensional Cosmic Haystack. The Astronomical

142:37–44. https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.05845v3. doi:

Journal, 156:260.

10.1016/j.actaastro.2017.10.014.

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018AJ....156..260W.
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aae099.
Wright, J. T., Mullan, B., Sigurdsson, S., and Povich, M. S.

Zackrisson, E., Calissendorff, P., Asadi, S., and Nyholm, A.
(2015). Extragalactic SETI: The Tully-Fisher Relation
as a Probe of Dysonian Astroengineering in Disk

(2014b). The Ĝ Infrared Search for Extraterrestrial

Galaxies. The Astrophysical Journal, 810:23. doi:

Civilizations with Large Energy Supplies. I. Background

10.1088/0004-637X/810/1/23.

and Justification. The Astrophysical Journal, 792:26.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014ApJ...792...26W.
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/792/1/26.
Wright, J. T. and Oman-Reagan, M. P. (2018). Visions of
human futures in space and SETI. International Journal
of Astrobiology, 17:177–188.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018IJAsB..17..177W.
doi: 10.1017/S1473550417000222.
Wright, J. T. and Sigurdsson, S. (2016). Families of
Plausible Solutions to the Puzzle of Boyajian’s Star. The
Astrophysical Journal, 829:L3.

Zackrisson, E., Korn, A. J., Wehrhahn, A., and Reiter, J.
(2018). SETI with Gaia: The Observational Signatures
of Nearly Complete Dyson Spheres. The Astrophysical
Journal, 862:21.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018ApJ...862...21Z.
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aac386.
Zarka, P., Lazio, J., and Hallinan, G. (2015).
Magnetospheric Radio Emissions from Exoplanets with
the SKA. In Proceedings of Advancing Astrophysics with
the Square Kilometre Array — PoS(AASKA14), volume

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016ApJ...829L...3W.

215, page 120. SISSA Medialab.

doi: 10.3847/2041-8205/829/1/L3.

https://pos.sissa.it/215/120. doi: 10.22323/1.215.0120.

Wu, W., Chen, M., Zhang, Z., Liu, X., and Dong, Y.

Zenil, H. (2020). A Review of Methods for Estimating

(2017). Overview of deep space laser communication.

Algorithmic Complexity: Options, Challenges, and New

Science China Information Sciences, 61(4):040301.

Directions. Entropy, 22(6):612.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11432-017-9216-0. doi:

https://www.mdpi.com/1099-4300/22/6/612. doi:

10.1007/s11432-017-9216-0.

10.3390/e22060612.

104
Zenil, H., Adams, A., Abrahão, F. S., and Ozelim, L.
(2025). An Optimal, Universal and Agnostic Decoding
Method for Message Reconstruction, Bio and
Technosignature Detection.
http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.16045. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2303.16045.
Zenil, H. and de Sena Monteiro Ozelim, L. C. (2025).
Fractal spatio-temporal scale-free messaging: Amplitude
modulation of self-executable carriers given by the
Weierstrass function’s components. Information
Sciences, 706:121988. https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0020025525001203. doi:
10.1016/j.ins.2025.121988.
Zenil, H., Kiani, N. A., and Tegnér, J. (2023). Algorithmic
Information Dynamics: A Computational Approach to
Causality with Applications to Living Systems.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/algorithmicinformationdynamics/6ABDAD480E710BAD5180CED0C4822BDB.
doi: 10.1017/9781108596619.
Zhang, B. (2020). A quantitative assessment of
communicating extra-terrestrial intelligent civilizations in
the galaxy and the case of FRB-like signals. Frontiers of
Physics, 15:54502. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020FrPhy..1554502Z. doi:
10.1007/s11467-020-0973-5.

Zúñiga-Fernández, S., Pozuelos, F. J., Dévora-Pajares, M.,
Cuello, N., Greklek-McKeon, M., Stassun, K. G.,
Grootel, V. V., Rojas-Ayala, B., Korth, J., Günther,
M. N., Burgasser, A. J., Hsu, C., Rackham, B. V.,
Barkaoui, K., Timmermans, M., Cadieux, C., Alonso, R.,
Strakhov, I. A., Howell, S. B., (...), and Parviainen, H.
(2025). Two warm Earth-sized exoplanets and an
Earth-sized candidate in the M5V-M6V binary system
TOI-2267. Astronomy & Astrophysics, 702:A85.
https://www.aanda.org/articles/aa/abs/2025/10/
aa54419-25/aa54419-25.html. doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202554419.
Zubrin, R. (1995). Detection of Extraterrestrial
Civilizations via the Spectral Signature of Advanced
Interstellar Spacecraft. 74:487.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1995ASPC...74..487Z.
Zuckerman, B. (1985). Stellar evolution - Motivation for
mass interstellar migrations. Quarterly Journal of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 26:56–59.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1985QJRAS..26...56Z.
Zuckerman, B. (2022). Infrared and optical detectability of
Dyson spheres at white dwarf stars. Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 514:227–233. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022MNRAS.514..227Z.
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1113.
Zwicky, F. (2012). Morphological Astronomy. Springer
Science & Business Media.

105
12. APPENDICES

12.1. Technosignature Science Traceability Matrix
Table 15. Technosignature Science Traceability Matrix.
Science Goal

Technosignature / Artifact
Type

Observational Feasibility
(today and/or near-future)

Required Instruments and
methods

Earth Technosignatures (Section 2)
Searching for
past visitation

Long-lived artifacts or time
capsules in the geological,
fossil, or archaeological record;
a “shadow technosphere” of
past extraterrestrial activity
on Earth (extension of the
“shadow biosphere” concept).

A dedicated survey of the
fossil and geological record
would demand massive
resources; however, it may be
serendipitously discovered by
archeologists and geologists in
the field. Climatology, geology,
archaeology and paleontology
become relevant disciplines.

Methods and instruments used
by archeologists,
paleontologists, and geologists;
isotopic and chemical analysis
of strata; anomaly detection
on geological databases.

UAP studies

Active spacecraft or probes in
Earth’s atmosphere, ocean, or
near-space.

Closest possible
technosignature, so has a high
potential visibility. The
phenomenon is transient and
unpredictable, which demands
ideally 24/7 multimodal
all-sky coverage. ∼5–10% of
reports remain unexplained.
See also the UAP science
traceability matrix in Watters
et al. (2023).

Galileo-Project-style
multimodal observatories:
all-sky fish-eye cameras,
passive radar, acoustic sensors,
high-resolution/high-zoom
camera with ML outlier
detection, magnetometers,
infrared cameras, cosmic-ray /
high-energy particle detectors,
and high-resolution
remote-sensing satellites
(Landsat, Planet Labs, Maxar,
etc.).

Earth orbit

Probes and artefacts in Earth
orbit; high-albedo objects in
geosynchronous orbits;
non-terrestrial artefacts on
archival photographic plates
(Villarroel et al. 2022a).

Very low distance and high
observability, but
distinguishing an alien artefact
from human-made space junk
or satellites is not obvious.

Historical astronomical plates
(pre-satellite age / Sputnik);
dedicated telescopes and
radars with algorithms to
distinguish from satellites;
VASCO and ExoProbe-style
searches; photographic-plate
archives (e.g. POSS1-E).

Most of the solar system has
not been observed at high
resolution (see Table 3 of the
paper). The Barrow scale
implies that technology tends
towards ever-smaller scales,
making detection harder.
Active probes are easier to
detect if they communicate or
produce waste heat and waste
materials.

High-resolution imaging from
existing planetary missions;
archeological methods applied
to surface artefacts;
commensal SETI on archival
data; future deep-space
telescopes and probes.

Solar System Technosignatures (Section 3)
General
solar-system
SETA

Active or passive probes,
artificial structures, Bracewell
/ Von Neumann probes;
surface artefacts and orbital
artefacts.

Continued on next page

106
Table 15 – Continued from previous page
Science Goal

Technosignature / Artifact
Type

Observational Feasibility
(today and/or near-future)

Required Instruments and
methods

The Moon

Lunar artefacts, debris,
monoliths, unusual structures
(e.g. the unusual geometric
features in Paracelsus C
crater); evidence of past
activity at sub-meter scales.

The Moon is a privileged place
for long-term artefacts (shields
from meteoroids and half of
ionizing radiation, no erosion,
no atmosphere, no biology).
LRO has imaged the surface
at 0.5 m resolution.
Machine-learning analyses can
detect human activities, but a
systematic search on LRO
data remains to be done.

Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter
(LRO) high-resolution imagery
with machine learning
anomaly detection;
citizen-science image searches;
future lunar missions.

Lagrange points

Probes at Lagrange points
L1–L5 (Earth–Moon and
Earth–Sun); artificial probes
embedded in the Kordylewski
dust clouds at L4/L5;
co-orbital / horseshoe-orbit
objects that would be used as
long-term Earth monitors.

Targeted multiwavelength
observations and in-situ
missions. The L2 Earth–Moon
Lagrangian point requires a
space mission as it is
permanently occulted by the
Earth. Horseshoe orbits
provide concealment,
long-term stability and
periodic observation
opportunities.

Targeted multiwavelength
observations covering the
Lagrange regions; dedicated
in-situ spacecraft; surveys of
co-orbital asteroids and
horseshoe-orbit objects with
anomaly detection.

Inner solar
system
(Mercury,
Venus, Mars
and their
moons)

Probes from migrating
civilizations (an extension of
the silurian hypothesis);
anomalous surface or orbital
features; outliers in
orbital-parameter space
(non-gravitational
acceleration, fine-tuned gravity
assists, goal-directed
behaviour).

Beware of pareidolia in
low-resolution imagery (e.g.
Lowell’s “canals”). Anomaly
detection on existing planetary
imagery is a promising route.

Anomaly detection on Mars
Reconnaissance Orbiter,
MESSENGER, Magellan,
Mars Global Surveyor, and
other planetary-mission
archives; orbital-parameter
outlier surveys.

Asteroid belt

Lurkers hiding in low-gravity
wells; forensic evidence of
extrasolar asteroid mining;
metallic surfaces standing out
from natural objects.

Polarimetry and spectroscopy
to detect metallic surfaces
uncommon among natural
objects.

Polarimeters and
spectroscopes on
existing/future surveys;
asteroid mining-signature
searches; high-resolution
imaging missions
(Dawn-class).
Continued on next page

107
Table 15 – Continued from previous page
Science Goal

Technosignature / Artifact
Type

Observational Feasibility
(today and/or near-future)

Required Instruments and
methods

Interstellar
objects (ISOs)

Anomalous ISOs interpreted
as passive probes, light sails or
megastructure debris (e.g.
’Oumuamua-like candidates);
“dark comets” with
non-gravitational
accelerations.

Detection rates will rise
sharply with the Vera C.
Rubin Observatory and the
Nancy Grace Roman Space
Telescope. Davenport et al.
(2025) recommend a
multi-mode observing protocol
during ISO passages (see
Table 4): astrometry/tracking,
full-sky photometry,
optical/IR spectroscopy, radio
spectroscopy, multi-band
photometry, high-cadence
imaging, IR photometry,
polarimetry, and radar
imaging.

Vera C. Rubin Observatory
(LSST); Nancy Grace Roman
Space Telescope; JWST;
planetary radar (Goldstone
and successors); rendezvous
missions for ISO interception
(Siraj et al. 2023; Hein et al.
2022).

Outer solar
system

Anomalous occulting objects

Detectable via high-cadence
optical photometry; rare
events that demand
cross-instrument validation.

High-cadence optical
photometric surveys; archival
pulse searches;
multi-wavelength follow-up.

Kuiper belt

Artificial Kuiper belt objects;
artificially illuminated
surfaces.

Lights on Kuiper belt objects
are in principle detectable
with existing instruments;
same capabilities can also be
applied to exoplanet surfaces.

Sensitive optical/IR telescopes
capable of detecting faint
illumination (HST, JWST,
Subaru, LSST/Rubin).

Solar
gravitational
lens (SGL)
region

Probes or communication
relays at the SGL focal region
(EM focus from ∼547 AU;
neutrino focus from ∼29.6 AU;
gravitational-wave focus from
∼22.45 AU).

A radio search of SGL
communication between the
Sun and α Centauri has been
conducted (Tusay et al. 2022);
Kerby and Wright (2021)
suggested searching for
artefacts around the focal
region.

Targeted radio and optical
searches towards the SGL
regions; future probes to the
SGL focal region.

Oort cloud

Civilizations migrating across
or operating at the boundary
between stellar systems;
ejection signatures;
communicative or waste heat
signatures at the periphery
(Romanovskaya 2022b).

Diﬀicult given enormous
distances; neighbouring Oort
clouds are almost touching,
which makes the periphery a
natural interface for ETI
activities.

Wide-field optical/IR surveys
(Vera Rubin / Roman); IR
and communicative anomaly
surveys at the solar-system
periphery.

Exoplanetary Technosignatures (Section 4)
Continued on next page

108
Table 15 – Continued from previous page
Science Goal

Technosignature / Artifact
Type

Observational Feasibility
(today and/or near-future)

Required Instruments and
methods

Surface
Artificial night-side
technosignatures illumination; surface
megastructures (solar-panel
fields, ecumenopolis, large
industrial complexes);
polarization signatures of
artificial surfaces (cement,
plastic, cloth); urban
heat-island effect.

JWST could detect artificial
lights on Proxima b if 500×
stronger than Earth LEDs or
in a spectrum 1000× narrower.
Solar-panel detection demands
hundreds of HWO-class
observation hours assuming
∼23% land coverage. SGL
telescope could yield ∼224
km/pixel at 10 pc, enough to
detect for megastructures.

JWST; future Habitable
HWO; LIFE space mission;
SGL-positioned telescope;
coronagraph and starshade
equipped large telescopes;
polarimeters; ELTs.

Atmospheric
Industrial pollutants and
technosignatures engineered gases: CFCs,
HCFCs, PFCs (CF4 , C2 F6 ,
CCl3 F); high-GWP
greenhouse gases (SF6 , NF3 ,
SF5 CF3 ); NO2 from
combustion; chemical fossils;
isotopic anomalies
(plutonium-244, anomalous
D/H ratios); methanethiol or
other markers of
nuclear/biotechnological
catastrophes; ozone-layer
depletion.

Long residence times and high
GWPs make many of these
detectable across interstellar
distances. Best targets: SF6 ,
CF4 , NF3 (vibrational modes
7.5–16 µm); NO2 in visible
reflectance (400–500 nm);
CCl3 F in mid-IR ∼11–13 µm.
Detection ideally requires a
>15 m space-based mid-IR
telescope with high-resolution
spectroscopy and
stellar-contamination control.

JWST; planned LIFE mission;
future HWO; high-resolution
mid-IR spectrometers; ELTs.

Orbital
Clarke exobelts (artificial
technosignatures satellite belts);
mega-constellations and glints
from artificial satellites;
asymmetric or anomalous
debris-disk features (Jaiswal
2023); persistent disk-like
signatures around old
(post-zero-age) stars;
geocentric solar-power satellite
beaming; planetary Dyson
sphere with 10 µm waste-heat
signature.

Detectable via
transit/photometric signatures
and infrared characterization
of debris disks.
Mega-constellations could be
detected with VLTI (Osmanov
2021). The duration of
debris-disk technosignatures
could be long, because still
observable if ETI is inactive or
extinct.

Kepler-class transit
photometry (TESS, PLATO);
Very Large Telescope
Interferometer (VLTI);
debris-disk imaging with
ALMA / JWST / HST; future
high-resolution coronagraphs.

ExoplanetaryService worlds (highly
system
polluted, terraformed planets
technosignatures outside the habitable zone);
active asteroid mining
generating localized infrared
excess; engineered planetary
systems.

Detectable through
transit-timing variations,
dynamical anomalies, and
infrared excess from in-system
mining. Search strategies
developed for our solar system
(Section 3) generalize to other
systems, with greater distance
challenges.

Transit/timing photometry
(Kepler/TESS/PLATO); IR
photometry (Spitzer/JWST);
ALMA for debris-disk
imaging; dynamical/orbital
surveys.

Continued on next page

109
Table 15 – Continued from previous page
Science Goal

Technosignature / Artifact
Type

Observational Feasibility
(today and/or near-future)

Required Instruments and
methods

Multiplanetary
systems and
terraforming

Multiple planets in one system
with engineered, suspiciously
similar atmospheric
compositions; high GWP
greenhouse gas signatures
across planets; engineered
planetary pressure, O2 growth
or temperature.

Searches should not be limited
to the conventional habitable
zone, as ETIs could terraform
inside or outside it. A cluster
of planets with anomalously
similar atmospheres would be
the key indicator.

Transit/atmospheric
spectroscopy with JWST,
HWO, LIFE, ELTs;
comparative multi-planet
atmospheric studies.

Stellar Technosignatures (Section 5)
Stellar
megastructures
(transit
detection)

Anomalous transit light
curves, e.g. asymmetric,
irregular, jagged, non-uniform,
or time-varying, indicating
Dyson swarms, ring structures,
or messaging megastructures.
Boyajian’s star (KIC 8462852)
was a candidate, although now
attributed to dust).

Well-established
transit-photometric
techniques. Machine learning
to flag unusual light curves
systematically. Simulations of
megastructure transits help
guide pattern recognition.

Archival Kepler; TESS;
PLATO; LSST/Rubin;
ML-based anomalous-transit
pipelines.

Energy
utilization
(Dyson
spheres/swarms)

Infrared waste-heat signature
of partial or complete Dyson
spheres/swarms (∼300 K, ∼10
µm at 1 AU); anomalous IR
excess inconsistent with
circumstellar dust.

Has been studied with infrared
observatories (IRAS, WISE).
Zackrisson et al. (2018) and
Suazo Suazo (2024b)
cross-matched Gaia DR3,
2MASS and WISE on ∼5
million sources, identifying
seven M-dwarfs with
anomalous IR excess as
candidates.

IRAS, WISE, 2MASS, Spitzer,
Gaia DR3 cross-matches;
JWST; future IR
observatories.

Stellar
modification /
rejuvenation

Stars with anomalously
extended main-sequence
lifetimes (e.g. anomalously
composed blue stragglers as
proposed by Beech 1990);
high-reflectivity Dyson spheres
that prolong stellar lifetime;
stellar mixing signatures.

Models propose observable
signatures (Scoggins and
Kipping 2023; Huston and
Wright 2022; Beech 2008);
requires precise stellar
parameters and population
studies.

High-resolution stellar
spectroscopy; stellar-evolution
modelling; photometric
monitoring; precise
asteroseismology.

Stellar pollution

Photospheric spectral
signatures of dumped
nuclear-fission waste products;
anomalous heavy-element
abundances. Candidate:
Przybylski’s star (HD 101065).

Detectable via high-resolution
stellar spectroscopy

High-resolution stellar
spectrographs (e.g.
ESPRESSO, HARPS, Keck
HIRES, ELTs).

Continued on next page

110
Table 15 – Continued from previous page
Science Goal

Technosignature / Artifact
Type

Observational Feasibility
(today and/or near-future)

Required Instruments and
methods

Compact
objects

Dyson spheres around white
dwarfs, neutron stars/pulsars
or black holes
(IR/UV/optical/X-ray
signatures); engineered pulsar
modulation patterns;
“mini-Earths” (rocky planets
with central small black holes);
“stellivores” (reinterpretation
of some accreting binaries)
anomalously slowing
black-hole rotation (Penrose
process).

Detectable through anomalous
IR/X-ray excess, pulsar timing
anomalies, and X-ray binary
peculiarities.

X-ray observatories (Chandra,
XMM-Newton, future
Athena); pulsar timing arrays
(NANOGrav, EPTA, IPTA);
IR observatories;
gravitational-wave
observatories.

Interstellar Technosignatures — Communication (Section 6)
Artificial radio
signals

Narrowband or broadband
radio signals, which may be
beacons, modulated pulses,
intentional or leakage
radiation (e.g.
deep-space-network analogs).
The “cosmic water hole”
region (1.42–1.67 GHz) and
low-frequency bands are key
search regions.

Many radio telescopes already
scan for signals, but requires
long observation times and
sophisticated RFI mitigation.
Commensal SETI on
major-telescope raw data is
increasingly productive. Earth
contamination motivates
lunar-farside deployment.

Breakthrough Listen program
and observatories such as
Green Bank Telescope; Parkes;
Automated Planet Finder;
MeerKAT; FAST; Hat Creek
Radio Observatory (Allen
Telescope Array); SKA;
LOFAR; OVRO-LWA;
NenuFAR; GMRT; future
Lunar Farside Technosignature
& Transients Telescope
(LFT3).

Pulsed (short duration)
optical laser
transmissions

Nanosecond-scale laser pulses
producing flashes far brighter
than the host star at the pulse
wavelength.

Requires high time-resolution
sensitivity and long
observation windows.

PanoSETI; Laser SETI
program at the SETI
Institute; VERITAS;
STACEE; Lick/Leuschner
Observatories; STACEE.

Continuous
optical laser
transmissions

Narrow monochromatic
emission lines from
continuous-wave lasers,
distinguishable from natural
emission by their narrow
linewidth.

Requires high spectral
resolution to distinguish
narrow monochromatic
emission lines from
background starlight. Many
high-resolution spectrographs
are being used for exoplanet
detection, so there’s abundant
archival data to survey.

Keck HIRES; HARPS;
ESPRESSO; archival
exoplanet-spectroscopy data
mining.

X-ray laser
signals

Artificial pulsed or continuous
X-ray laser emissions
producing narrow X-ray
emission lines distinct from
natural astrophysical sources.

Requires future high spectral
resolution and sensitivity to
detect narrow X-ray emission
lines from a laser. Currently
challenging: Chandra requires
∼5 days to build a spectrum;
SNR is the main limitation.

Current X-ray observatories
(Chandra, XMM-Newton);
future
high-resolution/sensitivity
X-ray spectrometers (e.g. ESA
Athena); Lynx X-ray
Observatory
Continued on next page

111
Table 15 – Continued from previous page
Science Goal

Technosignature / Artifact
Type

Observational Feasibility
(today and/or near-future)

Required Instruments and
methods

Gamma-ray
communication

Narrowband or pulsed
gamma-ray signals;
gamma-ray signatures from
antimatter propulsion or
warp-bubble snowplow
ejections.

Rarely explored. Could
synergize with
advanced-propulsion
technosignatures.

Fermi-LAT; INTEGRAL;
future MeV–GeV missions.

Neutrino
communication

Coherent, pulsed, or unusually
structured artificial neutrino
signals.

Neutrinos can penetrate the
ISM and dense objects
essentially unimpeded;
near-noise-free in the galactic
plane. Solar gravitational
neutrino focus starts at ∼29.6
AU, much closer than the EM
focus.

IceCube; KM3NeT; future
MEMPHYS- or 1-Mton-class
water-Cherenkov detectors.

Gravitational
wave
communication

Engineered gravitational-wave
signals at characteristic
frequencies / modulations
distinguishable from natural
mergers.

Abramowicz et al. (2020)
argue a Jupiter-mass GW
emitter at the galactic centre
would be LISA-detectable.

LIGO, Virgo, KAGRA; future
LISA, Einstein Telescope,
Cosmic Explorer;
high-frequency GW concepts.

Inscribed
matter

Physical messages encoded in
matter: e.g. messages in
non-coding DNA of
space-proof microorganisms;
ET probes hosting onboard
archives.

Genomic sequencing; in-situ
examination of solar-system
artefacts. Inscribed-matter
data rate falls only as 1/r (vs
1/r2 for EM), giving an
advantage at large distances;
particularly attractive for
searches inside our solar
system.

DNA sequencing of
extremophiles followed by
anomaly detection (e.g.
millisecond-pulsar spacetime
timestamps); high-resolution
imaging of solar-system
bodies;
rendezvous/sample-return
missions.

Occulters

Artificial opaque objects
modulating an already-existing
bright background source;
ETI-modulated pulsar
emission (Chennamangalam
et al. 2015; Vidal 2019);
modulated Cepheids (Learned
et al. 2008).

Detectable as anomalies in
transits or in pulsar timing
patterns.

Transit photometry
(Kepler/TESS/PLATO);
pulsar timing arrays;
high-cadence photometric and
spectroscopic monitoring.

Polarization,
OAM, and
quantum
communication

Signals encoded in
polarization states, orbital
angular momentum (vortex
beams), or quantum protocols
(qubits/qudits).

Underexplored frontier.
Polarimetry already feasible;
OAM degrades faster than
1/r2 so favours moderate
distances. Quantum coherence
may be maintainable at X-ray
wavelengths over interstellar
distances (Berera and
Calderón-Figueroa 2022).

Polarimeters; future
quantum-receiving systems;
high-resolution spectroscopy
supplemented with
polarimetric capability.

Travel Technosignatures (Section 7)
Continued on next page

112
Table 15 – Continued from previous page
Science Goal

Technosignature / Artifact
Type

Observational Feasibility
(today and/or near-future)

Required Instruments and
methods

Interstellar
migration via
close stellar
encounters

Generation ships travelling
during stellar-encounter
windows; associated heat or
communication signatures
along close-encounter
trajectories.

Cross-matching Gaia data for
close stellar encounters with
heat/communication
anomalies (Hansen 2022).
Binary (S-type) systems offer
strong incentives for short
interstellar travels.

Gaia astrometry; IR and radio
follow-up of close-encounter
pairs; targeted S-type binaries.

Light sails
(directed-energy
propulsion)

Direct detection of reflected
light from large light sails;
leakage radiation from
high-power laser beams
between planets (Guillochon
and Loeb 2015); Fast Radio
Bursts hypothesized as
sail-powering beams (Lingam
and Loeb 2017); starshade-like
signatures.

Detectable via radial-velocity
wobbles, photometric
reflections, leakage radiation,
and FRB statistics. Leakage
detection limited if beams are
well-matched to sail size.

Optical/IR coronagraphs
(HWO, JWST); time-domain
optical surveys; FRB detectors
(CHIME, ASKAP, DSA-2000).

Bussard ramjet

Combined signatures: ∼1 AU
magnetic scoop megastructure;
high-velocity or accelerating
object; fusion-exhaust contrail;
void carved through the ISM
behind the spacecraft.

Schattschneider and Jackson
(2022) argue that even a
megastructure-class scoop
cannot achieve relativistic
flight; but the very existence
of the megastructure makes it
potentially observable.

Multi-wavelength surveys
including IR, radio, and
plasma diagnostics targeting
ISM voids and exhaust
signatures.

Spacecraft —
interstellar
contrails

Low-frequency cyclotron radio
emission from interaction
between a magnetic sail and
the ISM (Zubrin 1995);
inverse-Compton interaction
signatures of relativistic
spacecraft with the CMB
(Yurtsever and Wilkinson
2018); spatially extended
exhaust trails.

Contrails are extended in
space and thus relatively
detectable, but
inverse-Compton signatures
are degenerate with the
Sunyaev–Zel’dovich effect and
other natural emission. Could
check whether candidate
contrails point towards or
away from habitable systems.

Low-frequency radio arrays
(LOFAR, SKA);
multi-wavelength
contrail-tracing pipelines; Gaia
for tracing origin/destination.

Demands very large masses
and accelerations for the
spacecraft to be detectable;
physics of Alcubierre warp
drives may or may not be
possible. LIGO would be
sensitive to some of these
scenarios, and
higher-frequency
gravitational-wave
observatories are being
planned.

Gravitational-wave
observatories (LIGO, Virgo,
KAGRA); future LISA,
Einstein Telescope, Cosmic
Explorer; high-frequency-GW
concepts.

Spacecraft —
Gravitational-wave signatures
gravitational-wave from massive accelerating
signatures
spacecraft (RAMAcraft,
Sellers et al. 2022) or from
collapsing / accelerating
Alcubierre warp bubbles.

Continued on next page

113
Table 15 – Continued from previous page
Science Goal

Technosignature / Artifact
Type

Observational Feasibility
(today and/or near-future)

Required Instruments and
methods

Matter–antimatterExhaust leakage from
propulsion
matter–antimatter
annihilation producing copious
neutrinos and gamma-rays;
possible neutrino contrails
(Harris 1986).

Requires high energies to be
detectable; if achieved,
abundant neutrinos and
gamma-rays would be
produced.

Neutrino detectors (IceCube,
KM3NeT); gamma-ray
telescopes (Fermi-LAT,
INTEGRAL).

Directed-mass
propulsion
(Singer pellet
stream)

High-energy particle streams
(akin to ultra-high-energy
cosmic rays, UHECRs)
directed from a home world to
a spacecraft; secondary
synchrotron radiation from
re-routed particles.

A few UHECRs (Amaterasu
particle, “Oh-My-God”
particle) sit at the boundary
of natural and technological
origin. Tracing UHECRs is
hard but possible at very high
energies due to reduced
magnetic deflection.

Pierre Auger Observatory;
Telescope Array;
multi-messenger correlation
with synchrotron sources.

Planet engine

Controlled motion or
goal-directed trajectory of
rogue planets, with
internal-iron-core energy
sources providing
long-duration thrust
(Romanovskaya 2022a);
abrupt accelerations producing
time-varying quadrupole
gravitational-wave signatures
(Sellers et al. 2022).

Rogue planets are extremely
diﬀicult to detect, and
tracking them is even harder.
A Jupiter-mass RAMAcraft
with ∆v = 0.3 c is detectable
from 10–100 kpc with
proposed future GW detectors.

Wide-field astrometric surveys
(Gaia, Vera Rubin, Nancy
Grace Roman); microlensing
surveys; future high-strain
GW detectors.

Stellar engine

Stars moving in goal-directed
or anomalous ways (Shkadov
thrusters, Caplan-style
high-acceleration engines,
binary stellar engines as spider
pulsars from Vidal (2024).

Requires precise astrometry
over long baselines.

High-precision astrometry
(Gaia and successors)
complemented with VLBI or
radial-velocity observations;
targeted searches around
spider pulsars and other
compact binaries.

Newtonian
gravitational
assists

Anomalously fast inspiral
rates of compact binary
systems; propulsion signatures
at periapsis (slight residual
eccentricity, anomalous mass
loss); changes in inspiral rate
increasing merger rates of
binary black holes (Dyson
1963; Kipping 2018).

Detectable if many or very
massive spacecraft use binaries
as gravitational machines;
binary compact objects should
be on technosignature target
lists.

Gravitational-wave
observatories
(LIGO/Virgo/KAGRA, future
LISA); pulsar timing arrays;
optical/X-ray monitoring of
compact binaries.

Continued on next page

114
Table 15 – Continued from previous page
Science Goal

Technosignature / Artifact
Type

Observational Feasibility
(today and/or near-future)

Required Instruments and
methods

Einsteinian
propulsion —
warp bubbles
(Alcubierre)

Gravitational-lensing
signatures of warp bubbles
(front:
defocusing/dimming/redshift;
rear: focusing/brightening/
Einstein-ring arcs/blueshift);
“bi-modal” signal (Lentz and
Felton 2024) when bubble
outruns its own emission;
short-duration gamma-ray
bursts from particle
“snowplow” upon deceleration;
characteristic high-frequency
GW bursts (∼300 kHz for a 1
km bubble) at bubble collapse.

Outside the range of current
GW detectors but potentially
measurable by future
detectors; lensing/light-curve
anomalies could be searched
for in time-domain surveys.

Future high-frequency GW
detectors; time-domain optical
surveys; gamma-ray
observatories.

Einsteinian
propulsion —
traversable
wormholes

Concentric ring/arc
gravitational-lensing patterns
with no event-horizon shadow;
distinct redshifts between
inner and outer rings (light
from a different region of the
universe);
asymmetric/elliptical
distortions depending on
viewing angle; duplicate or
time-delayed background
images.

Distinguishable from
black-hole lensing; requires
very high resolution and
sensitivity.

Large space-based telescopes;
very-long-baseline
interferometers;
Event-Horizon-Telescope-class
imaging.

Kinematics and distribution of
millisecond pulsars tuned for
engineering purposes;
anomalous IR excess and
beamed signals from the
galactic centre; transient
surveys may reveal candidate
megabeam pulses.

Pulsar timing arrays
(NANOGrav, EPTA, IPTA);
IR observatories (WISE,
Spitzer, JWST); radio
transient surveys (CHIME,
MeerKAT, ASKAP, SKA).

Galactic and Beyond (Section 8)
Galactic

Engineered pulsar positioning
system, i.e. millisecond pulsars
used as galactic timing /
navigation / communication
standards (Vidal 2019); Dyson
swarm around the central
SMBH (Inoue and Yokoo
2011); “Black-Hole Bomb”
exploiting SMBH rotational
energy (Cardoso et al. 2004);
modulated Cepheid variables
(Learned et al. 2008);
galactic-centre radio transients
(e.g. GCRT J1745−3009).

Continued on next page

115
Table 15 – Continued from previous page
Science Goal

Technosignature / Artifact
Type

Observational Feasibility
(today and/or near-future)

Required Instruments and
methods

Extragalactic

Galaxy-wide infrared excess
from Dyson-spheres-at-scale
(Griﬀith et al. 2015; Wright
et al. 2014a); deviations from
Tully–Fisher, Faber–Jackson
and Fundamental Plane
scaling relations
(under-luminous galaxies,
Zackrisson et al. 2015);
morphological anomalies (e.g.
Hoag’s object; Voros 2013);
YeV neutrino point sources
from Type-III particle
accelerators (Lacki 2015);
SMBH-collimated power
beams to receiving stations;
Fast Radio Bursts with
unnatural periodicity or
modulation.

Most galaxy-wide dimming
searches so far have yielded no
candidates, suggesting Type
III civilizations may
concentrate rather than spread
out. Extragalactic SETI lets
us probe billions of stars
simultaneously.

WISE / Spitzer / IRAS for IR
excess; Planck for far-IR
fully-enclosed galaxies; FRB
detectors (CHIME, ASKAP,
DSA-2000); large radio
telescopes (Green Bank,
FAST, MeerKAT);
Breakthrough Listen; GMRT.

Universal

Bubbles of ambitious
(near-Type-IV) civilizations
covering ∼0.1–1% of the sky;
locally depressed matter
density / elevated radiation
density; significant statistical
deviations in cosmic-web void
distributions (Olson 2015).

Requires statistical anomalies
in cosmic-scale
matter/radiation distributions;
large surveys needed to
confirm.

High-resolution spectroscopy
(HWO, Keck HIRES,
HARPS); large-scale-structure
surveys (Euclid, DESI,
LSST/Rubin); CMB
experiments.

Simulation
hypothesis

Anisotropy of the
Greisen–Zatsepin–Kuzmin
(GZK) cutoff energy in
UHECRs (signature of a
discrete spacetime lattice;
Beane et al. 2014); drift in
fundamental constants (e.g.
fine-structure constant);
momentary localized violations
of conservation laws.

Each candidate signature is
independently testable but at
the edge of current
observational capability;
statistically significant
deviations are required.

Pierre Auger Observatory and
Telescope Array (GZK
anisotropy); ultra-stable
atomic-clock networks
(constant drift).

12.2. Abbreviations
AARO
AAS

All-Domain Anomaly Resolution Oﬀice
American Astronomical Society

ADS-B

Automatic Dependent Surveillance–Broadcast

AMD

Arnowitt–Deser–Misner

AGN

Active Galactic Nucleus

AM

Amplitude Modulation

ASK

Amplitude Shift Keying

AU

Astronomical Unit

BLC1

Breakthrough Listen Candidate 1

116
CETI

Communication with Extraterrestrial Intelligence

CFCs

Chlorofluorocarbons

CMB

Cosmic Microwave Background

CNEOS
DMS

Center for Near-Earth Object Studies
Dimethyl Sulfide

DMSP

Dimethylsulfoniopropionate

DNA

Deoxyribonucleic Acid

Gaia DR3
DTN

Gaia Data Release 3
Delay-Tolerant Networking

ELT

Extremely Large Telescope

EM

Electromagnetic

EPR

Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen

ER

Einstein–Rosen (bridge)

ESA

European Space Agency

ESPRESSO

Echelle Spectrograph for Rocky Exoplanet and Stable Spectroscopic Observations

ET

Extraterrestrial

ETI

Extraterrestrial Intelligence

ETZ

Earth Transit Zone

EVA

Extravehicular Activity

FM

Frequency Modulation

FRBs

Fast Radio Bursts

FSK

Frequency Shift Keying

GBT

Green Bank Telescope

GC

Galactic Center

GHZ

Galactic Habitable Zone

GRB

Gamma-Ray Burst

GW

Gravitational Waves

GWP

Global Warming Potential

GZK

Greisen–Zatsepin–Kuzmin (cutoff)

HabEx

Habitable Exoplanet Observatory

HCFCs

Hydrochlorofluorocarbons

HCRO

Hat Creek Radio Observatory

HMMs

Hidden Markov Models

HWO

Habitable Worlds Observatory

IM1
IPCC
IR

Interstellar Meteor 1
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Infrared

IRAS

Infrared Astronomical Satellite

ISM

Interstellar Medium

ISO

Interstellar Object

ISS

International Space Station

JS

Jensen–Shannon (divergence)

JWST

James Webb Space Telescope

KC

Kolmogorov Complexity

KIC

Kepler Input Catalog

KL

Kullback–Leibler (divergence)

117
LED

Light Emitting Diode

LFT3

Lunar Farside Technosignature & Transients Telescope

LIFE

Large Interferometer For Exoplanets

LIGO

Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory

LISA

Laser Interferometer Space Antenna

LOFAR

Low-Frequency Array

LPI

Lunar and Planetary Institute

LRO

Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter

LROC
ly
LSST

Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera
light-year
Legacy Survey of Space and Time

METI

Messaging to Extraterrestrial Intelligence

MIT

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

ML

Machine Learning

MSPs

Millisecond Pulsars

NASA

National Aeronautics and Space Administration

NEC

Null Energy Condition

NOAA

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

OAM

Orbital Angular Momentum

OSETI

Optical Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence

OSI

Open Systems Interconnection

OVRO

Owens Valley Radio Observatory

PAHs

Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons

PanoSETI
pc

Panoramic SETI
parsec

PFAS

Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances

PFCs

Perfluorocarbons

PM

Phase Modulation

POSS

Palomar Observatory Sky Survey

PSETI

Penn State Extraterrestrial Intelligence (Center)

PSK

Phase Shift Keying

PTZ

Pan-Tilt-Zoom

QAM

Quadrature Amplitude Modulation

RFI

Radio Frequency Interference

SAM

Spin Angular Momentum

SEC

Strong Energy Condition

SETA

Search for Extraterrestrial Artifacts

SETI

Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence

SGL

Solar Gravitational Lens

SKA

Square Kilometre Array

SMBH

Supermassive Black Hole

STACEE

Solar Tower Atmospheric Cherenkov Effect Experiment

TESS

Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite

TOI

TESS Object of Interest

UAP

Unidentified Anomalous (formerly Aerial) Phenomena

UFO

Unidentified Flying Object

118
UHECRs
USGS
UV
VERITAS

Ultra-High Energy Cosmic Rays
United States Geological Survey
Ultraviolet
Very Energetic Radiation Imaging Telescope Array System

VLTI

Very Large Telescope Interferometer

WEC

Weak Energy Condition

WISE

Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer

XFEL

X-ray Free Electron Laser

12.3. Scientific Prefixes
Prefix

Symbol

Numerical Value

Vocto

v

10−33

Quecto

q

10−30

Ronto

r

10−27

Yocto

y

10−24

Zepto

z

10−21

Atto

a

10−18

Femto

f

10−15

Pico

p

10−12

Nano

n

10−9

Micro

µ

10−6

Milli

m

10−3

Centi

c

10−2

Deci

d

10−1

Deca

D

101

Hecto

h

102

Kilo

k

103

Mega

M

106

Giga

G

109

Tera

T

1012

Peta

P

1015

Exo

E

1018

Zetta

Z

1021

Yotta

Y

1024

Ronna

R

1027

Quetta

Q

1030

Votta

V

1033

Table 17. Scientific prefixes from very small to very large
scales

