                                                  This draft was prepared using the LaTeX style file belonging to the Journal of Fluid Mechanics   1



                                                    Finite-size evaporating droplets in weakly
                                                   compressible homogeneous shear turbulence
arXiv:2104.10184v3 [physics.flu-dyn] 9 Feb 2022




                                                  Nicolò Scapin1 †, Federico Dalla Barba2 , Giandomenico Lupo1 , Marco
                                                           Edoardo Rosti3 , Christophe Duwig4 , Luca Brandt1,5
                                                    1
                                                        Department of Engineering Mechanics, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm,
                                                                                             Sweden,
                                                         2
                                                             Department of Industrial Engineering & CISAS, University of Padova, Padova, Italy,
                                                    3
                                                        Complex Fluids and Flows Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate
                                                              University (OIST), 1919-1 Tancha, Onna-son, Okinawa 904-0495, Japan,
                                                    4
                                                        Department of Chemical Engineering, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm,
                                                                                             Sweden,
                                                        5
                                                            Department of Energy and Process Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and
                                                                               Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway

                                                                                  (Received xx; revised xx; accepted xx)


                                                  We perform interface-resolved simulations of finite-size evaporating droplets in weakly
                                                  compressible homogeneous shear turbulence. The study is conducted by varying three
                                                  dimensionless physical parameters: the initial gas temperature over the critical tempera-
                                                  ture Tg,0 /Tc , the initial droplet diameter over the Kolmogorov scale d0 /η and the surface
                                                  tension, i.e. the shear-based Weber number, W eS .
                                                  For the smallest W eS , we first discuss the impact on the evaporation rate of the
                                                  three thermodynamic models employed to evaluate the gas thermophysical properties:
                                                  a constant property model and two variable-properties approaches where either the gas
                                                  density or all the gas properties are allowed to vary. Taking this last approach as reference,
                                                  the model assuming constant gas properties and evaluated with the ”1/3” rule is shown
                                                  to predict the evaporation rate better than the model where the only variable property
                                                  is the gas density. Moreover, we observe that the well-known Frössling/Ranz-Marshall
                                                  correlation underpredicts the Sherwood number at low temperatures, Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75.
                                                  Next, we show that the ratio between the actual evaporation rate in turbulence and that
                                                  computed in stagnant conditions is always much higher than one for weakly deformable
                                                  droplets: it decreases with Tg,0 /Tc without approaching unity at the highest Tg,0 /Tc con-
                                                  sidered. This suggests an evaporation enhancement due to turbulence also in conditions
                                                  typical of combustion applications.
                                                  Finally, we examine the overall evaporation rate and the local interfacial mass flux at
                                                  higher W eS , showing a positive correlation between evaporation rate and interfacial
                                                  curvature, especially at the lowest Tg,0 /Tc .

                                                  Key words: finite-size, evaporating droplets, homogeneous shear turbulence, weakly
                                                  compressible simulations.



                                                                         † Email address for correspondence: nicolos@mech.kth.se
2                                     Scapin et. al.
1. Introduction

   The understanding of droplets evaporation in turbulent flows is a crucial aspect in
many different contexts, such as geophysics and spray combustion to name a few. In the
first example, evaporation is central for the formation and evolution of clouds and, more
in general, in many of the grand challenges of environmental fluid mechanics (Dauxois
et al. 2021). In the second example, droplet evaporation is a precursor of combustion;
ensuring that all the liquid vaporizes before chemical reactions occur is fundamental to
minimize the pollutants formation and to maximize the efficiency of the entire process
(Birouk & Gökalp 2006). More recently, evaporation in turbulence acquired a prominent
role also in our understanding of the fluid dynamics aspects of COVID-19 spreading
(e.g., droplet generation due to exhalation and airborne dispersion) as described in
Mittal et al. (2020); Balachandar et al. (2020); Bourouiba (2021). Therefore, several
studies have been conducted to understand how relative humidity affects evaporation
and condensation (Rosti et al. 2020; Ng et al. 2021; Chong et al. 2021) as well as on
the interaction between droplets and turbulent flows (Bourouiba 2020; Rosti et al. 2021)
with the ultimate goal of improving social distancing guidelines.
Historically, evaporating droplets in turbulence have been the subject of numerous and
extensive experimental campaigns which have mainly focused on the flow topology inside
the droplets (Wong & Lin 1992; Mandal & Bakshi 2012), on the interaction between
droplet dispersion and vapour clouds structure (De Rivas & Villermaux 2016; Villermaux
et al. 2017; Sahu et al. 2018) and on evaporation enhancement of super-Kolmogorov
(i.e., finite-size) droplets (Marti et al. 2017; Verwey & Birouk 2018, 2020). On the
computational side, the most common approach has been the point particle method
(Kuerten 2016; Maxey 2017) for the studies of sub-Kolmogorov droplets in different
flow configurations, i.e. forced homogeneous isotropic turbulence (Mashayek 1998a;
Weiss et al. 2018), homogeneous shear turbulence (Mashayek 1998b; Weiss et al. 2020),
turbulent channel flow (Russo et al. 2014; Bukhvostova et al. 2014) and turbulent jets
(Reveillon & Demoulin 2007; Wang et al. 2021). The main limitation of this approach
is represented by the inherent need of empirical closure equations to model the mass,
momentum and energy coupling between the disperse and the continuous phase. This
feature limits their rigorous applications only to sub-Kolmogorov droplets (Elghobashi
2019) and hinders the possibility to investigate directly aspects such as the reciprocal
influence of nearby droplets (Lupo et al. 2020; Chong et al. 2021) or the evaporation
enhancement due to turbulence (which typically occurs for droplets of the order of
the Taylor length, Birouk & Gökalp 2006). Moreover, assessing the impact of droplets
deformation on the evaporation rate as well as the local interfacial mass flux distribution
over the droplet surface is not possible, unless further models are introduced. On the
other hand, less work has been dedicated to numerical simulations of droplets larger
than the Kolmogorov scale and the only few works available consider homogeneous
isotropic turbulence (HIT). Specifically, in Albernaz et al. (2017) the authors studied
by means of a hybrid Lattice Boltzmann method the deformation and heat transfer of
a single droplet with a diameter between 25η and 40η, with η the Kolmogorov length.
In this set-up, however, little can be said about the mass transfer because evaporation
and condensation compensate for a statistically constant droplet volume. Recently,
Dodd et al. (2021) employed a geometric volume of fluid (VoF) method to study the
evaporation of droplets at different volume fractions (0.01 % ⩽ α ⩽ 1 %) with an initial
droplet diameter ranging between 4η and 17η, in order to highlight the limitations of
point particle closures for the calculation of the evaporation rate and the semi-empirical
correlations of the Sherwood number in absence of mean flow and for non-isolated
                         Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                          3
droplets.
The limited number of studies and the need of further understanding of such a
complex process motivates us to further investigate finite-size evaporating droplets
in homogeneous-shear turbulence (HST). As noted in Kasbaoui et al. (2017), this
configuration can be regarded as one of intermediate complexity between homogeneous
isotropic and non-homogeneous flows and it represents a particularly convenient set-up
for two reasons. First, it allows to study shear flows without the complications induced
by the presence of the walls. Next, given the intrinsic production of turbulent kinetic
energy by the mean shear, turbulence is self-sustained without any external forcing and
the flow achieves a statistically stationary condition (SS-HST) (Pumir 1996; Sekimoto
et al. 2016). The SS-HST has been recently considered in multiphase flows, e.g. in Rosti
et al. (2019b) for emulsions and in Tanaka (2017); Yousefi et al. (2020) for turbulence
modulation by rigid particles of different shapes. In both cases, the characteristic length
of the disperse phase was chosen larger than the Kolmogorov scale.
In the current study we therefore consider finite-size evaporating droplets in SS-HST,
assuming an incompressible liquid surrounded by a compressible gas phase at higher
temperature. The initial size, ranging between 10.5η and 21.5η, is chosen to focus on
evaporation enhancement by turbulence (Verwey & Birouk 2020) and to elucidate the
effects of the interface deformation. This last aspect is less discussed in literature and,
so far, the spherical assumption has been invoked to describe the droplet shape also
in fully resolved simulations (Lupo et al. 2019, 2020). Given the large parameter space
which characterizes evaporating flows, here we focus on changing the ratio between the
droplet initial diameter and the Kolmogorov scale (d0 /η), the surface tension and the
initial gas temperature. Moreover, in all cases, to study the isolated droplet behaviour,
we consider a small initial liquid volume fraction, α0 = 0.14 %, corresponding to five
droplets. The resulting parametric study aims at addressing the following questions:
   a. What is the level of approximation of the estimated evaporation rates when the gas
thermophysical properties are assumed constant?
   b. What are the effects on the evaporation rate and on the liquid temperature of the
droplet size? Moreover, how does the ratio K/K0 (actual evaporation rate in turbulence
over the evaporation rate in stagnant conditions) changes when increasing the gas
temperature in conditions relevant for combustion applications?
   c. How does the interface deformation affect the evaporation rate and does the local
interfacial mass flux correlates with changes in the droplet shape?
To investigate this complex phenomenon numerically, we propose a new VoF method for
evaporating flows in weakly compressible homogeneously sheared turbulence, extending
the algorithm in Scapin et al. (2020). The tool addresses the two main issues arising when
performing this kind of simulation with more realistic and challenging conditions. First, as
already remarked in Kasbaoui et al. (2017), numerical simulations in HST are demanding
even in single phase since the commonly employed multistep time-integration schemes
(e.g., Adams-Bashforth and Runge-Kutta), if employed in their classical formulation, are
weakly unstable and, therefore, not adequate for long-time simulations. Next, since the
HST computational domain does not possess any outflow boundary, a rigorous description
of the two-phase evaporating system requires a compressible formulation that allows the
thermodynamic pressure to vary with the state variables. To address the first issue, we
present a modified version of the Adams-Bashforth scheme which recovers the analytical
solution of Kelvin modes in the limit of the rapid distortion theory (RTD) (Maxey
1982) and, overall, ensures a stable integration over long times. The second issue is
addressed by deriving and presenting a new mathematical formulation for evaporating
4                                         Scapin et. al.
flows with phase change in the low-Mach limit (weakly compressible formulation) with
a detailed numerical implementation. Differently from other approaches available in
literature (Wang et al. 2019; Ni et al. 2021), this formulation relaxes the assumption
of constant thermodynamic pressure and allows its dynamic variation according to the
global expansion and contraction of the compressible gas phase, as well as, on the amount
of mass flux exchanged at the interface.
This paper is organized as follows. In § 2 we introduce the mathematical model employed
to describe a two-phase evaporating system, adapted to the HST configuration. In § 3 the
numerical algorithm is presented, with a note on an improved Adams-Bashforth scheme
for HST simulations. The results, discussed in § 4, focus on the role played by the specific
thermodynamic model used to describe the weakly compressible phase and the effects on
the evaporation induced by the variation of the shear-based Reynolds number and the
shear-based Weber number. Finally, the main findings and conclusions are summarized
in § 5.


2. Governing equations
           2.1. Mathematical model for weakly compressible evaporating flows
   We consider a system of two immiscible and Newtonian fluids: a single component
liquid (phase 1) and an ideal mixture of an inert gas and vaporized liquid (phase 2).
The two phases are bounded by an infinitesimally small interface, through which mass,
momentum and energy are exchanged. The evaporation is driven by the partial pressure
of the inert gas in phase 2. To represent this system, a phase indicator function H is
defined at position x and time t to distinguish between the two phases:
                                         (
                                           1 if x ∈ Vl ,
                              H(x, t) =                                           (2.1)
                                           0 if x ∈ Vg ;
where Vl and Vg are the domains T     pertaining to the liquid and gas phases, divided by a
zero-thickness interface Γ (t) = Vl Vg .
Hereinafter and unless otherwise state, we assume that the liquid is incompressible with
constant properties, while the gas is compressible and its properties are allowed to vary
with temperature, pressure and composition. Thus, given the possible variation of the
density with the state variables, we consider compressibility, which in this work is treated
within the low-Mach approximation (Majda & Sethian 1985). This allows us to filter
acoustic effects, while still retaining potentially large density variations in the bulk region
of the compressible phase. Under this assumption, the conservation equations for species,
momentum, thermal energy and mass across the interface read as
                                    Du         1        fσ
                               ρ       = −∇p +    ∇·τ +    ,                             (2.2)
                                    Dt         Re       We

                           DYlv       1
                               ρg=         ∇ · (ρg Dlg ∇Ylv ),                           (2.3)
                             Dt    ReSc
                                                                    
                                                        2
        DT    1                       dpth      ρg Dlg X
    ρcp    =       ∇ · (k∇T ) + Πp,1       +              ∇hj · ∇Yj  (1 − H)           (2.4)
        Dt   ReP r                      dt      ReSc j=1

                 (ṁΓ δΓ )
             −             ,
                   Ste
                           Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                             5
                                       1 ρg,Γ Dlg,Γ       v
                             ṁΓ =               v ∇Γ Yl · nΓ .
                                     ReSc 1 − Yl,Γ
                                                                                           (2.5)

Here, u is the fluid velocity assumed to be continuous in the two phases, p is the
hydrodynamic pressure, T the temperature, h the enthalpy (with ∇h = ∇(cp T )), Ylv the
mass fraction of the vaporized liquid in the inert gas and ṁΓ is the interfacial mass flux.
In (2.2), τ is the viscous stress tensor for compressible Newtonian flows and fσ = κΓ δΓ
with κΓ the interfacial curvature. The generic thermophysical property ξ (density ρ,
dynamic viscosity µ, thermal conductivity k or specific heat capacity cp ) is computed
with an arithmetic average, i.e. ξ = 1 + (λξ − 1)H where λξ = ξl /ξg,r . Since ξl is kept
constant and uniform no further modelling is needed, while the generic gas property ξg is
computed with appropriate equation of states. The gas density ρg is computed with the
ideal gas law and the liquid diffusion coefficient with the Wilke-Lee correlation (Reid et al.
1987). More details on how the remaining gas thermophysical properties are evaluated
are given in Appendix A. Unless otherwise stated, all the property ratios λξ are computed
with respect to the reference gas property ξg,r , taken as the initial value.
In equations (2.2), (2.3),(2.5) and (2.4) different dimensionless parameters appear. By
introducing a reference velocity ur and reference length lr , we define the Reynolds number
Re = ρg,r ur lr /µg,r , the Weber number W e = ρg,r u2r lr /σ, with σ the surface tension;
Sc = µg,r /(ρg,r Dlg,r ) and P r = µg,r cpg,r /kg,r are the Schmidt and the Prandlt numbers.
Note that the temperature equation (2.4) requires the definition of the Stefan number
Ste = cpg,r Tg,0 /∆hlv , where Tg,0 is the initial gas temperature and ∆hlv is the latent
heat and of the dimensionless group Πp,1 = Ru /(cpg,r Mg ) where Mg is the molar mass
of the gas phase and Ru the universal gas constant. To form a close set of equations,
two additional equations are needed, one for the velocity divergence and one for the
thermodynamic pressure pth , i.e.
                                                                         
                            fY (x, t) + fT (x, t)            Πp,1    1 dpth
   ∇ · u = fΓ (xΓ , t) +                          − 1−                        (1 − H), (2.6)
                                     pth                  cp M m,av pth dt
            Z                          Z                                               
   1 dpth                 Πp,1                               fT (x, t) + fY (x, t)
                    1−            dVg =        fΓ (xΓ , t) +                       (1 − H) dV.
  pth dt     Vg        cp M m,av           V                          pth
                                                                                            (2.7)
In equations (2.6) and (2.7) the functions fΓ (xΓ , t), fY (x, t) and fT (x, t) represent the
different contributions to the total velocity divergence from the phase change (fΓ ) and
the change of the gas density either due to composition (fY ) or to temperature (fT ),
                                       
                              1      1
         fΓ (xΓ , t) = ṁΓ        −       δΓ ,                                             (2.8a)
                             ρg,Γ    λρ
                                              
                        1 M m,av       1
         fY (x, t) =                      − 1 ∇ · (ρg Dlg ∇Ylv ),                          (2.8b)
                      ReSc ρg         λM
                                                                              
                                                                 2
                      1     Πp,1  1                     ρg Dlg X
         fT (x, t) =                     ∇ · (k∇T ) +               ∇hj · ∇Yj  ,          (2.8c)
                      Re cp M m,av P r                     Sc j=1

where λM = Ml /Mg is the molar mass ratio. The complete derivation of equa-
tions (2.6), (2.7) and of relations (2.8) is provided in Appendix B.

                     2.2. Governing equations for the HST configuration
  Equations (2.2), (2.3), (2.5), (2.4), (2.6) and (2.7) are solved in a periodic box assuming
an imposed uniform mean shear S, as depicted in figure 1. In a shear-periodic domain the
6                                       Scapin et. al.
                                                              Ylv
                                            0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8




                                                                                  z

                                                                                      yy

                                                                                      x




Figure 1: Sketch of the computational box: the rendering represents the volume contour
of the vapour mass fraction for the case at ReS = 6700, W eS = 0.1 and Tg,0 /Tc = 1.5.



streamwise x and spanwise y directions are periodic, whereas the so-called shear-periodic
condition applies in the z direction, which reads for the generic scalar quantity g as

                             g(x + lx , y, z) = g(x, y, z),
                             g(x, y + ly , z) = g(x − Stly , y, z),                         (2.9)
                             g(x, y, z + lz ) = g(x, y, z).

   The presence of a mean velocity, i.e., Sz, suggests to decompose the velocity field u
into a mean and a fluctuating component u0 ,

                                       u = u0 + Szex ,                                     (2.10)

where ex = (1, 0, 0). Given the decomposition (2.10), the momentum equation (2.2) is
written in terms of u0 :
       Du0        ∂u0
                                                                           
                            0                1                 ∂µ       ∂µ           fσ
   ρ        + Sz      + Sw ex = −∇p +             ∇·τ +S          ex +      ez    +      ,
        Dt        ∂x                       ReS                 ∂z        ∂x         W eS
                                                                                       (2.11)
where ez = (0, 0, 1). Three new terms appear: the first, Sz (∂u0 /∂x), is the convection of
the velocity fluctuations by the mean shear; the second, Sw0 ex , represents the production
of streamwise momentum caused by the fluid parcel transport in the normal direction
owing to the mean shear; the third and last term, S (∂µ/∂zex + ∂µ/∂xez ), represents
the viscous dissipation due to the mean shear in the case of a fluid with variable viscosity.
Note that ReS and W eS are the shear-based Reynolds and Weber numbers, computed
taking ur = Slr .
  The same decomposition (2.10) is applied to the mass fraction and temperature
equations, giving
                          DYlv      ∂Ylv
                                        
                                                 1
                     ρg        + Sz        =          ∇ · (ρg Dlg ∇Ylv ),              (2.12)
                           Dt        ∂x        ReS Sc
                             Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                       7
                       
           DT      ∂T            1
 ρcp          + Sz          =         ∇ · (k∇T )                                      (2.13)
           Dt      ∂x         ReS P r
                                                                 
                                                     2
                                    dpth     ρg Dlg X                        ṁΓ δΓ
                            + Πp,1       +            ∇hj · ∇Yj  (1 − H) −        . (2.14)
                                      dt    ReS Sc j=1                        Ste

In equations (2.14) and (2.12) the two new terms, Sz (∂T /∂x) and Sz (∂Ylv /∂x), repre-
sent the convection of the temperature/vapour mass fraction by the mean shear.



3. Methodology
           3.1. Numerical method for low-Mach HST simulations with phase change
   The governing equations are solved on a uniform Cartesian grid of equal spacing ∆x =
∆y = ∆z, with a staggered arrangement for the velocity while the remaining scalar
fields are defined at the cell centres. The convection terms of the governing equations are
discretized with the QUICK scheme (Leonard 1979), while central schemes are employed
for the diffusive terms. The numerical method for phase change in the incompressible
limit is presented in (Scapin et al. 2020), while the details of the weakly compressible
two-phase code are reported in (Dalla Barba et al. 2020). Both implementations are
based on the solver CaNS (Costa 2018), extended in this work to handle shear-periodic
boundary conditions. In this section we therefore only describe the main modifications
needed to handle weakly compressible phase-change processes in homogeneous shear
turbulence (HST). The validation of the present algorithm against three benchmarks is
provided in Appendix C.

3.1.1. Dispersed phase
  The first step is the interface reconstruction and subsequent advection, handled in
a fully Eulerian manner using an algebraic VoF method, i.e., the MTHINC by Ii et al.
(2012); Rosti et al. (2019a). We start from the topological equation for the phase indicator
function (2.1):
                                    ∂H
                                         + uΓ · ∇H = 0,                                (3.1)
                                     ∂t
where uΓ is the interface velocity, taken as the sum of the extended liquid velocity uextl
and the contribution due to the interfacial mass flux ṁΓ nΓ /ρl ; see Scapin et al. (2020)
for more details. Note that since uext
                                     l   and uΓ are derived from the one-fluid velocity u,
the decomposition (2.10) applies directly to the interface velocity.
  Equation (3.1) is then rewritten in terms of the volume fraction, Φ, defined as the
volumetric average of H over a discrete computation cell of volume Vc = ∆x∆y∆z.
Employing the decomposition (2.10) in the colour function advection equation (3.1) yields

                         ∂Φ                        ∂H ht
                            + ∇ · (H ht u0Γ ) + Sz       = Φ∇ · u0Γ ,                      (3.2)
                         ∂t                         ∂x
where H ht represents the hyperbolic tangent function approximating the indicator func-
tion H. From equation (3.2), we see that an additional term is present, Sz(∂H ht /∂x),
which represents the convection of volume fraction by S.
   Equation (3.2) is solved in three sub-steps. First, it is advanced by ∆tn+1 to the new
time step omitting the convection by the mean shear and the right-hand side term. By
employing the classical directional splitting, we obtain a provisional Φ̃, see Ii et al. (2012)
8                                        Scapin et. al.
for more details. Next, the convection by mean shear is included
                                      ∂ Φ̃      ∂ H̃ ht
                                           + Sz         = 0.                              (3.3)
                                      ∂t          ∂x
Note that the time derivative in equation (3.3) is computed explicitly for Φ̃ while the
convective term contains the phase indicator function H ht . Since the latter is a function
of the former and the mathematical form of this dependency varies according to the
type of interface reconstruction method, it is possible to express the convective term as
a function of Φ. Nevertheless, this would modify the advection velocity in (3.3) adding a
spatial-dependent term along the mean shear direction (i.e., x), making more elaborated
and complex the application of the method of characteristics. For this reason, we prefer
to compute this extra term by an additional directional splitting along x, with Sz as
advection velocity.
Finally, the divergence is corrected. This consists in adding, after the four directional
splittings, a correction term proportional to the discrete velocity divergence, i.e.
                  Φn+1
                   i,j,k = Φ̃i,j,k − ∆t   Fi,j,k + ∆tn+1 Φn+1
                                       n+1 n                             n
                                                          i,j,k (∇ · uΓ )i,j,k ,          (3.4)

where Φn+1
         i,j,k is the volume fraction resulting from the directional splitting procedure,
  n
Fi,j,k represents the correction used in the previous directional splitting steps, and the
last term is the volume correction which ensures that the interface velocity divergence is
employed to update Φn+1 i,j,k (Scapin et al. 2020). The thermodynamic properties (ρ, µ, k
and cp ) are then updated using the new value Φn+1 .

3.1.2. Vapour mass fraction equation
   The conservation of the vapour mass fraction, see equation (2.12), is solved only in the
gas domain (i.e., Vg ), assuming saturation conditions at the interface Γ . In other words,
the value Ylv = Yl,Γ
                  v
                     , which is a function of the thermodynamic pressure and temperature,
                                                                                     v
is imposed at the interface Γ as a Dirichlet boundary condition. To compute Yl,Γ       , we
employ Span-Wagner equation of state (see equations (A 6) and (A 7) in Appendix A).
Equation (2.12) is advanced with the first-Euler method neglecting the mean shear
                                                                      n+1
contribution. This yields a provisional vapour mass fraction field Ỹv,l   :

            Ỹlv,n+1 − Ylv,n                          1
     ρn+1
      g              n+1
                             = −ρn+1
                                 g   (u · ∇Ylv )n +        ∇ · (ρn+1
                                                                 g
                                                                      n+1
                                                                     Dlg  ∇Ylv,n ).       (3.5)
                  ∆t                                ReS Sc
The calculation of the gradient in the convective part of (3.5) is performed as detailed
in Scapin et al. (2020), while some modifications are required for the linear term as it
contains the diffusion coefficient Dlg and the gas density ρg , which, in general, vary with
the thermodynamic pressure, temperature and composition. Since the procedure can be
performed dimension by dimension, we present the discretization along x as example,
the same approach being repeated for the other two directions,
                                                                                   !
              ∂Ylv                            ∂Ylv                       ∂Ylv
                  
  ∂                      1
       ρg Dlg        =         (ρg Dlg )i+1/2           − (ρg Dlg )i−1/2              . (3.6)
  ∂x           ∂x i     ∆x                     ∂x i+1/2                   ∂x i−1/2
                                                                                      i

The evaluation of the gradients ∂Ylv /∂xi±1/2 is performed on an irregular grid, employing
one-sided finite difference equations for the cell cut from the interface or central scheme
for cells away from the interface (see Scapin et al. 2020, for details). Next, the coefficients
(ρg Dlg )i±1/2 are obtained as the arithmetic mean,
                          (ρg Dlg )i±1/2 = 0.5[(ρg Dlg )i + (ρg Dlg )G ].                 (3.7)
                           Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                               9
                                                                           G
If the cell i and its neighbours (i ± 1) are not cut by the interface, ρg Dlg is set equal to
                                   G
(ρg Dlg )i±1 . Otherwise, (ρg Dlg ) is evaluated as
                                        (ρg Dlg )Γ + (θ − 1)(ρg Dlg )i±1
                         (ρg Dlg )G =                                      ,                  (3.8)
                                                        θ
where θ represents the sub-cell resolution computed from the level-set function, recon-
structed from the volume of fluid field. Since eq. (3.8) poorly behaves for small values of
θ, we set (ρg Dlg )G = (ρg Dlg )i when θ ⩽ 1/4. Note that equation (3.8) requires the value
of the coefficient (ρg Dlg ) at the interface location, i.e. (ρg Dlg )Γ . These are evaluated with
the corresponding equations of state using the temperature and the vapour composition
at the interface location. It is worth mentioning that we cannot access directly the liquid
and gas temperatures, separately, since the temperature equation is solved over the whole
domain, irrespective of the interface location. Therefore, to avoid problems of artificial
heating (especially when the difference between the gas and the liquid density is high), we
locally reconstruct the gas temperature in Vl and the liquid temperature in Vg relying on
a simple constant extrapolation of T . The resulting two fields, Tg and Tl , defined in a few
grid cells around the interface, are then used to update the thermophysical properties,
see Appendix A for more details.
   Finally, the mean shear contribution is included using the method of characteristic
over a time ∆tn+1 :
                                       ∂Ylv        ∂Y v
                                             + Sz l = 0.                                      (3.9)
                                        ∂t          ∂x
Equation (3.9) can be conveniently rewritten in more compact form as in Gerz et al.
(1989); Kasbaoui et al. (2017):
                             Ylv,n+1 = Ỹlv,n+1 (x − ∆tn+1 Szex ).                          (3.10)
Equation (3.10) is solved using a Fourier interpolation (Tanaka 2017), which ensures a
spectral accuracy provided that ∆tn+1 is chosen lower or equal than (SNz )−1 where Nz
is the number of grid points along the z direction (see section 3.2 for more details).

3.1.3. Calculation of the interfacial mass flux
   The interfacial mass flux (2.5) is computed only in the gas region by projecting the
interfacial gradient along the normal direction and adopting a dimension by dimension
approach. The interfacial vapour mass fraction Ylv , gas density ρg and diffusion coefficient
Dlg should be estimated at the interface location. Similarly to the case of the vapour
mass fraction described in section 3.1.2, all these quantities depend on the local gas and
liquid temperatures and on the thermodynamic pressure. Therefore, we first estimate the
interfacial liquid and gas temperature in those grid cells cut by the interface. Depending
on the interface position, this is done in each direction independently, providing different
                                                                               x    y
estimates for the gas and liquid temperature for the three coordinates, Tp,Γ     , Tp,Γ  and
  z
Tp,Γ where the subscript p stands for the gas and liquid phase. The resulting values are
averaged using the local normal, i.e.:
                                      x          y
                              Tp,Γ = Tp,Γ n2x + Tp,Γ n2y + Tp,Γ
                                                            z
                                                                n2z .                       (3.11)
                                                          v
Once Tp,Γ is known, the values of ρg,Γ , Dlg,Γ and Yl,Γ     are computed using the corre-
sponding equations of state, see Appendix A. Note that by employing the procedure here
explained, the mass flux ṁΓ is available only on the grid nodes pertaining the gas region.
Nevertheless, as equation (2.6) suggests, the values of ṁΓ are needed also in some grid
points inside the liquid region. Accordingly, ṁΓ is extrapolated over a narrow band at
the interface to populate all cells where |∇Φ|i,j,k 6= 0.
10                                          Scapin et. al.
3.1.4. Temperature equation
   The temperature equation (2.4) is solved using a whole domain approach as in Scapin
et al. (2020), with additional care paid to the time discretization. The adopted approach
follows the one proposed in Gerz et al. (1989) and has been improved here to enhance
the numerical stability and to include the additional source terms due to the gas
compressibility, phase change and enthalpy diffusion. First, a prediction temperature
field T̃ is computed using the Adams-Bashforth method:

                T̃ n+1 − T n              1 ∆tn+1                     1 ∆tn+1
                                                                             
                             =       1+                 RT n −                      RT n−1 ,   (3.12)
                    ∆tn+1                 2 ∆tn                       2 ∆tn

where the terms RT n and RT n−1 include all the convective and diffusive terms at the
current, n, and old time level, n − 1. The term RT n−1 is first shear mapped to the new
time level n + 1 and this step has proved to be crucial for the numerical stability of the
Adams-Bashforth scheme (see Appendix D).
  Next, the temperature field is shear mapped to the new time level n + 1 by employing
the same spectral interpolation described for the vapour mass fraction equation,

                                 T n+1,∗ = T̃ (x − Sz∆tn+1 ex ).                               (3.13)

Finally, the source terms in (2.4) are included using the first-order Euler scheme:

                     n+1
                                                         ext
                        − T n+1,∗
                                              
                 T                                dpth
       ρn+1 cn+1
             p                    = Πp,1                        (1 − Φn+1 ),                   (3.14)
                       ∆tn+1                       dt
                                                                    n+1
                                                       2
                                         1            X
                                     +        ρg Dlg     ∇Yj · ∇h∗j     (1 − Φn+1 ),
                                       ReS Sc         j=1

                                         (ṁΓ |∇Φ|)n+1
                                     −                 ,
                                               Ste
where (dpth /dt)ext represents the linear extrapolation in time of the derivative of the
thermodynamic pressure. It is important to note that the second and third terms in
equation (3.14), which include variables shear mapped to the new time level, (i.e., Φn+1
      v,n+1
and Yl,j    ) should be computed after (3.13).


3.1.5. Thermal divergence and thermodynamic pressure
   The calculation of the velocity divergence is performed simply by discretizating the
right-hand side of equation (2.6) node by node as done in Dalla Barba et al. (2020) for the
case of weakly compressible two-phase solvers without phase change. The calculation of
the thermodynamic pressure requires, however, more care. In the low-Mach framework,
the role of pth is to ensure mass conservation of the compressible phase at the discrete
level, since it enters the calculation of the gas density. This cannot be fulfilled simply by
the advection of the color-function, which is designed to satisfy the volume conservation of
the incompressible liquid, or by the pressure-correction step through the imposition of the
divergence constrain (2.6) on u. In fact, these ensure only the overall volume conservation
of the closed and isochoric system under consideration. Therefore, we compute pth by
integrating the equation for the gas density (equation A 1 in Appendix A) over the
computation domain occupied by the gas phase Vg (Demou et al. 2019; Dalla Barba
                         Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                          11
et al. 2020),
                                             Ggn+1 Πp,2
                          pn+1
                           th  =Z        n+1                       .                  (3.15)
                                       M m,av
                                              (1 − Φn+1 ) dx dy dz
                                   V   T n+1
The total mass of the gas Gg , used above, varies in time according to the following
relation, derived from the material balance across the droplet surface,
                                       Z
                        dGg
                            = ṁt,Γ =     ṁn+1
                                            Γ   |∇Φn+1 | dx dy dz.             (3.16)
                         dt             V

Once the volume integral in equation (3.16) is computed, the gas mass at the new time
level is computed from the time integration of (3.16),
                                            Z tn+1
                             Gn+1
                               g   =  Gn
                                       g +         ṁt,Γ dt.                    (3.17)
                                                tn

To evaluate numerically the integral in (3.17), we employ a trapezoidal quadrature. With
this approach, we impose correctly the conservation of the compressible phase at the
discrete level.
3.1.6. Momentum equation and pressure correction method
  Once the thermodynamic divergence is computed, the momentum equation (2.2) is
solved with a standard pressure correction method, reported below in semi-discrete form,
                                                          n−1
                                 RUn−1 = RU
                                          g     (x − ∆tn Szex ),                      (3.18)
              ??
              u − un        1 ∆tn+1          1 ∆tn+1
                                                 
                                        n
        ρn+1
                       = 1+           RU −             RUn−1 ,                        (3.19)
               ∆tn+1        2 ∆tn            2 ∆tn
                                                      ∆tn+1 κn+1 ∇Φn+1
                        u? = u?? (x − ∆tn+1 Szex ) + n+1 Γ             ,              (3.20)
                                                      ρ         W eS
                              ρn+1             ρn+1
                                       
           ∇2 pn+1 = ∇ · 1 − n+10
                                       ∇p̂ + 0n+1 ∇ · u? − ∇ · un+1 ,
                                                                     
                                                                                      (3.21)
                              ρ               ∆t
                                                                  
                 n+1    ?     n+1      1     n+1       1      1
                u    = u − ∆t             ∇p     +        − n+1 ∇p̂ ,                 (3.22)
                                     ρn+1
                                      0              ρn+1   ρ0
where RUn and RUn−1 in equation (3.19) include the convective and diffusive terms
computed at the current and previous time level, neglecting the surface tension force
and the mean shear contribution. As done for the temperature equation and explained
in detail in the Appendix D, it is very important for the stability and the accuracy of
the time integration scheme that the term RUn−1 is shear mapped to the current time
level n. The intermediate velocity u?? is shear mapped to the new time level n + 1,
similarly to what done for the temperature and vapour mass fraction, and updated with
the contribution from the surface tension (Rosti et al. 2019b).
   Finally, the pressure equation (3.21) is solved with a time-splitting technique which
allows to transform the variable Poisson equation into a constant coefficient one (Dodd
& Ferrante 2014). Note that ρn+10   and p̂ in (3.21) and (3.22) are the minimum density
over the entire computational domain and the extrapolated hydrodynamic pressure p̂ =
(1 + (∆tn+1 /∆tn ))pn − (∆tn+1 /∆tn )pn−1 . As already discussed in Motheau & Abraham
(2016); Dalla Barba et al. (2020), the use of the pressure splitting to solve the variable
density Poisson equation in a low-Mach framework is suitable when the temperature ratio
between the two phases is below 2 − 3, which is the case of the current study. Finally, it is
12                                     Scapin et. al.
worth mentioning that the presence of the shear, if left untreated, would make the use of
the eigenexpansion method to solve (3.21) not possible, since one direction is not periodic.
For this reasons, in order to still benefit from FFT-based solvers, equation (3.21) is solved
in a coordinate system moving with the mean shear for which, triperiodic boundary
conditions can be applied. The solution is then transformed back to the shear-periodic
domain, as detailed in Tanaka (2017); Rosti et al. (2019b).

                                3.2. Time-step restriction
                    n+1
  The time step ∆t  is estimated from the stability constraints of the overall system:
                                                                             
                                                               n+1        ∆z
   ∆tn+1 = min C∆tc ∆tn+1
                       c   , C∆td min (∆t µ , ∆tσ , ∆tm , ∆tk )    , C∆tS       , (3.23)
                                                                          Slz
where ∆tc , ∆tσ , ∆tµ , ∆tm and ∆tk are the maximum allowable time steps due to
convection, surface tension, momentum, thermal energy and mass diffusion. These can
be determined as suggested in Scapin et al. (2020); Dalla Barba et al. (2020):
                                                                        λµ ∆x2 ReS
                                                                        
                        ∆x                                        µg
    ∆tc =                               ,        ∆tµ = min min        ,            ,
            |umax | + |vmax | + |wmax |                     Vg    ρg    λρ     6
           s
              W eS (minVg {ρg } + λρ )∆x3                       (θm ∆x)2 Sc
    ∆tσ =                                    , ∆tm = min {Dlg }             ,
                            4π                         Vg            6
                                             ∆x2 P r
                                        
                          kg         λk
    ∆tk = min min                 ,                  ,
                    Vg   ρg cpg     λρ λcp     6
                                                                                 (3.24)
where |ui,max | is an estimate of the maximum value of the ith component of the flow
velocity, θm = 0.25 and maxVg {ξg } and minVg {ξg } denote the maximum and minimum
over the computational domain, Vg , of the generic thermophysical property of the
gas phase. For the cases presented here, the convective contrain represents the main
limitation; setting C∆tc = 0.15, C∆td = 0.5 and C∆tS = 1 was found sufficient for a
stable and accurate time integration.

                                3.3. Computational set-up
   Given the large number of dimensionless parameter that characterizes flows involving
evaporation, we focus our attention on the role of the ratio between droplet initial
diameter and the Kolmogorov dissipative flow scale (tuned by varying the shear-based
Reynolds number, ReS ), the role of surface tension (varying the shear-based Weber
number W eS ), the ratio between the initial gas temperature and the critical temperature,
Tg,0 /Tc , and the type of model employed to evaluate the thermophysical properties of
the gas phase during the simulations. Concerning this last aspect, we first consider
all the gas thermophyisical properties constant and computed with a proper averaging
between the liquid and the gas temperature (i.e., with the 1/3 rule by Hubbard et al.
1975) (case denoted as CP); secondly, we allow only the gas density ρg to vary (case
denoted as VPρ ) and, finally, we allow all the thermophysical properties to vary with the
local thermodynamic variables and vapour composition (case VPa ). A summary of the
numerical campaign is reported in table 1, together with the remaining dimensionless
physical parameters, which are all kept constant. Note that the physical parameters
reported in table 1 are representative of pentane evaporating droplets in dry air at high
pressure (∼ 43 bar). In particular, we will consider 3 values of the ratio Tg,0 /Tc =
0.75, 1.00, 1.50 where Tc is the critical temperature (469.69 K for pentane), which gives
                           Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                         13



  Case Tg,0 /Tc Model for ξg ReS WeS         Dav      Group          Definition        Value

  1       1.50       CP        6700   0.02   0.8213   Pr           µg,r cpg,r /kg,r      1.39
  2       1.50       VPρ       6700   0.02   0.8213   Sc         µg,r /(ρg,r Dlg,r )     1.66
  3       1.50       VPa       6700   0.02   0.8213   Ste         cpg,r Tg,r /∆hlv       5.70
  4       0.75       CP        6700   0.02   0.1528   λρ               ρl /ρg,r         13.15
  5       0.75       VPρ       6700   0.02   0.1528   λµ               µl /µg,r          2.10
  6       0.75       VPa       6700   0.02   0.1528   λcp             cpl /cpg,r         2.00
  7       1.00       VPa       6700   0.02   0.5531   λk               kl /kg,r          1.87
  8       1.50       VPa       2800   0.02   0.9584   λM               Ml /Mg            2.58
  9       1.00       VPa       2800   0.02   0.6589   Πp,1        Ru /(Mg cpg,r )       0.18
  10      0.75       VPa       2800   0.02   0.2341   Πp,2    pth,r Mg /(ρg,r Ru Tg,r ) 1.00
  11      1.50       VPa       6700   0.06   0.8212   Πp,3            pc /pth,r          0.83
  12      1.50       VPa       6700   0.10   0.8213   α0 [%]        Vl,0 /(lx ly lz )   0.14
  13      0.75       VPa       6700   0.06   0.1528   Ndp,0                −               5
  14      0.75       VPa       6700   0.10   0.1528   RH0 [%]              −              0.0


Table 1: Left: Dimensionless parameters defining the investigated cases, the initial gas
temperature over the critical temperature Tg,0 /Tc , the thermodynamic model employed
to evaluate the gas thermophysical property, the shear-based Reynolds number ReS =
ρg,r Sly2 /µg,r , and the shear-based Weber number W eS = ρg,r S 2 d30 /σ with d0 the initial
droplet diameter. The vaporization Damköhler number, the ratio between the turbulence
time scale and the evaporation time scale in stagnant conditions, Dav = τt /τv,L , is
also reported (see equation 4.4). Note that in the current study d0 /ly = 0.10. Right:
dimensionless parameters kept constant in the current study (Ndp,0 is the initial number
of droplet, α0 is the initial liquid volume and RH0 is the initial relative humidity).




Tg,0 = 354, 470 and 705 K. The initial liquid temperature Tl,0 is the wet bulb temperature
at Tg,0 and corresponds to Tl,0 = 334, 388 and 432 K.
   The focus of the study is the behaviour of evaporating isolated droplets in homogeneous
shear turbulence and, therefore, we consider five isolated droplets (i.e., initial volume
fraction α0 ≈ 0.14 % with Ndp,0 = 5), injected in a single-phase statistically steady-
state HST field at the desired shear-based ReS (2800 or 6700). For all the cases, the
computational domain has the streamwise aspect ratio, ARxy = lx /ly ≈ 2.10, and
the cross-stream ratio, ARzy = lz /ly ≈ 1.05. As discussed in Sekimoto et al. (2016),
employing such values, the effects on the flow induced by a finite-size computational box
are reduced. The domain is discretized with 1280 × 608 × 640 grid points, thus ensuring
not only an adequate resolution of the flow field (i.e., ∆x/η ≈ 0.33 for ReS = 2800
and ∆x/η ≈ 0.40 for ReS = 6700 where η is the Kolmogorov length scale), but also of
the droplets, whose initial resolution is 64 points per diameter. This value is consistent
with our previous study (Scapin et al. 2020), where we have assessed that a minimum
of 50 grid points per diameter is needed to fully resolve mass, momentum and energy
transfer across the droplet interface. Note that the resolution is also sufficient to resolve
                                                    v
the smallest scales
                  √of the two active scalar
                                      √ fields, Yl and T , since the associated Batchelor
scales ηB,Y = η/ Sc and ηB,T = η/ P r, although smaller than the Kolmogorov scale,
are always larger than ∆x.
14                                      Scapin et. al.
4. Results
                   4.1. Comparison of the three thermodynamic models
   We start our analysis by assessing the influence on the evaporation dynamics of the
type of thermodynamic model employed to evaluate the gas thermophysical properties.
A common approach (Abramzon & Sirignano 1989; Lupo et al. 2019, 2020) is to consider
the thermophysical properties of the gas phase uniform, constant and evaluate them at
an intermediate temperature, Tm = Tg,0 + m(Tg,0 − Tl,0 ). Hubbard et al. (1975) show
that the value m = 1/3 guarantees a good agreement between experimental results and
the theoretical predictions based on the d2 –law (Langmuir 1918). In the mathematical
framework introduced above, this amounts to limiting the expansion and contraction at
the interface, i.e. the terms fY and fT in (2.6), (2.7) become zero. Here, we will denote
the results obtained with these assumptions as CP. In many fully resolved simulations,
the only thermophysical property allowed to vary is the density and this is typically
done within the Oberbeck-Boussinesq approximation (Piedra et al. 2015). This model,
denoted VPρ , is considered here to asses whether it can provide accurate results. In typical
conditions of evaporating droplets, however, other thermophysical properties may play a
role. In particular, ρg and Dlg scale differently with the gas temperature, i.e., ρg ∼ pth /Tg
and Dlg ∼ Tg1.5 /pth and both appear in the expression of the interfacial mass flux.
These variations may significantly affect the evaporation dynamics, especially when the
difference between the liquid and gas temperatures is large. We will therefore also consider
variations of all the thermophysical properties, case VPa . To compare the different models
we consider two temperature ratios, Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75 and Tg,0 /Tc = 1.50 at ReS = 6700
and the lowest Weber number under consideration in this study, W eS = 0.02, to limit
droplet breakup and reduce the droplet deformation. Unless otherwise stated, the results
refer to the averaged values over the five droplets initially in the computational domain
and error bars are included to represent the droplet with the largest positive and negative
deviation from the mean value. Firstly, we show the square of the normalized droplet
diameter, see figure 2. From the cases at Tg,0 /Tc = 1.50, we observe that the complete
model and the constant property model provide similar evaporation rates; when the gas
density is the only varying thermophysical property, the evaporation rate is the highest.
This behaviour can be attributed to the presence of colder gas around the droplets,
leading to larger local gas densities (up to three times the initial gas density, see figure 3)
and, thus, to increased evaporation rates, as shown in figure 4a where we report the time
history of the surface-averaged gas temperature. Relaxing the assumption of constant
liquid diffusion coefficient reduces Dlg ∝ Tg1.5 . This counteracts the effect of the higher
gas density, decreasing the overall evaporation rate, which approaches the values obtained
assuming constant property values. The results at Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75 show a limited impact
of compressibility on the evaporation dynamics, with an almost identical evaporation
from the CP and VPa models. Once more, allowing only the gas density to vary leads to
an overestimation of the evaporation rate, which is explained by a lower gas temperature
and higher density at the interface, see figure 4b.         Note that in all the cases and
regardless of the model, the mean evaporation rate represents a good estimation of the
evaporation rate of the single droplet since the magnitude of the largest positive and the
negative deviations (represented by the error bars in figure 2) is within 5 %.
Figure 5 displays the time evolution of the ratio between the instantaneous area A =
|∇Φ|∆x3 and the area of a spherical droplet with same volume with error bars indicating
the maximum and minimum values at each instance at Tg,0 /Tc = 1.5 and Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75.
Note that the mean deviation form the spherical shape is always below 10 % (over the
simulated physical time) which makes the present data suitable for comparisons with
                           Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                      15
  (a)                                            (b)




Figure 2: Normalized square droplet diameter, (d/d0 )2 , as a function of the dimensionless
time (based on the diffusion time scale) for temperature ratio (a) Tg,0 /Tc = 1.50 and (b)
Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75 for ReS = 6700 and W eS = 0.02. The dotted curves indicate the slope
of the curves after the initial transient (extracted from the DNS), whereas the dashed
curves is the estimation from the theoretical Frössling/Ranz-Marshall correlation. The
length of the error bars indicates the droplet with the fastest/slowest evaporation rate
among the five droplets in the simulations.

                  .0                                                 3.0


                  .6                                                 2.6

                  .2                                                 2.2
                                                                           ρg /ρg,0

                  .8                                                 1.8
                             z

                  .4 x                                               1.4
                      y           y
                     x y
                  .0                                                 1.0

Figure 3: Volume rendering of the normalized gas density ρg /ρg,0 around a droplet for
the case ReS = 6700, W eS = 0.02 and Tg,0 /Tc = 1.5.


existing scaling laws, which are commonly derived under the assumption of rigid and
spherical droplets.
   In all cases, the evaporation rate follows the linear trend predicted by the d2 –law
since the droplets are isolated. We therefore test the closure relations available in the
literature against the data from the interface resolved simulations. To this end, we
estimate the evaporation rate as proposed in Birouk & Gökalp (2006). First, we obtain
the dimensionless evaporation rate in laminar conditions KL (Abramzon & Sirignano
1989) as
                                        4 ShRM log(1 + BM )
                                 KL =                       ,                         (4.1)
                                         ReS Sc     λρ
                                   v         v            v
where the Spalding number BM = (hYl,Γ iΓ − Yl,∞ )/(1 − hYl,Γ iΓ ) with hiΓ the average
over the surface Γ . The Sherwood number in equation (4.1) is estimated with the
16                                     Scapin et. al.
     (a)                                       (b)




Figure 4: Normalized gas temperature at the interface as a function of the dimensionless
time (based on the diffusion time scale) for temperature ratio (a) Tg,0 /Tc = 1.50 and (b)
Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75 for ReS = 6700 and W eS = 0.02. Tg,0 and Tl,0 are the initial gas and
liquid temperature.

     (a)                                        (b)




Figure 5: Ratio between the instantaneous interfacial area A and the area of a spherical
droplet with same volume V , i.e., Aeq = π 1/3 (6V )2/3 , for W eS = 0.02 and a):
Tg,0 /Tc = 1.50 and b): Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75. The upper lengths of the error bar refer to the
droplet with the largest A/Aeq , while the lower lengths displacement to the droplet with
lowest A/Aeq . The data refers to the simulations conducted with the VPa thermodynamic
models (negligible difference has been observed between the CP and the VPa model).


Frössling/Ranz-Marshall correlation (Ranz et al. 1952; Birouk & Gökalp 2006),
                                             BM
                     ShRM = 2 +             0.7
                                                          Sh0,RM ,                     (4.2)
                                   (1 + BM ) log(1 + BM )
with Sh0,RM = 2 + 0.552Re0.50d   Sc0.33 . In this last expression, Sc is the Schmidt number
and Red is the droplet Reynolds number, defined as Red = ρg,r |u0l,d − u0g,d |d/µg,r .
Following the original reference (Ranz et al. 1952) and more recent works (Wang et al.
2021; Ng et al. 2021), we compute Red using the instantaneous droplet diameter, the
instantaneous droplet velocity u0l,d and the surrounding gas velocity u0g,d at the droplet
location (Ng et al. 2021). Note that this correlation is based on experiments with droplets
larger than the Kolmogorov scale and in presence of a mean velocity field and, is therefore,
                         Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                          17
suitable for the current study. Finally, we correct equation (4.1) for the presence of
turbulence via a Damköhler number (Gökalp et al. 1992):
                                   K
                                      = 0.74Dav−0.115 .                                 (4.3)
                                   KL
In the above,
                                                  τt
                                       Dav =          ,                                 (4.4)
                                                 τv,L
                2/3   1/3
where τt = d0 /hεg iMg is the characteristic time scale of the turbulent eddies, d0 is
the initial droplet diameter and hεg iMg is the mass averaged turbulent dissipation (see
Abramzon & Sirignano 1989; Birouk & Gökalp 2006). The characteristic time scale of
evaporation τv,L , is computed as:
                                                 δM
                                        τv,L =      ,                                   (4.5)
                                                 Vr
where δM = d0 /(ShRM − 2) (Abramzon & Sirignano 1989) is the vapour film boundary
layer thickness and Vr is the Stefan flow velocity computed as Vr = 8πDlg,r log(1 +
BM )/d0 . Note that while equations (4.1), (4.2) and the expressions for τt and δM are
evaluated using also the instantaneous data from the interface-resolved simulations, the
Stefan velocity Vr is evaluated a-priori as it depends only on the initial thermodynamic
conditions.
The estimated values of K, dashed lines in figure 2, display a good agreement with
the interface-resolved simulations at Tg,0 /Tc = 1.50, especially for the CP and VPa
models, while a significant deviation is observed at Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75, regardless of the
thermodynamic model employed. Finally, it is worth noting that the evaporation rate
estimated with equation (4.1) depends linearly on Sh, whose calculation is generally
affected by a higher degree of uncertainty (Lupo & Duwig 2020).
   Next, we examine the temporal evolution of the Sherwood number, Sh, for the three
different models, see figure 6, using directly the definition
                                              ṁt,Γ deq
                            Sh =                    v i − Y v ).                        (4.6)
                                   ρg,r Dlg,r A(hYl,Γ  Γ   l,∞

Here ṁt,Γ is the total interfacial mass flux, A the interfacial area, deq the instantaneous
equivalent diameter (i.e., deq = (6V /π)3 ), ρg,r and Dlg,r the reference gas density and
                                     v
gas-vapor diffusion coefficients, hYl,Γ iΓ the surface-averaged vapour mass fraction at the
                 v
interface and Yl,∞   the reference vapour mass fraction, i.e. its initial value. The Sherwood
number defines the ratio between the mass transfer in the actual flow and the mass
transfer by diffusion, i.e. evaporation in stagnant conditions, so that it can be used
to quantify the effect of the flow on the evaporation. Note that since we perform a
comparison among different thermodynamic models, the gas thermophysical properties
in equation (4.6) are taken equal to the reference ones (i.e., those obtained with the ”1/3”
rule for the CP model, those at the initial condition for VPa and VPρ models).
   Both at high and low temperatures, Sh approaches an asymptotic value after the initial
transient. Note that for the cases at Tg,0 /Tc = 1.5, the transient is faster (∆tDlg,r /d20 ≈
0.02) than for the cases at Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75 (∆tDlg,r /d20 ≈ 0.1) since large temperature
differences increase the evaporation rates. For the high-temperature cases, the Sh number
differs significantly with the model employed, with the model VPρ giving the largest
value of Sh for the reasons explained above. Conversely, at lower temperature, the three
models provide a similar Sh, confirming the limited impact on the evaporation rate
18                                     Scapin et. al.
 (a)                                           (b)




Figure 6: Temporal evolution of the Sherwood number as a function of the dimensionless
time (based on the diffusion time scale) for temperature ratio (a) Tg,0 /Tc = 1.50 and (b)
Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75 and ReS = 6700 and W eS = 0.02. The dashed curves are the theoretical
prediction provided from the a-priori analysis based on the Frössling/Ranz-Marshall
correlation. For the cases at Tg,0 /Tc = 1.50, only one value of Sh is reported as the
three models provide almost identical predictions.


of the choice of the thermodynamic models in this regime. All other parameters being
fixed, the Sherwood number is higher at the lower temperature ratio, Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75
than for Tg,0 /Tc = 1.50, regardless of the thermodynamic model used. Recalling that the
Sherwood number is the ratio between the actual mass transfer and the mass transfer
by diffusion, the increase of evaporation rate due to the background turbulence is thus
larger at low temperatures. For the highest temperature ratio, the enhancement induced
by the turbulence is lower since evaporation is mainly driven by the large temperature
                                            v        v
difference and by the larger values of (hYl,Γ iΓ − Yl,∞ ).
   As a final remark, note that the Sherwood number from the direct numerical simulation
(DNS) agrees well with the estimation from the Frössling/Ranz-Marshall correlation
at high temperature (cf. models CP and VPa against the dashed line the figure 6).
Conversely, at lower temperature, the estimated value is much lower than the one
extracted from the direct numerical simulations, indicating that the Frössling/Ranz-
Marshall correlation underpredicts convective effects due to turbulence at low evaporation
rates, i.e. when the evaporation time becomes longer than the turbulence time scale
(Dav . 0.2 instead of Dav ≈ 1 as shown in table 1). This finding is consistent with
the recent investigations in HIT performed by Méès et al. (2020) and suggests the
need of including the turbulent effects (via the vaporization Damköhler number) in the
available correlations for the Sherwood number and more in general in the evaporation
models (Lupo et al. 2020).

                     4.2. Effects of the shear-based Reynolds number
  We now consider the effect of the shear-based Reynolds number on the evaporation
rate. Reducing from ReS = 6700 to ReS = 2800 results in a reduction of the ratio between
the initial droplet diameter and the Kolmogorov length scale from d0 /η = 21.5 to d0 /η =
10.5. For this analysis, we assume W eS = 0.02, three temperature ratios, Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75−
1.00 − 1.50 and employ the complete model (i.e., VPa ). We first examine the reduction
of the droplet diameter, (d/d0 )2 , as a function of the diffusion time scale tDlg,r /d20 ,
see figure 7a. In all cases, droplets with larger d0 /η (i.e. higher ReS ) evaporate faster,
                          Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                           19
  (a)                                           (b)




Figure 7: a) Normalized square droplet diameter (d/d0 )2 as a function of the diffusion
time scale tDlg /d20 . b) Ratio between the turbulent evaporation rate K and the one at
                                                               v     v           v
stagnant conditions, K0 = (8/λρ ) log(1 + BM ) with BM = (Yl,Γ   − Yl,∞ )/(1 − Yl,Γ ). The
data refer to the cases at ReS = 2800−6700 and Tg,0 /Tc = 1.5, 1.00 and 0.75. The length
of the error bars indicates the droplet with the fastest/slowest evaporation rate among
the five droplets in the simulations.


in agreement with previous experimental studies in homogeneous isotropic turbulence
(Verwey & Birouk 2018, 2020) and in the presence of a mean flow (Marti et al. 2017).
This is explained by the enhanced surface vapour gradient and faster dispersion of the
vapour around the droplet for larger d0 /η, related to the fact that larger flow structures
are more energetic. Note that a relative increase of the evaporation rate, quantified as the
ratio between the evaporation rate K extracted from the DNS and the one computed in
stagnant conditions, K0 , occurs at all temperatures as reported in figure 7b and it scales
with the dimensionless gas temperature with similar exponents for the two different d0 /η
investigated, i.e. (Tg,0 /Tc )−0.76 for d0 /η = 21.5 and (Tg,0 /Tc )−0.72 for d0 /η = 10.5. The
experimental correlations in Birouk & Gökalp (2006) suggests that, at high temperature
and pressure i.e., when the evaporation is much faster than the turbulent time scale,
the evaporation is only weakly dependent on the droplet size d0 /η. This is consistent
with our results, where the difference in K for the two droplet sizes examined decreases
when increasing the temperature; however, we do not observe the rate of evaporation to
become independent of the size in the parameter range considered.
   The variation of the evaporation rate with d0 /η significantly affects the liquid temper-
ature at the interface
               R        TΓ,l (computed as the surface average over the gas-liquid interface,
TΓ,l = (1/Γ ) Γ T dΓ ) and the mean liquid R     temperature TV,l (computed as the volume
average over the liquid, TV,l = (1/Vl ) Vl T dVl ). This is shown in figure 8 for the three
temperatures under investigation. At the highest temperature, panel 8a, both TΓ,l and
TV,l decrease with respect to the initial values due to the strong cooling caused by the
evaporation. However, due to the heat transfer enhancement at higher ReS , TΓ,l remains
greater than TV,l for droplets at larger d0 /η, whereas TΓ,l is lower than TV,l for the
smaller d0 /η considered. Clearly, the two temperatures eventually converge to a similar
value once the thermal gradients inside the liquid reduce. For the case with intermediate
temperature, see panel 8b, the cooling due to evaporation is not sufficiently high to
counteract the heat released from the gas and the two temperatures reach a regime value
larger than the initial one. The final values of TΓ,l and TV,l are higher for the droplets with
larger d0 /η (larger Reynolds number). We also note that the interface region is warmer
20                                     Scapin et. al.
     (a)                                      (b)




                        (c)




Figure 8: Dimensionless liquid temperature at the interface (Tl,Γ − Tl,0 )/(Tg,0 − Tl,0 )
(dotted line) and average liquid temperature (Tl,V − Tl,0 )/(Tg,0 − Tl,0 ) (continuous line)
at a) Tg,0 /Tc = 1.5 , b) Tg,0 /Tc = 1.0 and c) Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75.




than the droplet bulk (i.e., TΓ,l > TV,l ) for both droplet sizes. At the lowest temperature,
panel c of the figure 8, both TΓ,l and TV,l increase with time, when the evaporation is
too slow to cool the droplets. Unlike the previous two cases, the values of TΓ,l and TV,l
at d0 /η = 21.5 are always lower than the corresponding ones at d0 /η = 10.5, due to
the higher evaporation rate at the highest ReS . For this case, the faster evaporation
also changes the transient of TΓ,l , which at the beginning is higher than TV,l while for
tDlg,r /d0 > 0.2 becomes lower.
  We conclude this section by analysing the relative importance of the convective and
conductive heat and mass vapour fluxes, FT,i=c,d and FY,i=c,d , in the gas region around
the droplets and inside the liquid region. These are computed as an integral over the
                         Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                           21
     (a)                                       (b)




Figure 9: Conductive and convective heat fluxes FT (over the sum of the two, ΣF ),
FT,i=c,d , in the gas region for Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75 − 1.00 − 1.50 and: a) ReS = 6700, b) ReS =
2800. At ReS = 6700, ΣF ,0.75 = 0.08ΣF ,1.50 and ΣF ,1.00 = 0.14ΣF ,1.50 . At ReS = 2800,
ΣF ,0.75 = 0.04ΣF ,1.50 and ΣF ,1.00 = 0.13ΣF ,1.50 (In ΣF ,x , x is the temperature ratio).


control surfaces ST and SY ,
                                   Z
                                1
                      FT,d = −         k∇T · nΓ dST ,
                               ST ST
                                 Z
                              1
                      FT,c =         ρcp (u0 T + Szex T ) · nΓ dST ,
                             ST ST
                                   Z                                                    (4.7)
                                1
                      FY,d = −         ρg Dlg ∇Ylv · nΓ dSY ,
                               SY SY
                                 Z
                              1
                      FY,c =         ρg (u0 Ylv + Szex Ylv ) · nΓ dSY .
                             SY SY

In the gas phase, ST and SY are surfaces conforming to the droplet shape (quasi-spherical
at this low value of W eS ) at a distance approximately equal to the thermal and vapour
mass fraction boundary layer thicknesses δT and δY . These are determined as the distance
from the interface where (T (δT ) − TΓ )/(Tg,0 − TΓ ) = 0.99 and (Ylv (δY ) − Yl,Γ v      v
                                                                                     )/(Yl,0 −
  v
Yl,Γ ) = 0.99 as in Ni et al. (2021), moving normal to the interface thanks to a level-set
function, reconstructed from the VoF field. We evaluate F as in equations (4.7) after the
evaporation reaches a steady condition (i.e., d2 regime) and average in time over a time
interval ∆t = [0.20, 0.50, 0.60](tDlg,r )/d20 for the high, intermediate and low temperature
ratios. To capture the dominant transport mechanism in the liquid phase, ST is defined
at a distance from the interface equal to half the instantaneous droplet radius.
   The relative importance of the conductive and convective heat fluxes in the gas region
are shown in figure 9: increasing the ratio Tg,0 /Tc , the main transport mechanism changes
from convection to conduction, as already anticipated in section 4.1 when discussing the
Sherwood number Sh. The same applies to lower ReS , where we observe a slightly higher
conductive contribution for Tg,0 /Tc = 1.5. In the liquid region, fig 10, the heat transport
is mainly driven by convection in all cases. In agreement with previous experimental
results (Wong & Lin 1992; Pinheiro et al. 2019), the dominant transport mechanism is
weakly affected by a change of the droplet Reynolds number, here varied by changing
ReS , since the motion of the liquid inside the droplet is not significantly affected by
the intensity of the gas turbulence. Finally, the vapour fluxes reported in figure 11
22                                     Scapin et. al.
     (a)                                      (b)




Figure 10: Conductive and convective heat fluxes FT (over the sum of the two, ΣF ),
FT,i=c,d , in the liquid region for Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75 − 1.00 − 1.50 and: a) ReS = 6700,
b) ReS = 2800. At ReS = 6700, ΣF ,0.75 = 0.12ΣF ,1.50 and ΣF ,1.00 = 0.24ΣF ,1.50 .
At ReS = 2800, ΣF ,0.75 = 0.11ΣF ,1.50 and ΣF ,1.00 = 0.48ΣF ,1.50 (In ΣF ,x , x is the
temperature ratio).

     (a)                                      (b)




Figure 11: Conductive and convective vapour mass fluxes FY (over the sum of the two,
ΣF ), FY,i=c,d , in the gas region for Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75 − 1.00 − 1.50 and: a) ReS = 6700, b)
ReS = 2800. At ReS = 6700, ΣF ,0.75 = 0.58ΣF ,1.50 and ΣF ,1.00 = 0.89ΣF ,Tg,0 /Tc =1.50 .
At ReS = 2800, ΣF ,0.75 = 0.56ΣF ,Tg,0 /Tc =1.50 and ΣF ,1.00 = 0.87ΣF ,1.50 (In ΣF ,x , x is
the temperature ratio).


show that Ylv is predominantly transported by convection for the two Reynolds numbers
investigated, mass diffusion being relevant only at the highest temperatures.

                      4.3. Effects of the shear-based Weber number
   At last, we consider the effect of the shear-based Weber number on the evapora-
tion rate. For this analysis, three Weber numbers W eS = 0.02 − 0.06 − 0.10 and
two temperature ratios Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75 − 1.5 are considered and, as for the previous
section, the complete thermodynamic model (i.e., VPa ) is employed to evaluate the gas
thermophysical properties. Figure 12a-b) reports the time evolution of d2 for the three
values of W eS under investigation at high and low temperatures, respectively. Increasing
W eS leads to a higher evaporation rate, due to the increase of the surface area available
for mass transfer as a consequence of deformation. Note, also, that the increase in the
                         Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                          23
   (a)                                        (b)




                        (c)




Figure 12: Time history of (d/d0 )2 when varying the Weber number, W eS = 0.02 −
0.06 − 0.10 and for temperature ratios a): Tg,0 /Tc = 1.50 and b): Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75.
The black dashed curves represent the theoretical prediction of the actual evaporation
rate obtained with the procedure explained in section 4.1. The length of the error bars
(included for tDlg,r /d20 > 0.025 and tDlg,r /d20 > 0.04, respectively) indicates the droplet
with the fastest/slowest evaporation rate among the five droplets in the simulations.
c) Evaporation enhancement (i.e., K/K0 ) as function of W eS for ReS = 6700 and
Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75 − 1.50.




evaporation rate with W eS is more pronounced at lower temperature (see 12c), which
can be explained by the fact that the evaporation is faster at higher temperatures, the
droplets are therefore smaller, which leads to a limited deformation with respect to
the cases at the same W eS and Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75. In other words, the effective Weber
number based on the droplet diameter becomes quickly smaller at higher temperatures,
so differences in nominal surface tension are compensated by the reduced droplet size. To
quantify deformation while accounting for the decrease of the liquid volume, we measure
the deviation from the initial spherical shape as the ratio between the instantaneous
interfacial area A (computed numerically as A = |∇Φ|∆x3 ) and the area of a spherical
droplet with the same volume V , i.e., Aeq = π 1/3 (6V )2/3 . This calculation is performed
for each droplet q separately and each contribution Aq /Aeq,q averaged according to the
24                                     Scapin et. al.
     (a)                                      (b)




Figure 13: Ratio between the instantaneous interfacial area A and the area of a spherical
droplet with same volume V , i.e., Aeq = π 1/3 (6V )2/3 , for W eS = 0.02 − 0.06 − 0.10 and
a): Tg,0 /Tc = 1.50 and b): Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75.


instantaneous number of droplets, Ndp :
                                             Ndp
                                    A     1 X Aq
                                       =               .                                (4.8)
                                   Aeq   Ndp q=1 Aeq,q

  The time evolution of A/Aeq is reported in figure 13: as expected, the ratio A/Aeq
increases with W eS . For Tg,0 /Tc = 1.5, the data in the figure also display two peaks: at
tDlg,r /d20 ≈ 0.075 − 0.10 for W eS = 0.10 and tDlg,r /d20 ≈ 0.085 − 0.10 for W eS = 0.06.
These are associated to the droplet breakup as we have Ndp = 7 droplets for W eS = 0.06
and Ndp = 9 for W eS = 0.10 at the end of the simulations. For W eS = 0.02, no breakup
events have been observed within the simulation time. For Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75, given the lower
evaporation rate and consequently the higher effective Weber number, breakup events
have been observed for all the cases in the interval 0.05 < tDlg,r /d20 < 0.125, finally
yielding Ndp = 7 − 9 − 12 for W eS = 0.02 − 0.06 − 0.10.
Interestingly, for the case Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75, A/Aeq approaches a statistically stationary
value for tDlg /d20 > 0.125, whereas a regime value is not reached in the investigated time
window for Tg,0 /Tc = 1.50. This behaviour is interpreted by comparing the time scale of
deformation as dictated by surface tension and applied shear, τσ , with the time scale of
evaporation extracted from the simulations, τv ,
                                                τσ
                                         Πσv = ,                                       (4.9)
                                                τv
where τσ = ρg,r (Sd0 )d20 /σ and τv = d20 /K, with K the evaporation at statically steady
state, see figure 14. At the high temperature ratio, evaporation is faster than deformation
(i.e., τσ > τv ) and the surface tension does not have time to adjust the droplet shape after
the mass losses due to the differential evaporation across the interface. An increasing
deviation from the spherical shape is therefore observed in time. Conversely, at low
temperature, the deformation time is comparable or lower than the evaporation time
(i.e., τσ < τv ) and the droplet shape can compensate for the local deformations induced
by the evaporation mass flux (note that the droplet tends to a constant deformation,
increasing with W eS and not to the spherical shape, i.e. A/Aeq > 1, as we have an
imposed shear). From the data in figure 14, we also notice that for a fixed Tg,0 /Tc ,
                         Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                         25




Figure 14: Ratio between the deformation time scale and the evaporation time scale (in
turbulent condition) as a function of W eS for Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75 and 1.50.


increasing W eS accelerates the evaporation time scale (i.e., higher Πσv ), consistently
with what observed in figure 12.
   Given the variation of the evaporation rate with the W eS , it is worth investigating
whether the evaporation flux at the droplet surface is correlated to the local curvature.
This has been already assessed in laminar flows analytically for evaporating droplets of
spheroidal shapes (Tonini & Cossali 2013), and experimentally for sessile droplets (Sáenz
et al. 2017). In turbulent flows this analysis is missing and is performed here by com-
puting the joint probability density function (p.d.f.) of the normalized interfacial mean
curvature κΓ /κΓ,eq and the dimensionless interfacial mass flux ṁΓ /ṁΓ,0 , where κΓ,eq
is the curvature of a spherical droplet with same volume V (i.e., κΓ,eq = 4/deq with
deq = (6V /π)1/3 ) and ṁΓ,0 is the interfacial mass flux for a purely diffusion-dominated
evaporation process, i.e.,
                           ṁΓ,0 = 8πρg,r Dlg,r log(1 + BM )/d0 .                    (4.10)
Note that ṁΓ is evaluated using the expression (2.5) in all the nodal points cut by the
interface, whereas κΓ is computed directly from its definition, i.e., κΓ = ∇ · nΓ . The
reconstructed level-set function is employed for a more accurate estimation of κΓ .
From the results at high temperature (i.e., Tg,0 /Tc = 1.5) reported in figure 15, we do
not note a clear relation between ṁΓ and κΓ , yet there is a relatively broad distribution
of mass fluxes over the droplet surface, which can be attributed to the local variations
of vapour concentrations in the gas phase induced by the turbulence and by the flow
anisotropy. Indeed, the regions whose local outward normal vector is parallel to the mean
flow direction (i.e., droplet front) experience higher surface vapour gradients, whereas
larger concentrations are found in those where the normal vector is opposite to the flow
(i.e. droplet rear). Note also that the increase of W eS corresponds to a shift of the most
probable values of ṁΓ and κΓ towards higher values.
   When the gas temperature is reduced (i.e., Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75), the correlation between ṁΓ
and κΓ is still weak for W eS = 0.02, while for the case at W eS = 0.10 a higher interfacial
curvature is associated with a higher interfacial mass flux. Also at lower temperatures,
the most probable values are located at higher κΓ when increasing the Weber number.
Comparing with the results at higher temperatures, figure 15, we note that ṁΓ /ṁΓ,0 is
larger: turbulence enhances evaporation more efficiently at low temperature, when the
evaporative time scale is longer and the ratio with the turbulent time scales decreases,
26                                   Scapin et. al.
     (a)                                        (b)




Figure 15: Joint p.d.f. of the dimensionless mass flux ṁΓ /ṁΓ,0 and the normalized
interfacial curvature κΓ /κΓ,eq for ReS = 6700, Tg,0 /Tc = 1.5 and a) W eS = 0.02, b)
W eS = 0.10.

     (a)                                        (b)




Figure 16: Joint p.d.f. of the dimensionless mass flux ṁΓ /ṁΓ,0 and the normalized
interfacial curvature κΓ /κΓ,eq for ReS = 6700, Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75 and a) W eS = 0.02,
b) W eS = 0.10.

     (a)                                        (b)




Figure 17: Joint p.d.f. of the dimensionless mass flux ṁΓ /ṁΓ,0 and the normalized
interfacial curvature κΓ /κΓ,eq for ReS = 2800 for W eS = 0.02 and a) Tg,0 /Tc = 1.50 and
b) Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75.


i.e. Dav decreases.
Finally, we display in figure 17 the joint p.d.f. from the simulations at lower Reynolds
number, ReS = 2800, for Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75−1.5 and W eS = 0.02. In this case, the reduction
of Tg,0 /Tc leads to more pronounced deformation, i.e. larger values of κΓ /κΓ,eq (due
                         Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                           27
to the slower evaporation and higher effective W eS ) and to higher values of ṁΓ /ṁΓ,0
(more pronounced effects of turbulence at lower absolute evaporation rates) and a broader
distribution, again attributed to fluctuations induced by the turbulence. Comparing with
the results at the same W eS and Tg,0 /Tc but ReS = 6700 in panels (a) of figures 15
and 16, we see that, for both temperature ratios, the reduction in ReS restricts the range
of attained values for the curvature and the ratio ṁΓ /ṁΓ,0 , confirming that the increase
of deformation and evaporation rate is more pronounced for bigger droplets.


5. Conclusions
   Fully resolved simulations of finite-size evaporating droplets are performed in homoge-
neous shear turbulence (HST) using a weakly compressible solver for evaporating flows.
The new methodology, here described, combines two features. First, an improved version
of the Adams-Bashforth method in order to address the limitations of the classical
formulation, already highlighted in Kasbaoui et al. (2017). The improvement allows us
to match the single-phase analytical solution in the Rapid Distortion Limit and ensures
a stable integration over long times. Second, a mathematical model with the details
of the numerical implementation for a two-phase evaporating system composed of an
incompressible liquid and a compressible gas phase. In order to remove the acoustic
time-step restriction, compressible effects are here handled in the low-Mach number limit.
This new methodology is applied to investigate the behaviour of finite-size evaporating
droplets in HST when changing the gas temperature over the critical temperature
Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75, 1.00 and 1.50, the initial droplet diameter in terms of Kolmogorov scale,
d0 /η = 10.5 and 21.5 and the surface tension, quantified by the shear-based Weber
number W eS = 0.02, 0.06 and 0.10.
First, using the data at d0 /η = 21.5 and W eS = 0.02, we study the differences when
employing different thermodynamic models for the gas thermophysical properties. Three
approaches are investigated: a constant property model where the gas properties are kept
constant and initialized with the ”1/3 rule” (CP) and two variable-properties approaches
where either the gas density, VPρ or all the gas properties are allowed to vary, VPa . We
find that the predictions by the CP and VPa models agree well, whereas the VPρ model
overpredicts the evaporation rate, especially at high temperature. This overestimation
occurs since the local increase of the gas density (due to evaporative cooling) is captured
by the V Pρ model, but the decrease of the diffusion coefficient with temperature,
which slows down the evaporation, is not accounted. Moreover, by extracting the Sher-
wood number for the three models at Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75, 1.50 and comparing it with the
Frössling/Ranz-Marshall correlation (Ranz et al. 1952), we show that the correlation
provides an excellent estimation of Sh at high temperature (conduction-dominated
regime), whereas it substantially underestimates Sh at lower temperature (convective-
dominated regime), in agreement with recent experimental observations (Méès et al.
2020).
Next, reducing the ratio d0 /η from 21.5 to 10.5 (obtained by reducing ReS from 6700
to 2800), we show that the ratio between the actual evaporation rate, and the one
computed in stagnant conditions, is always much higher than 1, while decreasing with
Tg,0 /Tc . Interestingly, this ratio does not approach unity at the highest temperature level,
suggesting an evaporation enhancement due to turbulence also in these conditions. The
variation of the droplet size, d0 /η, also affects the liquid temperature at the interface and
the mean liquid temperature. For Tg,0 /Tc = 1.0, 1.5, the regime values of both quantities
are larger for droplets of d0 /η = 21.5, whereas the opposite is true at Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75
when the regime values of the liquid temperature are lower for the largest droplets. This
28                                      Scapin et. al.
is explained as the result of two competing effects: cooling by evaporation and heating
from the hot gas.
Finally, by varying W eS in the range 0.02 and 0.10, we observe an increase in the
evaporation rate for higher W eS given the larger surface area available for mass transfer.
At fixed W eS , this increase is more pronounced at Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75 due to a slower
evaporation rate and to higher deformation (larger effective Weber number based on
the instantaneous droplet diameter). By computing the joint p.d.f. of the interfacial
mass flux and curvature, a weak correlation between the two is observed at high tem-
perature regardless of the Weber number, whereas a positive correlation is recovered
at Tg,0 /Tc = 0.75 and W eS = 0.10, consistently with the theoretical prediction in
laminar environments (Tonini & Cossali 2013) and the experimental observations for
sessile droplets (Sáenz et al. 2017).
Note that in all the cases, the initial liquid volume fraction has been kept small (i.e.,
α0 ≈ 0.14 %), the droplets do not interact with each other and, as expected, no significant
deviations from the d2 -law have been observed. To investigate such deviations and more
in general the collective dynamics of a dense suspension of evaporating droplets we are
currently exploring the same configurations presented in this work at higher volume
fractions.



Acknowledgements
  N.S. and L.B. acknowledge the support from the Swedish Research Council via the
multidisciplinary research environment INTERFACE, Hybrid multiscale modelling of
transport phenomena for energy efficient processes and the Grant No. 2016-06119. M.E.R.
was supported by the JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP20K22402. The computer time
was provided by SNIC (Swedish National Infrastructure for Computing) and by the
National Infrastructure for High Performance Computing and Data Storage in Norway
(project no. NN9561K). Francesco Picano and Marco Crialesi Esposito are thanked for
the useful discussions and, the latter, also for providing the droplet tagging algorithm.
Karim Khamis is acknowledged for pointing out to some typos in the dimensionless
formulation of the mathematical model.



Appendix A. Equations of state
  In this Appendix, we report the equations of state employed for the gas density, the
gas thermal diffusivity, the gas viscosity, thermal conductivity, heat capacity at constant
pressure and the Span-Wagner equation of state.

                                      A.1. Gas density
     The gas density variations as a function of pth , Tg and Ylv follow the ideal gas model

                                                 pth M m,av
                                     ρg = Πp,2              ,                          (A 1)
                                                     Tg

where M m,av is the mixture molar mass computed using an harmonic average between the
gas and the liquid molar mass and Πp,2 = (pth,r Mg )/(Ru Tg,r ) where pth,r and Tg,r are the
reference thermodynamic pressure and gas temperature, taken equal to the corresponding
initial value and Ru is the universal gas constant.
                         Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                          29
                           A.2. Liquid-gas diffusion coefficient
  The liquid gas diffusion coefficient is computed using the relation (Reid et al. 1987):
                                                 3/2
                                               Tg
                                       Dlg =        ,                                  (A 2)
                                                pth
where Tg is the gas temperature.

                                    A.3. Gas viscosity
  The gas viscosity varies with the temperature according to the simplified Sutherland’s
law (Reid et al. 1987):
                                        µg = Tg2/3 .                                   (A 3)

                     A.4. Specific heat capacity at constant pressure
  The specific heat capacity at constant pressure is evaluated as a function of the
temperature using the virial polynomials (Reid et al. 1987):
                        cp = A1 + A2 Tg + A3 Tg2 + A4 Tg3 + A5 Tg4 ,                   (A 4)
where the coefficients A1 = 1.012, A2 = 0.0553, A3 = 0.006, A4 = 2 · 10−3 and A5 =
5 · 10−4 are adequate to estimate the heat capacity at constant pressure for dry air over
a wide range of temperatures.

                              A.5. Gas thermal conductivity
  As for the gas viscosity, the gas thermal conductivity is function of the temperature
only and computed as (Reid et al. 1987):
                                           µg cpg
                                      kg =        ,                               (A 5)
                                             Pr
where P r is the Prandtl number.

                           A.6. Span–Wagner equation of state
   In order to compute the value of Ylv at the interface, see section 3.1.2, we assume that
                                                                         v
the gas mixture is ideal and composed of ideal components. Hence, Yl,Γ       can be computed
using the Rault’s law,
                                               ps,Γ
                                               p
                               v
                             Yl,Γ =           th             ,                        (A 6)
                                     ps,Γ          ps,Γ    1
                                           + 1−
                                      pth           pth λM
where λM = Ml /Mg is the molar mass ratio, while pth and ps,Γ are the thermodynamic
pressure and the partial pressure of the vaporized species at the interface. Since the
interface is assumed at saturation, ps,Γ is computed as a function of the liquid tem-
perature at the interface. For most of the substances, Span-Wagner equation of state
represents a valid approximation over a wide range of thermodynamic pressures and
temperatures (Span & Wagner 1996):
                                                  1.5       2.5        5
                                                                         
                  ps,Γ    Πp,3       B1 ηsw + B2 ηsw  + B3 ηsw   + B4 ηsw
                       =       exp                                          .           (A 7)
                  pth     pth                     1 − ηsw
where ηsw = 1 − TΓ (Tg,0 /Tc ) and Πp,3 = pc /pth,r , with Tg,0 , Tc and pc the initial gas
temperature, the critical temperature and critical pressure, respectively. The coefficients
30                                     Scapin et. al.
Bi=1,4 = {−7.32714, 1.82365, −2.272744, −2.711929} are experimentally determined and
correspond in the current study to those of pentane; see Span & Wagner (1996). Note that
the use of Span-Wagner model is also convenient since it does not involve the saturation
temperature (like the Clausius–Clapeyron relation), which in a weakly compressible
phase-changing system is not a constant anymore, but should be computed as a function
of the time-varying thermodynamic pressure.
As a final remark, to justify the assumption of incompressible liquid with constant
properties, we evaluate a posteriori the variations of ρl , cpl , kl and µl given the maximum
variation of liquid temperature discussed in section 4.2. Using the data reported in Reid
et al. (1987) and taking as reference the cases at Tg,0 /Tc = 1.5 (when the liquid
temperature variation is more pronounced), these amount to: ∆ρl /ρl,0 = 6 %, ∆µl /µl,0 =
8 %, ∆cpl /cpl,0 = 4 %, ∆kl /kl,0 = 5 %.


Appendix B. Derivation of the velocity divergence
   The system composed of equations (2.2), (2.3),(2.5) and (2.4) reported in section 2
is not closed and an additional equation should be included. To derive it, we adapt
the approach proposed in Majda & Sethian (1985) in the context of reacting flows and
recently employed for phase change in Dodd et al. (2021). Nevertheless, since a detailed
derivation is missing in literature, it is provided here for completeness. The idea is to
compute the missing relation from the divergence of the velocity field, u, which can be
computed as Hul + (1 − H)ug . Taking the divergence yields
                   ∇ · u = (ug − ul ) · ∇H + (1 − H)∇ · ug + H∇ · ul .                 (B 1)
The first term on the right-hand side represents the volume variation at the interface due
to phase change, while the second and the third come from the density variations in the
gas and in the liquid phases. We start with the phase-change contribution and consider a
reference frame moving with the interface. Accordingly, we decompose the vector ug − ul
along the normal nΓ , tangential tΓ and bi-normal directions nΓ :
              ug − ul = (ug,n − ul,n )nΓ + (ug,t − ul,t )tΓ + (ug,b − ul,b )bΓ .       (B 2)
If the interface has zero thickness, the mass balance imposes that the velocity is con-
tinuous along the tangential and bi-normal direction (i.e., ug,t = ul,t and ug,b = ul,b ).
Along the normal direction, conversely, the velocity has a discontinuity proportional to
the mass flux ṁΓ between the two phases, i.e.,
                                 ṁΓ = ρg,Γ (ug,n − uΓ,n ),
                                                                                       (B 3)
                                 ṁΓ = ρl,Γ (ul,n − uΓ,n ),
where uΓ,n represents the normal component of the interface velocity and ρi=l,g,Γ the
phase density at the interface location. Combining the previous two equations yields
                                                           
                                                 1      1
                            ug,n − ul,n = ṁΓ        −        .                   (B 4)
                                                ρg,Γ   ρl,Γ
Inserting equations (B 2) and (B 4) into equation (B 1), we obtain
                                                            
                                                 1       1
                        (ug − ul ) · ∇H = ṁΓ        −         δΓ ,                    (B 5)
                                                ρg,Γ    ρl,Γ
where δΓ = ∇H · nΓ .
The second term of equation (B 1) is computed from the continuity in the gas region. If
                          Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                        31
chemical reactions are absent, this reads as
                                                     1 Dρg
                                        ∇ · ug = −         .                           (B 6)
                                                     ρg Dt
Using the equation of state for the gas density (A 1), the total derivative of ρg can be
expanded as follows:
                                                                   
                 1 Dρg      1 Dpth      1 DT            D       1
                         =           −        − M m,av                 .            (B 7)
                 ρg Dt     pth Dt      T Dt             Dt M m,av
Combining eq. (B 5) and (B 7) finally provides the velocity divergence in the gas re-
gion Dodd et al. (2021),
                                                                 
                             1 dpth   1 DT           D       1
                 ∇ · ug = −         +       + M m,av                .           (B 8)
                            pth dt    T Dt           Dt M m,av
Note that, given the low-Mach assumption, the total derivative of pth in (B 8) has been
replaced by the time derivative of pth . A similar strategy can be employed to compute
∇ · ul ; however, we consider here constant and uniform liquid density and therefore,
∇ · ul = 0 in eq. (B 1) and ρl,Γ = ρl .
   Differently from what it is commonly done in literature (Motheau & Abraham 2016), we
found preferable to replace the total derivative of the molar mass and of the temperature
with the corresponding spatial derivatives. By doing so, this solution completely removes
the time discretization errors when computing the terms in (B 8). For the contribution
due to composition, we employ equation (2.3) and we treat the mixture of inert gas
and vapour as ideal, so that the mixture molar mass is given by the harmonic average
of the molar mass of each component (Reid et al. 1987). Accordingly, using the relation
                 PN −1 v
Yg = YN = 1− j=1 Yl,j      the third term on the right-hand side of equation (B 8) becomes

                                                          N −1                v
                                                                            DYl,j
                                                                        
                         D          1                     X         1
                  M m,av                       = M m,av                 −1        .    (B 9)
                         Dt       M m,av                  j=1
                                                                   λM,j      Dt
where λM,j = Ml,j /Mg . For the temperature T , we start from the generic enthalpy
equation for the gas phase:
                                                     N
           Dh    1                      dpth    1 X v
       ρ      =       ∇ · (k∇T ) + Πp,1      +         h ∇ · (ρg Dlg ∇Yj ) .          (B 10)
           Dt   ReP r                    dt    ReSc j=1 j

In a weakly compressible system, being the enthalpy of the gas phase function of tem-
perature, thermodynamic pressure and vapour composition, the left-hand side of (B 10)
can be expanded as
                                                               −1
                                                             N
                                                                        !
                                                                                     v
                                                                                  DYl,j
                                        
      Dh       ∂h          DT          ∂h           dpth     X     ∂h
    ρ    =ρ                    +ρ                         +ρ         v                  ,
      Dt       ∂T Y v ,pth Dt         ∂pth Y v ,T dt         j=1
                                                                  ∂Yl,j            Dt
                    l,j                       l,j                         T,Yi6=j
                                            −1
                                          N
                                                        !
                                                                      v
               DT               dpth      X        ∂h             DYl,j
         = ρcp     + ρ(1 − βT )       +ρ             v                  .
               Dt                dt       j=1
                                                  ∂Yl,j         v
                                                                   Dt
                                                                   T,pth ,Yl,i6=j
                                                                                      (B 11)
Note that for an ideal gas, the isothermal compressibility coefficient β = 1/T and, thus,
(1 − βT ) = 0, which can be omitted. Considering the term varying with the composition
32                                             Scapin et. al.
  v
Yl,j , this can be recast as (see Lupo et al. 2019, for details):
                     −1                                −1
                   N
                                !                    N
                                                v                         v
                   X       ∂h              DYl,j     X                 DYl,j
                             v                    =       (hv,j − hg )       .        (B 12)
                    j=1
                          ∂Yl,j        v
                                             Dt      j=1
                                                                        Dt
                                     T,pth ,Yl,i6=j

Inserting equations (B 12) and (B 11) into equation (B 10) and using (2.3), we get
                                                                      
                                                    N
     DT       1                      dp th    ρ g
                                                   X
 ρcp     =        ∇ · (k∇T ) + Πp,1       +           Dlg,j ∇hj · ∇Yj  (1 − H). (B 13)
     Dt     ReP r                      dt    ReSc j=1

Note that equation (B 13) is the same as (2.4) except for the source term due to phase
change which acts at the interface location. Finally, by combining (B 13), (B 9) (B 8) in
expression (B 1), the velocity divergence u can be expressed as
                                
                       1      1
      ∇ · u = ṁΓ          −       δΓ ,
                      ρg,Γ    λρ
               |          {z        }
                        fΓ (xΓ ,t)
                              N −1           
                1    1 M m,av X        1                        v
             +                             − 1 ∇ · (ρg Dlg,j ∇Yl,j )(1 − H),
               pth ReSc ρg    j=1
                                     λ M,j
                   |                     {z                        }
                                                      fY (x,t)
                                                                                
                                                                        N
                  1 1      Πp,1  1                                  ρg X
             +                        ∇ · (k∇T ) +        Dlg,j ∇hj · ∇Yj (1 − H),
                 pth Re cp M m,av P r              Sc j=1
                     |                       {z                           }
                                                          fT (x,t)
                                    
                         Πp,1             1 dpth
             − 1−                                (1 − H),                             (B 14)
                      cp M m,av          pth dt
where fΓ , fY and fT are functions representing the different contributions to the total
velocity divergence, i.e., phase change, (fΓ ), change of the gas density due to composition
(fY ) and due to temperature (fT ).
  The last step is to derive an expression for the thermodynamic pressure, pth . For
an open domain, pth is constant, whereas for a closed or triperiodic domain it can be
obtained by imposing the volume conservation on the global domain V . This can formally
expressed as a constrain on the velocity divergence
                                     Z
                                         ∇ · u dV = 0.                               (B 15)
                                              V

By employing (B 15), we can easily rearrange the rate of change of pth as
         Z                         Z                                               
  1 dpth             Πp,1                              (fT (x, t) + fY (x, t))
              1−              dVg =      fΓ (xΓ , t) +                         (1 − H) dV.
 pth dt Vg        cp M m,av           V                          pth
                                                                                      (B 16)


Appendix C. Verification/validation of the low-Mach solver with
            phase change
  In this appendix, we provide a verification and two validation cases of the weakly
compressible code employed to perform the numerical simulations in the present work.
                         Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                           33
  (a)                                         (b)




Figure 18: a): Temporal evolution of the instantaneous droplet diameter over the initial
value, d/d0 , b): Temporal evolution of the thermodynamic pressure over the initial value,
pth /pth,0 .

            C.1. Droplet evaporation due to a prescribed, constant mass flux
   The set-up of this verification case consists of a two-dimensional circular droplet with
initial diameter d0 , which evaporates due to a prescribed, constant mass flux ṁΓ,A . In this
case, the momentum equation is decoupled from the transport of energy and vapour mass
fraction equations and it is straightforward to show that the droplet diameter evolves as:
                                                        
                                  d(t)            2ṁΓ,A
                                        =1−                 t.                         (C 1)
                                   d0              d0 ρl
In our previous work (Scapin et al. 2020), we reproduce this test case using a zero-pressure
outflow boundary condition, whereas here we prescribe periodic boundary conditions.
Accordingly, as evaporation starts, the thermodynamic pressure builds up and eventually
reaches a stationary value when the droplet is completely evaporated. By setting fY
and fT to zero in equation (B 16) and after some manipulations a nonlinear ordinary
differential equation can be derived for pth ,
                            42ṁΓ,A πd2 (t)
                                                                   
               dpth (t)                                   pth (t)
                        −                        1−                   pth (t) = 0,     (C 2)
                 dt       30Gtot − 5ρl πd3 (t)       ρl (Ru /Mg )T0
where d(t) is computed using equation (C 1), Gtot is the mass inside the system, taken
equal to its initial value (i.e., Gtot = ρg,0 Vg,0 + ρl Vl,0 ), T0 and (Ru /Mg ) are chosen
so that the group pth,0 /(ρg,0 (Ru /Mg )T0 ) = 1. Equation (C 2) is here solved with the
fourth-order Runge-Kutta scheme. The test has been repeated for three density ratios
λρ = 10 − 50 − 100, with the remaining dimensionless physical parameters Re = 25,
W e = 0.10, λµ = 50; gravity is absent. The governing equations are solved in a square
domain [−2d0 ; 2d0 ]2 , discretized with 128 × 128 grid points. The droplet is held at the
centre of the domain. Results are reported in figure 18: an excellent agreement between
the numerical and the analytical solutions is found for all the cases.

                 C.2. Hexadecane static droplet evaporation in a hot gas
  As a validation case, we reproduce the numerical test proposed in Ni et al. (2021)
consisting of a static hexadecane droplet of initial diameter d0 = 550 µm, which
evaporates in dry air at Tg = 673 K. For this test case, we set Re = 25, W e = 0.1,
P r = Sc = 1, λρ = 770, λµ = 202, λk = 20, λcp = 2.1. Zero-pressure outflow boundary
34                                     Scapin et. al.
 (a)                                          (b)




Figure 19: Temporal evolution of the instantaneous droplet diameter (d/d0 )2 over the
initial value for the a): validation case described in C.2 and the b): C.3.

conditions are prescribed (therefore, pth = pth,0 ) and the assumption of constant liquid
bulk density is relaxed (see Ni et al. 2021, for more details). The whole set of governing
equations are solved in a square domain [−10d0 ; 10d0 ]2 using 256 × 256 grid points.
Once evaporation starts, the liquid droplet undergoes a local initial expansion (i.e.,
(d/d0 )2 > 1) until t/d20 ≈ 2, after which the d2 regime is approached (see figure 19a).
Overall, good agreement between our simulations and the reference data is observed,
confirming once more the validity of our numerical algorithm.

          C.3. Single droplet evaporating in homogeneous isotropic turbulence
  As a final validation case, we reproduce the experimental results in Verwey & Birouk
(2018), reproduced also in Dodd et al. (2021), consisting of a single n-heptane droplet
of initial diameter d0 = 200 µm, which evaporates in nitrogen at Tg = 348 K and
pth,0 = 10 bar. For this test case, we consider homogeneous isotropic turbulence sustained
by an artificial forcing (Podvigina & Pouquet 1994) at a Reynolds number based on the
Taylor’s microscale Reλ = u0rms λ/νg,r ≈ 32. The initial droplet Weber number W erms =
ρg,r u02
      rms d0 /σ is set equal to 0.0044, P r = 0.715, Sc = 2.81, Ste = 1.05, λρ = 25.27, λµ =
11.82, λk = 3.72 and λcp = 2.45. The whole set of governing equations are solved in a
cubic domain [−16d0 ; 16d0 ]3 using 7683 grid points corresponding to about 48 grid points
per initial diameter. Figure 19b reports (d/d0 )2 as a function of t/d20 for the both the
experimental and the numerical results. A good agreement is observed with a deviation of
evaporation rate KDN S of less then 7 % with respect to the experimental data, which is
considered a satisfactory result and within the uncertainty of the measurement (Verwey
& Birouk 2018).


Appendix D. Improved Adams-Bashforth scheme for HST
            simulations
   Kasbaoui et al. (2017) show that that the classical Adams-Bashforth scheme (AB2)
employed in Gerz et al. (1989) is not suitable for the direct numerical simulations of
homogeneous shear turbulence. Using as a benchmark the Kelvin modes derived in the
framework of the Rapid Distortion Theory (RDT) (Maxey 1982; Isaza & Collins 2009),
they show that the method fails to reproduce the analytical solution with an unbounded
growth of the error. In this appendix, we propose a modification of the classical Adams-
                           Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                              35
Bashforth scheme able to reproduce the Kelvin modes and, more generally, stable and
accurate simulations.

                              D.1. Proof the numerical stability
   We follow the approach proposed in Kasbaoui et al. (2017) and compute the time dis-
cretization error introduced by the classical Adams-Bashforth scheme using the simplified
equation
                                     ∂u       ∂u
                                         + Sz     = Au,                               (D 1)
                                      ∂t      ∂x
where A is a positive constant and S is the applied shear. As noted in Kasbaoui
et al. (2017), equation (D 1) allows us to remove the complications due to the pressure
gradient while preserving some important key features of homogeneously sheared flows,
i.e. the exponential growth of the turbulent kinetic energy (Maxey 1982). The solution
of equation (D 1), u = û(t) exp(ik · x), needs to satisfy two conditions for the amplitude
û(t) and for the wave vector k,
                                  dû
                                      = Aû,                                     (D 2a)
                                  dt
                                  dk
                                      · x = −Szk · ex .                          (D 2b)
                                  dt
Assuming that the discretization error evolves as a wave of amplitude ε̂ and wavevector
k, at the nth time step
                                     εn = ε̂n exp(ikn · x).                                  (D 3)
Employing the classical Adams-Bashforth integration scheme, we obtain a first interme-
diate error neglecting the mean shear contribution,
               εn+1 = εn + A∆tn+1 γ1 RU(ε̂n , kn ) − γ2 RU(ε̂n−1 , kn−1 ) ,
                                                                        
                                                                                  (D 4)
where RU represents the discrete operator for the spatial terms in the governing equation
of the error and γ1 = (1+0.5∆tn+1 /∆tn ) and γ2 = 0.5∆tn+1 /∆tn are the two coefficients
of the Adams-Bashforth scheme for a variable time-step size. Note again that, at this
stage, the mean shear contribution is not included in RU.
Following the approach proposed by Gerz et al. (1989), we set RU(ˆ        n , kn ) = ε̂n exp(ikn ·
               n−1    n−1        n−1        n−1
x) and RU(ˆ       ,k     ) = ε̂     exp(ik     ·x). Moreover, by using the identity exp(ikn−1 ·
                              n
x) = exp(−i∆k · x) exp(ik · x), equation (D 4) becomes
           εn+1 = εn + A∆tn+1 γ1 ε̂n − γ2 ε̂n−1 exp(−i∆k · x) exp(ikn · x),
                                                                   
                                                                                             (D 5)
where ∆k = kn − kn−1 . Next, the mean shear contribution is included and this results
in an error at time n + 1,

                                            ε̂n+1
        z                              }|                           {
  εn+1 = εn + A∆tn+1 γ1 ε̂n − γ2 ε̂n−1 exp(−i∆k · (x − ∆tn+1 Szex )) ·
                   

                                                           exp[ikn · (x − ∆tn+1 Szex )]. (D 6)
                                                               |          {z        }
                                                                         ikn+1

If we analyse equation (D 6), we see that the new wave vector kn+1 satisfies the first
condition, i.e., eqn (D 2a). In fact:
                                                     kn+1 − kn
            kn · (x − ∆tn+1 Szex ) = kn+1 · x →                · x = −Szkn · ex .            (D 7)
                                                       ∆tn+1
36                                     Scapin et. al.
Conversely, the amplitude at the new time level, ε̂n+1 , does not satisfy the condi-
tion (D 2b) since it contains a spatial-dependent term, ∆k, which is caused by the
difference in orientation between the wave vector at the current and old time level, n
and n − 1.
   The approach proposed in this work improves the method by Gerz et al. (1989) by
removing the spatial-dependent term, ∆k. To this end, the third term on the right-hand
side of equation (D 4) is first shear mapped to the current time level,
                  ε̂n−1 exp(ikn−1 · (x − ∆tn Szex )) = ε̂n−1 exp(ikn · x).              (D 8)
Equation (D 8) is key to obtain two wave errors of different amplitudes (i.e., ε̂n and ε̂n−1 )
but equal wave vector, i.e., kn . Inserting equation (D 8) in equation (D 4) gives
                  εn+1 = εn + A∆tn+1 γ1 ε̂n − γ2 ε̂n−1 exp(ikn · x).
                                                       
                                                                                        (D 9)
Next, the shear-mapping step is applied to equation (D 9), providing an error at n + 1
                              ε̂n+1
             z           }|               {
       εn+1 = εn + A∆tn+1 γ1 ε̂n − γ2 ε̂n−1 exp[ikn · (x − ∆tn+1 Szex )].              (D 10)
                                                |          {z        }
                                                               ikn+1

As expected, and similarly to what is observed for (D 5), equation (D 10) satisfies the
condition for kn+1 given by (D 2b). This time, however, also the condition (D 2a) is met
since the term ε̂n+1 does not contain any spatial-dependent term, i.e., k. The effectiveness
of the proposed approach is shown in the next subsection with an analytical benchmark.

                                      D.2. Validation
  To validate the modified algorithm proposed here, we employ the two-dimensional
analytical Kelvin modes derived in the framework of the RDT,
                  2         "                                      !#
                                                          2
   K           K    k0           tS    2
                                                         kx,0 S 2 t2
  v (x, t) = v0           exp −      k0 − kx,0 ky,0 St +                exp(ik · x),
                     k           Reλ                         3
                ky (t) K                                                             (D 11)
  uK (x, t) = −        v (x, t),
                 kx
  ky = ky,0 − kx St,
where Reλ , defined
              p       as Sλ20 /ν, is the Reynolds number based on the perturbation wave-
length λ0 = (2π/kx )2 + (2π/ky,0 )2 , taken as a reference length. As done by Kasbaoui
et al. (2017), we consider a two-dimensional square box lx = ly = 2π, discretized with
N = 128 points along each direction. The analytical solution    √ (D 11) is employed as
the initial condition, with initial vertical amplitude v0K = 2/2, initial wavevector
k0 = (4, 1) and Reλ = 208. We compare three time-integration methods: (1) the
Adams-Bashforth (AB2) in the two variants (classical and modified), (2) the third-order
Runge-Kutta (RK3) method proposed in Tanaka (2017); Yousefi et al. (2020) and (3)
the Explicit Crank-Nicholson (CN2) method, proposed in Kasbaoui et al. (2017). In all
cases, the momentum equation is advanced with a constant time step, ∆t = 0.25 (SN )−1 .
  Figures 20–22 report the horizontal mode obtained with the three different time-
integration schemes, which according to the RDT should go to zero at tS = 1. Using the
modified AB2 scheme and CN2, we obtain almost identical results and zero horizontal
mode up to machine precision at tS = 1. Conversely, using the original approach by Gerz
(figure 21), the normal mode does not go to zero for tS = 1 and for tS = 5 the numerical
errors largely affect the solution.
                        Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                        37




Figure 20: Temporal evolution of the horizontal mode for tS = 1, 3 and 5 using the
modified Adams-Bashforth.




Figure 21: Temporal evolution of the horizontal mode for tS = 1, 3 and 5 using the
standard Adams-Bashforth.




Figure 22: Temporal evolution of the horizontal mode for tS = 1, 3 and 5 using the
explicit Crank-Nicolson method.


  The excellent agreement between the results obtained with our approach and the
analytical solution from RDT are reported in figure 23. A more detailed analysis considers
the evolution in time of the relative error, reported in figure 24 for the horizontal and
vertical Kelvin modes. The modified AB2, RK3 and CN2 provide similar errors, especially
for tS > 2, while for tS ⩽ 2, the CN2 method appears to be slightly more accurate. On the
contrary, the error of the classical AB2 is well above that from the other three methods,
with a local peak at tS = 1 in the horizontal mode uK , as already observed in the first
38                                     Scapin et. al.




Figure 23: Comparison between the numerical solution obtained with AB2 (proposed
method) and the analytical results from RDT.


     (a)                                        (b)




Figure 24: Temporal evolution of the discretization of error (in log scale) for: (a) the
horizontal mode (i.e., u), (b): the vertical mode (i.e., v) using the three time integration
methods, AB2 - Gerz et al. and AB2 - Modified, RK3 and CN2.


panel of figure 21. Furthermore, the error evolves at a much faster pace, which is the main
reason for the poor performance of the classic AB2 in more demanding simulations.


                                      REFERENCES
Abramzon, B & Sirignano, WA 1989 Droplet vaporization model for spray combustion
     calculations. International journal of heat and mass transfer 32 (9), 1605–1618.
Albernaz, Daniel L, Do-Quang, Minh, Hermanson, Jim C & Amberg, Gustav 2017
     Droplet deformation and heat transfer in isotropic turbulence. Journal of Fluid Mechanics
     820, 61–85.
Balachandar, S, Zaleski, Stephane, Soldati, Alfredo, Ahmadi, Goodarz &
     Bourouiba, Lydia 2020 Host-to-host airborne transmission as a multiphase flow problem
     for science-based social distance guidelines.
Birouk, Madjid & Gökalp, Iskender 2006 Current status of droplet evaporation in turbulent
     flows. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 32 (4), 408–423.
Bourouiba, Lydia 2020 Turbulent gas clouds and respiratory pathogen emissions: potential
     implications for reducing transmission of covid-19. Jama 323 (18), 1837–1838.
                          Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                           39
Bourouiba, Lydia 2021 The fluid dynamics of disease transmission. Annual Review of Fluid
      Mechanics 53, 473–508.
Bukhvostova, A, Russo, E, Kuerten, Johannes GM & Geurts, Bernardus J 2014
      Comparison of dns of compressible and incompressible turbulent droplet-laden heated
      channel flow with phase transition. International journal of multiphase flow 63, 68–81.
Chong, Kai Leong, Ng, Chong Shen, Hori, Naoki, Yang, Rui, Verzicco, Roberto &
      Lohse, Detlef 2021 Extended lifetime of respiratory droplets in a turbulent vapor puff
      and its implications on airborne disease transmission. Physical review letters 126 (3),
      034502.
Costa, Pedro 2018 A fft-based finite-difference solver for massively-parallel direct numerical
      simulations of turbulent flows. Computers & Mathematics with Applications 76 (8), 1853–
      1862.
Dalla Barba, Federico, Scapin, Nicoló, Demou, Andreas D, Rosti, Marco E, Picano,
      Francesco & Brandt, Luca 2020 An interface capturing method for liquid-gas flows
      at low-mach number. Computers & Fluids p. 104789.
Dauxois, Thierry, Peacock, Thomas, Bauer, Peter, Caulfield, Colm-cille P,
      Cenedese, Claudia, Gorlé, Catherine, Haller, George, Ivey, Greg N, Linden,
      Paul F, Meiburg, Eckart & others 2021 Confronting grand challenges in
      environmental fluid mechanics. Physical Review Fluids 6 (2), 020501.
De Rivas, A & Villermaux, E 2016 Dense spray evaporation as a mixing process. Physical
      Review Fluids 1 (1), 014201.
Demou, AD, Frantzis, C & Grigoriadis, DGE 2019 A low-mach methodology for efficient
      direct numerical simulations of variable property thermally driven flows. International
      Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 132, 539–549.
Dodd, Michael S & Ferrante, Antonino 2014 A fast pressure-correction method for
      incompressible two-fluid flows. Journal of Computational Physics 273, 416–434.
Dodd, Michael S, Mohaddes, Danyal, Ferrante, Antonino & Ihme, Matthias 2021
      Analysis of droplet evaporation in isotropic turbulence through droplet-resolved dns.
      International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 172, 121157.
Elghobashi, Said 2019 Direct numerical simulation of turbulent flows laden with droplets or
      bubbles. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 51, 217–244.
Gerz, Thomas, Schumann, Ulrich & Elghobashi, SE 1989 Direct numerical simulation of
      stratified homogeneous turbulent shear flows. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 200, 563–594.
Gökalp, Iskender, Chauveau, Christian, Simon, Olivier & Chesneau, Xavier 1992
      Mass transfer from liquid fuel droplets in turbulent flow. Combustion and flame 89 (3-4),
      286–298.
Hubbard, GL, Denny, VE & Mills, AF 1975 Droplet evaporation: effects of transients and
      variable properties. International journal of heat and mass transfer 18 (9), 1003–1008.
Ii, Satoshi, Sugiyama, Kazuyasu, Takeuchi, Shintaro, Takagi, Shu, Matsumoto,
      Yoichiro & Xiao, Feng 2012 An interface capturing method with a continuous function:
      The thinc method with multi-dimensional reconstruction. Journal of Computational
      Physics 231 (5), 2328–2358.
Isaza, Juan C & Collins, Lance R 2009 On the asymptotic behaviour of large-scale
      turbulence in homogeneous shear flow. Journal of fluid mechanics 637, 213.
Kasbaoui, M Houssem, Patel, Ravi G, Koch, Donald L & Desjardins, Olivier 2017 An
      algorithm for solving the navier–stokes equations with shear-periodic boundary conditions
      and its application to homogeneously sheared turbulence. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 833,
      687–716.
Kuerten, Johannes GM 2016 Point-particle dns and les of particle-laden turbulent flow-a
      state-of-the-art review. Flow, turbulence and combustion 97 (3), 689–713.
Langmuir, Irving 1918 The evaporation of small spheres. Physical review 12 (5), 368.
Leonard, Brian P 1979 A stable and accurate convective modelling procedure based
      on quadratic upstream interpolation. Computer methods in applied mechanics and
      engineering 19 (1), 59–98.
Lupo, Giandomenico, Ardekani, Mehdi Niazi, Brandt, Luca & Duwig, Christophe
      2019 An immersed boundary method for flows with evaporating droplets. International
      Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 143, 118563.
40                                       Scapin et. al.
Lupo, Giandomenico & Duwig, Christophe 2020 Uncertainty quantification of multispecies
       droplet evaporation models. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 154,
       119697.
Lupo, Giandomenico, Gruber, Andrea, Brandt, Luca & Duwig, Christophe 2020
       Direct numerical simulation of spray droplet evaporation in hot turbulent channel flow.
       International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 160, 120184.
Majda, Andfrew & Sethian, James 1985 The derivation and numerical solution of the
       equations for zero mach number combustion. Combustion science and technology 42 (3-4),
       185–205.
Mandal, Deepak Kumar & Bakshi, Shamit 2012 Internal circulation in a single droplet
       evaporating in a closed chamber. International journal of multiphase flow 42, 42–51.
Marti, Ferran, Martinez, Oscar, Mazo, David, Garman, John & Dunn-Rankin, Derek
       2017 Evaporation of a droplet larger than the kolmogorov length scale immersed in a
       relative mean flow. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 88, 63–68.
Mashayek, Farzad 1998a Direct numerical simulations of evaporating droplet dispersion in
       forced low mach number turbulence. International journal of heat and mass transfer
       41 (17), 2601–2617.
Mashayek, Farzad 1998b Droplet–turbulence interactions in low-mach-number homogeneous
       shear two-phase flows. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 367, 163–203.
Maxey, MR 1982 Distortion of turbulence in flows with parallel streamlines. Journal of Fluid
       Mechanics 124, 261–282.
Maxey, Martin 2017 Simulation methods for particulate flows and concentrated suspensions.
       Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 49, 171–193.
Méès, L, Grosjean, N, Marié, Jean-Louis & Fournier, C 2020 Statistical lagrangian
       evaporation rate of droplets released in a homogeneous quasi-isotropic turbulence. Physical
       Review Fluids 5 (11), 113602.
Mittal, Rajat, Ni, Rui & Seo, Jung-Hee 2020 The flow physics of covid-19. Journal of fluid
       Mechanics 894.
Motheau, Emmanuel & Abraham, John 2016 A high-order numerical algorithm for dns
       of low-mach-number reactive flows with detailed chemistry and quasi-spectral accuracy.
       Journal of Computational Physics 313, 430–454.
Ng, Chong Shen, Chong, Kai Leong, Yang, Rui, Li, Mogeng, Verzicco, Roberto &
       Lohse, Detlef 2021 Growth of respiratory droplets in cold and humid air. Physical
       Review Fluids 6 (5), 054303.
Ni, Zhaojing, Hespel, Camille, Han, Kai & Foucher, Fabrice 2021 Numerical simulation
       of heat and mass transient behavior of single hexadecane droplet under forced convective
       conditions. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 167, 120736.
Piedra, S, Lu, J, Ramos, E & Tryggvason, G 2015 Numerical study of the flow and heat
       transfer of bubbly flows in inclined channels. International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow
       56, 43–50.
Pinheiro, Abgail P, Vedovoto, João Marcelo, da Silveira Neto, Aristeu & van
       Wachem, Berend GM 2019 Ethanol droplet evaporation: effects of ambient temperature,
       pressure and fuel vapor concentration. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer
       143, 118472.
Podvigina, O & Pouquet, A 1994 On the non-linear stability of the 1: 1: 1 abc flow. Physica
       D: Nonlinear Phenomena 75 (4), 471–508.
Pumir, Alain 1996 Turbulence in homogeneous shear flows. Physics of Fluids 8 (11), 3112–
       3127.
Ranz, WE, Marshall, W R & others 1952 Evaporation from drops. Chem. eng. prog 48 (3),
       141–146.
Reid, Robert C, Prausnitz, John M & Poling, Bruce E 1987 The properties of gases and
       liquids .
Reveillon, Julien & Demoulin, François-Xavier 2007 Effects of the preferential
       segregation of droplets on evaporation and turbulent mixing. Journal of Fluid Mechanics
       583, 273–302.
Rosti, ME, Cavaiola, M, Olivieri, S, Seminara, A & Mazzino, A 2021 Turbulence role in
                           Finite-size evaporating droplets in HST                               41
      the fate of virus-containing droplets in violent expiratory events. Physical Review Research
      3 (1), 013091.
Rosti, ME, Olivieri, S, Cavaiola, M, Seminara, A & Mazzino, A 2020 Fluid dynamics of
      covid-19 airborne infection suggests urgent data for a scientific design of social distancing.
      Scientific reports 10 (1), 1–9.
Rosti, Marco E, De Vita, Francesco & Brandt, Luca 2019a Numerical simulations of
      emulsions in shear flows. Acta Mechanica 230 (2), 667–682.
Rosti, Marco E, Ge, Zhouyang, Jain, Suhas S, Dodd, Michael S & Brandt, Luca 2019b
      Droplets in homogeneous shear turbulence. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 876, 962–984.
Russo, E, Kuerten, Johannes GM, Van Der Geld, CWM & Geurts, Bernardus J 2014
      Water droplet condensation and evaporation in turbulent channel flow. Journal of fluid
      mechanics 749, 666–700.
Sáenz, PJ, Wray, AW, Che, Z, Matar, OK, Valluri, P, Kim, J & Sefiane, K 2017
      Dynamics and universal scaling law in geometrically-controlled sessile drop evaporation.
      Nature communications 8 (1), 1–9.
Sahu, S, Hardalupas, Y & Taylor, AMKP 2018 Interaction of droplet dispersion and
      evaporation in a polydispersed spray. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 846, 37–81.
Scapin, Nicolò, Costa, Pedro & Brandt, Luca 2020 A volume-of-fluid method for interface-
      resolved simulations of phase-changing two-fluid flows. Journal of Computational Physics
      407, 109251.
Sekimoto, Atsushi, Dong, Siwei & Jiménez, Javier 2016 Direct numerical simulation of
      statistically stationary and homogeneous shear turbulence and its relation to other shear
      flows. Physics of Fluids 28 (3), 035101.
Span, Roland & Wagner, Wolfgang 1996 A new equation of state for carbon dioxide
      covering the fluid region from the triple-point temperature to 1100 k at pressures up
      to 800 mpa. Journal of physical and chemical reference data 25 (6), 1509–1596.
Tanaka, Mitsuru 2017 Effect of gravity on the development of homogeneous shear turbulence
      laden with finite-size particles. Journal of Turbulence 18, 1–36.
Tonini, Simona & Cossali, GE 2013 An exact solution of the mass transport equations for
      spheroidal evaporating drops. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 60, 236–
      240.
Verwey, Cameron & Birouk, Madjid 2018 Fuel vaporization: Effect of droplet size and
      turbulence at elevated temperature and pressure. Combustion and Flame 189, 33–45.
Verwey, Cameron & Birouk, Madjid 2020 Experimental investigation of the evaporation
      of suspended mono-sized heptane droplets in turbulence intensities approaching unity.
      Combustion and Flame 219, 425–436.
Villermaux, Emmanuel, Moutte, Alexandre, Amielh, Muriel & Meunier, Patrice
      2017 Fine structure of the vapor field in evaporating dense sprays. Physical Review Fluids
      2 (7), 074501.
Wang, Jietuo, Dalla Barba, Federico & Picano, Francesco 2021 Direct numerical
      simulation of an evaporating turbulent diluted jet-spray at moderate reynolds number.
      International Journal of Multiphase Flow 137, 103567.
Wang, Yanxing, Chen, Xiaodong, Wang, Xingjian & Yang, Vigor 2019 Vaporization of
      liquid droplet with large deformation and high mass transfer rate, ii: Variable-density,
      variable-property case. Journal of Computational Physics 394, 1–17.
Weiss, Philipp, Giddey, Valentin, Meyer, Daniel W & Jenny, Patrick 2020 Evaporating
      droplets in shear turbulence. Physics of Fluids 32 (7), 073305.
Weiss, Philipp, Meyer, Daniel W & Jenny, Patrick 2018 Evaporating droplets in
      turbulence studied with statistically stationary homogeneous direct numerical simulation.
      Physics of Fluids 30 (8), 083304.
Wong, Shwin-Chung & Lin, Ar-Cheng 1992 Internal temperature distributions of droplets
      vaporizing in high-temperature convective flows. Journal of fluid mechanics 237, 671–687.
Yousefi, Ali, Ardekani, Mehdi Niazi & Brandt, Luca 2020 Modulation of turbulence by
      finite-size particles in statistically steady-state homogeneous shear turbulence. Journal of
      Fluid Mechanics 899.
