Prepared for submission to JCAP




The highest-speed local dark
matter particles come from the
Large Magellanic Cloud

G. Besla,a,1 A. H. G. Peter,b N. Garavito-Camargoa
a Steward Observatory, University of Arizona, 933 North Cherry Avenue, Tucson, AZ 85721,

 USA
b CCAPP, Department of Physics, and Department of Astronomy, The Ohio State University,

 191 W. Woodruff Ave., Columbus, OH 43210, USA
 E-mail: gbesla@email.arizona.edu, peter.33@osu.edu,
 jngaravitoc@email.arizona.edu

Abstract. Using N-body simulations of the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC’s) passage through
the Milky Way (MW), tailored to reproduce observed kinematic properties of both galaxies,
we show that the high-speed tail of the Solar Neighborhood dark matter distribution is over-
whelmingly of LMC origin. Two populations contribute at high speeds: 1) Particles that
were once bound to the LMC, and 2) MW halo particles that have been accelerated owing
to the response of the halo to the recent passage of the LMC. These particles reach speeds
of 700-900 km/s with respect to the Earth, above the local escape speed of the MW. The
high-speed particles follow trajectories similar to the Solar reflex motion, with peak velocities
reached in June. For low-mass dark matter, these high-speed particles can dominate the
signal in direct-detection experiments, extending the reach of the experiments to lower mass
and elastic scattering cross sections even with existing data sets. Our study shows that even
non-disrupted MW satellite galaxies can leave a significant dark matter footprint in the Solar
Neighborhood.




  1
      Corresponding Author
Contents

1 Introduction                                                                                1

2 The LMC: A Massive Satellite on First Infall                                                3

3 Numerical Methods                                                                           3
  3.1 The MW Model                                                                            4
  3.2 Initial MW Halo Kinematics                                                              4
  3.3 The LMC Model                                                                           5
  3.4 Defining Motions in the Solar Neighborhood                                              6

4 Results: DM Motions in the Vicinity of the Sun                                              7

5 Implications for direct-detection limits                                                   10

6 Discussion                                                                                 15
  6.1 Impact of Uncertainties in the LMC and MW Mass and Orbit                               16
  6.2 DM contribution of known substructure and debris flow vs. the LMC to the
      Solar Neighborhood                                                                     19

7 Conclusions                                                                                20


1   Introduction

The nature of dark matter (DM) is one of the fundamental unsolved mysteries in astrophysics.
The simplest phenomenological model of DM, the cold dark matter (CDM) paradigm of a
cold, collisionless, stable particle species, works remarkably well to describe the expansion of
the Universe and the web of cosmic structure [1–3]. A class of particle CDM candidate, the
weakly interacting massive particle (WIMP; [4]), naturally reproduces DM at the abundance
measured precisely with cosmological measurements, on account of a small coupling between
DM and baryonic matter [1]. This small coupling motivates direct and indirect astroparticle
searches for WIMPs in the Milky Way (MW) and beyond. And yet, WIMP CDM has never
been detected in an experiment. A confirmation of the WIMP CDM paradigm requires
observing a consistent signal in astroparticle experiments and astronomical observations [5],
but an assessment of consistency requires accurate theoretical modeling of our Galaxy’s DM
halo and any massive perturbers.
      A prime example of the intertwining of signals in astroparticle experiments and the
distribution of DM in the MW is the interpretation of direct-detection experiments. If DM
consists of WIMPs (or axions [6]), laboratory experiments directly detect DM as it passes
through the apparatus [7–11]. The number of events, the energy spectrum of recoiling nu-
clei/electrons (WIMPs) or photons (axions), and their angular distribution depend on the
Solar Neighborhood DM phase-space density as well as DM’s intrinsic particle properties.
While there are well-motivated ideas about what the Solar Neighborhood DM phase-space
density might be (e.g., Refs. [12–14]), the only way to understand and measure it will be via
these same direct-detection experiments [15, 16].




                                             –1–
      This presents both a problem and opportunity. The problem is that, in the absence
of a secure detection, the experiments require an assumption about the DM density and its
velocity distribution in the Solar Neighborhood in order to interpret any potential signal in
terms of DM particle-physics parameters (e.g., mass, cross sections; for a novel alternative
“halo-free” method, see Refs. [17, 18]). Current input models, however, are unrealistically
simple, frequently invoking a Maxwell-Boltzmann velocity distribution (usually assumed to be
isotropic, but sometimes anisotropic [19]), and an axisymmetric or triaxial mass distribution
of DM that is in dynamical equilibrium [12, 20–23]. The isotropic Maxwell-Boltzmann model
with a Solar Neighborhood DM mass density of ρχ = (0.3 − 0.4) GeV/cm3 and a cut-off
at the escape speed from the MW is called the “standard halo model” (SHM) [24, 25]. A
number of simulations, though, indicate that the SHM is a poor model for the MW, even if
it allows for convenient benchmarking of experiments against each other at the present (e.g.,
Refs. [26–29]. The inclusion of baryons may bring the local DM speed distribution closer to
Maxwellian [30–32], although with significant halo-to-halo variations.
      The opportunity is that the phase-space density, shaped by effects of the MW disk and
the recent accretion history of the MW, may be directly measured from WIMP detections
(e.g., Ref. [15]). Both effects are only partially theoretically and observationally understood.
At geocentric speeds of ∼ 200 km/s−300 km/s, the disk of the MW likely has a dramatic
effect on the Solar Neighborhood DM density and velocity distribution (e.g., Refs. [27, 33, 34]),
although other authors have argued the opposite (see, e.g., [28, 32]). A measurement of this
effect would provide an important constraint on hydrodynamic simulations of the co-evolution
of galactic disks and their DM halos.
      The satellites of the MW—both the ones identified as galaxies as well as those dissolving
into the stellar halo—are evidence of the MW’s non-equilibrium state and assembly history,
and should be imprinted in the Solar Neighborhood DM phase-space density. The cosmolog-
ical assembly history of a galaxy can induce significant halo-to-halo scatter in the velocity
distribution function [29, 35]. Several studies associate DM with un-phase-mixed stellar de-
bris, notably: Sagittarius stellar stream [36, 37], Gaia-Enceladus [38, 39], Gaia-Sausage [40],
Sequoia & S1 stream [41, 42], and Nyx [43]. The DM associated with these stellar substruc-
tures is expected to leave distinct signatures in direct-detection experiments [14, 16, 44–49].
It is possible, though unlikely, that the solar system is sitting inside a dense subhalo, which
would significantly influence the local DM phase-space density [50–52].
      In current models, the highest-speed DM particles are spatially homogenized remnants
of recently accreted and disrupted subhalos [13, 31, 53]. For low-mass WIMPs, these high-
speed particles can dominate the signal, since only the fastest particles are energetic enough
to reach the experimental threshold.
      Current estimates of both effects – the disk effects on the moderate-speed population
and the streams, and the substructure origin of the high-speed tail – come from a handful of
hydrodynamic simulations, none of which contain an analog of the most massive substructure
orbiting within the MW halo, the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC). An appropriate analog of
the LMC must have 3D velocity and position vectors that are consistent with the observations
of the real system, a feat that is not achievable in cosmological simulations. This omission
is problematic, as the LMC is the most massive and most recent merger event for the MW,
with a recent high-speed pericenter passage at a distance of ∼48 kpc only ∼50 Myr ago [54].
      In this study, our models account for three effects simultaneously: 1) the MW disk
potential; 2) the MW DM halo velocity anisotropy profile; and, for the first time, 3) the
presence of the LMC. At 50 kpc, the LMC is a significantly more massive, higher speed and




                                             –2–
closer satellite than is found in the majority of cosmological simulations [55, 56]. In the
following we illustrate that the high-speed tail of the local DM distribution is overwhelmingly
of LMC origin – both as particles that were once bound to the LMC and MW halo particles
that have been accelerated owing to halo resonances induced by the motion of the LMC [57].

2   The LMC: A Massive Satellite on First Infall

The influence of the LMC on the DM structure of the MW has been ignored in all existing
models of the MW’s DM potential. However, two new pieces of information about the LMC
are causing the astronomical community to reconsider its omission:
      1) The LMC is just past its first close approach to the MW: Recent measurement
of the 3D velocity of the LMC has revealed that it is moving too fast to be a long-term
companion of our Galaxy [58]. It is expected to have only recently (< 1-2 Gyr) entered our
neighborhood and is just past its only pericentric approach to the MW in at least 6 Gyr [54].
The LMC’s closest approach to the MW occurred only ∼50 Myr ago at a distance of ∼ 48
kpc. This first infall scenario is cosmologically expected for high-speed satellites of MW-like
galaxies [55, 56, 59] and implies that the LMC should have retained a significant fraction of
the DM mass it had upon entering the MW halo [57].
      2) The LMC is a Massive Satellite: The stellar mass of the LMC is ∼ 2.7 × 109 M
[60]. Abundance matching techniques indicate that the LMC’s cosmologically expected halo
mass at infall is ∼ (1 − 3) × 1011 M (e.g., Ref. [61]). This is 10× larger than conventionally
assumed for the LMC. Recently, it was shown that such a high LMC mass will not perturb the
MW’s disk to levels inconsistent with observations [62] and is both supported by the timing
argument [63] and needed to explain the kinematics of the Orphan Stream [64] (and likely
many other stellar streams whose kinematics are now measured by Gaia [65]). Furthermore,
such high infall mass prevents the LMC disk from being tidally truncated by the MW, ex-
plaining new results that the LMC’s outer stellar disk extends to a radius approximately half
its current separation to the MW (∼ 18.5 kpc; [66, 67]). Significantly, Ref. [68] finds that
satellites of MW type galaxies with stellar masses similar to the LMC and with a satellite
companion comparable in mass to the Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC), are found to have a
pre-capture DM mass of Mvir = 3.4+1.8        11
                                     −1.2 ×10 M . This high mass is also supported by studies
of cosmological dwarf galaxy pairs in the field [69].
      The mounting evidence supporting the LMC’s high infall mass implies that the LMC
cannot be treated as a point mass tracer of the halo potential and cannot be ignored in
dynamical models of the MW (see the review in Refs. [57, 70]). Rather, such a massive
satellite will contribute to the DM distribution of the MW. In particular, the virial radius
of the LMC at infall is expected to be of order 100 kpc. Given its current separation of 50
kpc, this implies that the LMC’s DM halo overlaps with the MW’s disk and our own Solar
Neighborhood. In this study, we explore the contribution of DM particles from the LMC’s
halo to the density and kinematics of DM in the Solar Neighborhood in a first infall scenario.

3   Numerical Methods

The LMC is just past its first pericentric approach to the MW [54, 58]. This is a rare orbital
configuration and cosmological analogs are difficult to identify at z=0 [56]. Moreover, because
the kinematic properties of LMC particles in the Solar Neighborhood will depend on the exact
orbital motion of the LMC through the halo, we cannot turn to cosmological simulations to




                                            –3–
study the LMC’s impact on the velocity distribution of DM in the Solar Neighborhood.
Instead, we utilize idealized N-body simulations of the LMC-MW encounter presented in Ref.
[57] (hereafter, G19), which we summarize briefly here.
      All simulations are created using the N-body/TreePM Smoothed Particle Hydrodynam-
ics (SPH) code P-GADGET-3 an updated version of the publicly available GADGET-2 code
[71]. N-body galaxy models are generated using the publicly available GALIC code, which
implements an iterative method for the construction of N-body galaxy models in collisionless
equilibrium [72].

3.1   The MW Model
The MW is modeled as a Hernquist DM halo [73] of mass Mvir = 1.2 × 1012 M . The virial
mass Mvir is defined as the mass enclosed within the virial radius, Rvir ; the radius where the
halo density ρvir = ∆vir Ωm ρ, with ρ being the average density of the Universe. The equivalent
halo mass for the Hernquist profile is MHern = 1.56 × 1012 M . The circular speed for the
MW DM halos in both Model 1 and Model 2 (see below) peaks at Vmax = 208 km/s.
      The MW’s DM halo is simulated with ∼ 108 particles, providing a DM mass resolution of
4 × 104 M . This is comparable to state-of-the-art cosmological simulations, like Caterpillar
(∼ 104 M ) [74], ELVIS (∼ 1.9×105 M ) [75] LATTE (∼ 3.5×104 M ) [76] or APOSTLE (∼
5 × 104 M ) [77]. By modeling the MW DM halo using as a spherical Hernquist distribution,
any velocity asymmetries that result can be unambiguously attributed to the action of the
LMC.
      The stellar component of the MW is modeled as a live Hernquist bulge (M∗ = 1010
M ) and exponential disk (M∗ = 5.78 × 1010 M ). Live stellar components allow us to
appropriately account for gravitational accelerations from MW baryons and also allows us to
accurately track the center of mass motion of the MW and the relative location of the Sun.
      The properties of the MW disk, bulge and halo (e.g. scale lengths, mass) are listed
in G19 (their table 1) and are chosen such that the disk kinematics roughly reproduce the
observed rotation curve of the MW, which peaks at a value of V ∼ 240 km/s [78, 79]. Note
that this circular speed is higher than generally assumed in the Standard Halo Model (e.g.,
Ref. [80]).

3.2   Initial MW Halo Kinematics
In order to fully specify the initial conditions for the DM halo particles in the simulations, we
must additionally make assumptions about the velocity distribution. The velocity distribution
can either be isotropic — the velocity dispersion is the same in every direction, like for an ideal
gas — or anisotropic. While idealized simulations often adopt isotropy for simplicity (one
may then use Eddington’s formula to define the full 6D phase-space density given a spatial
density profile [81]), real halos typically have significant radial anisotropy resulting from their
accretion histories. At a given radius in the halo, the so-called anisotropy parameter, β, is
defined as:

                                                   σt2
                                          β =1−         .                                    (3.1)
                                                   2σr2
      Following G19, we explore two MW halo models with different initial velocity anisotropy
profiles, β(r): 1) Model 1 an isotropic DM halo (β(r) = 0); and 2) Model 2 a radially
biased profile [82], consistent with the kinematics of DM halos formed in cosmological simu-
lations [83],




                                              –4–
                                                               d ln ρDM
                        β(r) = −0.5 − 0.2α(r);        α(r) =            .                 (3.2)
                                                                 d ln r
     G19 find that the amplitude of the halo response to the LMC is strengthened in Model
2 relative to the isotropic Model 1. In this study, these two models will thus allow us to
explore whether the MW’s initial halo kinematics also generate different kinematic responses
in the Solar Neighborhood. For example, (author?) [19, 84] have suggested that halo velocity
anisotropy can impact direct-detection experiments.
     Both the velocity anisotropy profile and the inclusion of a stellar disk/bulge impact the
kinematics of DM particles in the Solar Neighborhood. This is illustrated in Figure 1, which
shows the normalized distribution function of Galactocentric speeds, f (v):

                                                  dN 1
                                        f (v) =                                           (3.3)
                                                  dv N
of all DM particles selected within a thick ring (6 kpc in both width and thickness), centered
at the Solar radius of 8.3 kpc. Results are shown for three different MW halos: Model 1,
Model 2, and Model 1 initialized without a disk or bulge.
      Plotted for reference is the 1D speed distribution function for the Standard Halo Model
(SHM), which has isotropic dispersions and is described by a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution:
                                             2    2
                             fSHM (v) ∝ e−(v /2σ ) v 2 dv (km/s)−1                        (3.4)
      The value of the 1D velocity dispersion (σ = 177 km/s) is computed from the motions
of DM particles in the Solar Neighborhood within Model 1, initialized without a disk. Note
that the SHM speed distribution, fSHM (v), is usually truncated at an escape speed of 500-600
km/s (e.g., as measured by the RAVE survey [85]), but we do not do this here to provide a
point of reference for the high velocity tail.
      The SHM model corresponds to a collisionless isothermal density distribution, with
ρ(r) ∝ r−2 (see Ref. [86]). Unsurprisingly, the SHM model is not a good fit to the kinematics
of the DM halo in Model 1 (red solid line), which is modeled as a Hernquist density profile. In
general, self-consistent, stable models of cuspy DM structures do not have a locally Maxwellian
velocity distributions [87].
      Additionally, Figure 1 illustrates that the discrepancy between the SHM model and the
modeled MW increases when a stellar bulge and disk is included in Model 1 (blue dashed
lined) and when the halo kinematics are not isotropic, as in Model 2 (magenta dotted).

3.3   The LMC Model
The LMC is modeled using a Hernquist DM halo of mass Mvir = 2.5 × 1011 M . This is
the highest LMC mass model explored in G19 (their model LMC4; see their table 2). This
LMC model is consistent with cosmological expectations of LMC analogs that host SMC-mass
companions (see § 2). In § 6.1 we study the validity of our results in lower mass LMC models
(G19 models LMC3 and LMC2).
      The initial orbital parameters for the LMC are chosen such that its simulated present day
position and velocity are within 2σ of the observed values 2 Gyr after first crossing the MW’s
virial radius [58]. The LMC’s orbital plane is roughly confined with the YZ Galactocentric
plane, where the LMC reached its pericentric approach of 48 kpc, 50 Myr ago. The fiducial
simulations used in this study thus correspond to Simulations 4 and 8 in G19 (see their table




                                            –5–
Figure 1. Initial speed distributions for MW DM halo particles within a thick ring (width and
thickness of 6 kpc), centered on the Solar radius of 8.3 kpc. The MW is isolated; the LMC is not yet
introduced. The red, solid line indicates the distribution of halo particles in the isotropic Model 1,
where a stellar disk and bulge is not included. This distribution roughly matches the corresponding
SHM model (black, dash-dotted), computed with a 1D velocity dispersion of σ = 177 km/s. The
inclusion of the disk and bulge in Model 1 shifts the distribution to higher speeds (blue, thick dashed
line). When a radially biased β(r) profile is adopted in Model 2 (purple, dotted line), the discrepancy
between the SHM model (which assumes isotropic dispersion) increases. In this study, we will compare
perturbations induced by the LMC against these initial conditions for Model 1 and 2 (blue dashed
and purple dotted lines).


3). In the following we track the present day positions and velocities of DM particles that
were initially bound to the LMC at infall but now reside within the Solar Neighborhood.

3.4   Defining Motions in the Solar Neighborhood
We identify particles representative of motions in the Solar Neighborhood as having Galac-
tocentric positions:

              |x − x | < 3.0 kpc,        |y − y | < 3.0 kpc,       |z − z | < 3.0 kpc,           (3.5)
where the position of the Sun is (x , y , z )= (-8.3, 0, 0.027) kpc. There are ∼ 140, 000
MW DM particles in this volume in both Model 1 and Model 2 before the LMC crosses the
virial radius of the MW ∼ 2 Gyr ago. Note that because the flow of LMC particles is not
uniform throughout the disk, we do not consider the motions of particles within an annular
ring centered at the Solar radius, in contrast to §3.2. The local MW DM density in this
volume is ∼0.4 Gev/cm3 for both Models 1 and 2.




                                                –6–
      We acknowledge that the height of the defined Solar Neighborhood (3 kpc above or
below the disk midplane) is large. This choice was made to maximize the number of LMC
particles in the volume, given the resolution of the G19 simulation. On average, high speed
LMC and MW DM particles ( > 800 km/s with respect to the Earth) are roughly evenly
distributed at all distances above or below the disk midplane (LMC high speed particles have
a median height of |z| ∼ 1.0 kpc from the disk midplane in the defined volume). As such,
we are not averaging over local effects that would bias the expected velocity distribution of
LMC particles in a smaller volume.
      We compute the motion of LMC and MW particles in the Solar Neighborhood utilizing
two different coordinate systems:

    1. Galactocentric Coordinates: A reference frame defined relative to the Galactic cen-
       ter. Because the MW and LMC are both modeled as live systems, the MW’s center
       of mass (COM) will move in response to gravitational forces from the LMC [88]. We
       account for this motion by computing all particle velocities with respect to the MW
       COM. In this coordinate system, the LMC is currently moving predominantly in the -Y
       direction (opposite to the velocity vector of the Sun).

    2. Earth Frame Coordinates: A reference frame defined relative to the position of the
       Earth. Particle velocities are corrected for both the motion of the Local Standard of
       Rest (LSR)1 and the peculiar motion of the Sun. These are defined in Galactocentric
       coordinates following (author?) [89] and (author?) [79]:

             V x = 11.1 km/s,        V y = 12.24 + 239.0 km/s,            V z = 7.25 km/s.         (3.6)

         To account for the annular motions of the Earth about the Sun, we follow equation 4.9
         and 4.10 in Ref. [32] (see also Refs. [19, 90]).
         Results presented in the Earth Frame thus account for both the motion of the Local
         Standard of Rest, the peculiar motion of the Sun and the annular motions of the Earth
         averaged over the year, unless otherwise indicated (e.g., at the end of §4 and §5). Because
         the LMC is currently moving in the opposite direction of the Sun, its DM particles will
         flow through the Solar Neighborhood in roughly the same direction as that of the MW
         halo particles.

4       Results: DM Motions in the Vicinity of the Sun

In Figure 2, we show the DM speed distribution in the Solar Neighborhood, with the inclusion
of the LMC, in Galactocentric coordinates. We illustrate the speed distributions of MW DM
particles for the two different MW models, before (blue dashed line) and after (red solid line
and blue histogram) the LMC is introduced. DM particles from the LMC alone (not MW
particles perturbed by the LMC’s passage through the disk) are shown with the histogram.
Each distribution is normalized to peak at 1.0.
     The speed distribution of LMC particles is striking. The RAVE survey finds that the
90% confidence range for the local escape velocity is 492 km/s−587 km/s in the Galactocentric
    1
     Our results are insensitive to the exact value of the LSR. The LSR motion is removed from the LMC’s
observed velocity vector, measured with respect to the Sun [58], in order to compute the simulations in a
Galactocentric frame. However, we then add back the LSR motion to carry out the calculations presented in
this work.




                                                 –7–
Figure 2. Galactocentric velocity distribution for all DM particles in the Solar Neighborhood, as
defined in § 3.4. Each distribution is arbitrarily normalized. LMC particles contribute at high speeds,
primarily from 550 km/s−640 km/s (blue histograms), with a median value of 570 km/s in both
Model 1 (left panel) and Model 2 (right panel). These speeds are near or exceed the local escape
speed. The initial speed distribution of MW halo particles, before the LMC is introduced (blue dashed
line) is skewed to higher speeds after the LMC arrives at its current location (red solid line) – no LMC
particles are included in these MW distributions. Results for Model 1 (left) and Model 2 (right) are
largely similar, with Model 2 generally having more particles at the highest speeds.


frame [85]. However, LMC particles are moving predominantly at 550-640 km/s — higher
than, or at the same speed as, the local escape speed. Because the LMC is coming in for the
first time, its contributing particles are not in equilibrium and can be moving at high speeds.
Comparing the two panels of Figure 2, we find that the resulting LMC particle kinematics
are the same in both Model 1 and Model 2 (median velocity of ∼570 km/s). This is by design
as the LMC mass model and orbit is the same in both cases.
       While LMC particles comprise a small fraction (∼0.2%) of particles in the Solar Neigh-
borhood, they dominate the high speed tail - 70% of DM particles with geocentric speeds
> 750 km/s originate from the LMC. Furthermore, the LMC also impacts the kinematics of
MW halo particles, an effect which extends beyond the Solar Neighborhood, affecting stars
as well as DM in the MW halo [57]. As the LMC passes near the MW disk, it accelerates DM
particles to higher speed, such that the local MW DM velocity distribution skews to higher
speeds (red solid line in Figure 2). 20% of DM particles moving at geocentric speeds > 600
km/s either originate from or are accelerated by the LMC, together augmenting the local DM
density distribution by ∼5%.
       The relative contribution of LMC particles to the high-speed tail compared to the accel-
eration of MW particles by the LMC is illustrated more clearly in the Earth Frame Coordinate
system (§3.4) in Figure 3. In that Figure, we focus on geocentric speeds greater than 650
km/s. The inclusion of the LMC clearly skews the velocity distribution to higher velocities,
boosting particle speeds to as high as 900 km/s in June and 875 km/s in December. We
will return to this point in the discussion of annual modulation of direct-detection signals in
§5. Such speeds are not exhibited by MW particles prior to the arrival of the LMC (lines




                                                 –8–
Figure 3. Speed distribution in Earth Frame Coordinates for all DM particles in the Solar Neighbor-
hood for Model 1 (left) and Model 2 (right). The Y-axis indicates the relative density of DM particles
in the solar volume, in arbitrary units. Thin black lines represent the initial high-speed Earth Frame
speed distribution of MW DM particles (before the LMC arrives; MW Iso). Dashed and blue lines
indicate the speeds of MW and LMC DM particles expected in June (maximal) and dashed-dotted
and magenta lines indicate speeds in December (minimum). DM particles that originate in the LMC
are also plotted separately as histograms, following the same color coding. In December(June), all
particles moving at speeds in excess of ∼800(840) km/s either originate from or are accelerated by
the LMC.


marked as MW Iso). As such, all of the highest speed particles in the Solar Neighborhood
(near or above the escape speed) either originate from the LMC (60-100%) or are MW par-
ticles that have been accelerated to high speeds by the LMC. This statement follows from
the LMC’s unique status as the only known substructure on first infall that can also impact
the Solar Neighborhood, enabling DM particles to reach speeds near or exceeding the local
escape speed.
      Table 1 lists the DM density in the high speed tail originating from either the LMC
or the MW (Model 1 or 2, before, MWIso , and after the LMC is accreted; columns 3-6).
The inclusion of the LMC increases the amount of DM at Earth Frame velocities greater
than 800 km/s by factors of 4-11 relative to the MW in isolation and by factors of 2 in June
vs. December (column 7). For Model 1, the highest-speed particles come from the LMC,
but for Model 2, the high-speed population has a higher contribution from accelerated MW
halo particles (column 8). This result is consistent with the stronger halo response to the
LMC’s passage found by G19 in Model 2 – i.e. the density enhancements in the Transient
and Collective Responses in Model 2 are larger than in Model 1. Finally, all DM particles
moving at geocentric speeds higher than 850 km/s either originate in or are accelerated by
the LMC.
      We can also show the direction from which the particles entered the Solar Neighbor-
hood in the Earth Frame Coordinate system, which is of interest for directionally sensitive
experiments [91]. Figure 4 illustrates the trajectories of high-speed DM particles in the Solar
Neighborhood (v > 800 km/s in Earth Frame Coordinates) projected on Mollweide equal-area
plots of the sky at two different times of year. Trajectories are computed as the negative of




                                                –9–
Table 1. Density of High Speed DM Particles in the Solar Neighborhood (103 M /kpc3 )
MWIso refers to the MW before the LMC arrives.
                                                                                     MW+LMC           LMC
    Model    Speed (km/s)      MWIso          MW       LMC        MW+LMC              MWIso          MW+LMC
     1        VJune > 800       1.9           8.3       8.3         16.7                9.0           0.50
     1        VDec > 800        0.93          3.2       6.5         9.3                 11.0          0.35
     1        VJune > 850       0.0           0.93      3.2         4.2                  -            0.77
     1        VDec > 850        0.0           0.0      0.93         0.93                 -            1.0
     2        VJune > 800       4.7           13.0      6.9         20.0                4.3           0.35
     2        VDec > 800        1.9           6.0       4.7         10.6                5.8           0.43
     2        VJune > 850       0.0           1.4       2.3         3.7                  -            0.63
     2        VDec > 850        0.0           0.46     0.93         1.4                  -            0.67


the Earth Frame velocity vector of each DM particle, thus indicating the direction from which
they originate. Results are presented for MW Model 1 and are similar for Model 2.
     Particles at these high speeds primarily originate within or are accelerated by the LMC
(Table 1), as such their motions reflect the direction of motion of the LMC at closest approach.
This direction is coincident with the reflex motion of the Sun, indicated by the yellow star,
explaining why the LMC has such a dramatic effect on the local velocity distribution at high
speeds. If we attempted this experiment on the opposite side of the MW’s disk, where the
LMC’s motion would be opposite the reflex motion of the Sun, the speeds would be roughly
240 km/s lower than we find here.
     Although the LMC boosts the density of high-speed DM in the Solar Neighborhood, the
arrival direction is approximately the same as (although somewhat more southerly than) the
highest speed particles in the SHM. The arrival direction is little changed between the times
of maximal (June) and minimal (December) relative speed of the Earth with respect to the
Galactic halo, although the density of particles is higher in the former case (top vs. bottom
panels in Figure 4). Interestingly, the arrival direction is distinct from other kinematic stellar
substructures observed in Gaia [14].

5   Implications for direct-detection limits

We consider the implications of the LMC’s presence in the MW for WIMP direct-detection
specifically, although the results from § 4 may also be applied to direct searches for other DM
candidates. For concreteness, we consider only spin-independent elastic scattering off nuclei,
although our results generalize to other types of interaction with nuclei or electrons.
     For spin-independent interactions, the expected differential event rate is

                                                            Z
             dR(Q, t)         ρχ              X                               dσA (v)
                      =                (Q)       NA                   d3 v           |v|f (v, t),           (5.1)
               dQ             mχ                                                dQ
                                              A      vmin(mχ ,mA ,Q)


the number of events in the experiment per unit time t per unit recoil energy Q. We assume
that the local phase-space density can be represented by the multiplication of the DM particle
number density (the local mass density ρχ divided by the WIMP particle mass mχ ) and utilize
the three-dimensional velocity distribution f (v, t) in Earth Frame Coordinates. We assume
that the experiment has a set of isotopes {A}, and that there are NA target nuclei of isotope




                                                     – 10 –
Figure 4. Mollweide all-sky, equal-area, projection of the trajectories of all DM particles in the
Solar Neighborhood for Model 1 in Earth Frame Coordinates in June (top) and December (bottom).
Trajectories indicate the direction from which the particles originate. The current location of the
LMC (black star) and its orbital path over the past 2 Gyr (black line) are marked. The reflex motion
of the Sun is indicated by the yellow star, which is coincident with the direction of motion of the LMC
at closest approach, and hence also of the trajectories of both DM particles that originate within (blue
circles) or are accelerated by (orange triangles) the LMC.


A in the experiment, each with mass mA . The efficiency for an experiment to detect nuclear
recoils of energy Q is (Q). For a WIMP to scatter a nucleus to energy Q, the WIMP must
have a minimum speed
                                            s
                                              mA Q
                                     vmin =         ,                                 (5.2)
                                              2µ2A

where µA is the reduced mass of the nucleus-WIMP system. The elastic scattering cross
section is




                                                – 11 –
                                   dσA   mA  SI 2     
                                       = 2 2 σA FSI (Q) ,                                            (5.3)
                                   dQ   2µA v

where σA SI is the interaction cross section in the limit of no momentum transfer, and F (Q) is

the form factor (taken to be the Helm form factor [92] in this work).
     In order to benchmark experiments against each other, it is useful to express Eq. (5.1) in
terms of the WIMP-proton cross section σpSI and to isolate the universal velocity dependence
of the integral from other variables that depend on experimental specifics or WIMP mass. If
the WIMP interacts equally strongly with protons and neutrons, then
                                                          2
                                          SI          µA
                                         σA  =                  A2 σpSI ,                            (5.4)
                                                      µp

where µp is the reduced mass of the WIMP-proton system and A is the atomic number of the
isotope. The mean inverse speed g(vmin ) is
                                          Z
                          g(vmin ) =           d3 vf (v, t)/|v|,                   (5.5)
                                          vmin(mχ ,mA ,Q)


and hence, Eq. (5.3) can be re-written as
                                                             2
             dR(Q, t)         ρχ              X            µA                  mA 2
                      =                (Q)       NA                 A2 σpSI        F (Q)g(vmin ).   (5.6)
               dQ             mχ                           µp                  2µ2A
                                              A

      Modulo the form-factor suppression represented by F 2 (Q), the energy spectrum of events
follows the mean inverse speed function g(vmin ). In Figures 5 & 6, we show how the presence
of the LMC alters g(vmin ), averaged over a year. The MW’s mean inverse speed before the
LMC is added is denoted by the dashed black line, labeled “MW Iso”. To separate the effects
of the acceleration of MW particles by the LMC (red line) from particles of LMC origin,
we plot both the mean inverse speed of LMC particles (dot-dashed purple) and of the MW
+ LMC system (dashed blue line). The 3D velocity distribution function for each line is
normalized to unity; in practice, the total event rate scales with the dark matter density ρχ,i
in each component i. In the bottom-left panel, we show the ratio of the MW mean inverse
speed to that of the MW Iso model, and the ratio of the mean inverse speed of all particles
in our simulated Solar Neighborhood model to the MW Iso initial conditions. For reference,
we show the vmin corresponding to the minimum nuclear recoil energy thresholds for various
experiments assuming a 10 GeV WIMP, taking the threshold explicitly indicated in papers
or the recoil energy corresponding to a detection efficiency (Qmin ) = 0.5.
      The LMC is found to increase the g(vmin ) both by accelerating MW particles and also
by contributing high-speed DM particles. Because the LMC particles are dominantly near the
escape velocity from the MW, the mean inverse speed is high (dot-dashed line), and the energy
spectrum is hard. However, the percentage of Solar Neighborhood particles originating in the
LMC is relatively small, and the bigger effect of the LMC on the mean inverse speed function
is the acceleration of MW particles by resonances induced in the halo by the LMC, until
the LMC becomes dominant for speeds above 750 km/s. This is most visible in the bottom
left panels of Figures 5 & 6, where we examine the ratio of g(vmin ) of Solar Neighborhood




                                                   – 12 –
Figure 5. Left (top): Time-averaged inverse speed, g(vmin ), as a function of the minimum scattering
speed vmin for halo Model 1 (isotropic). The black, dashed line indicates results for the Isolated MW
(MW Iso), before the LMC is not introduced. Remaining lines indicate results after the LMC is
introduced: the LMC particles only (LMC: purple, dashed-dotted); the MW particles only (MW:
red, solid); and both the LMC and MW particles together (MW+LMC: blue, dashed). Vertical
green lines represent the value of vmin near the thresholds for particle scattering of a 10 GeV/c2 DM
particle in the: Xenon1T (Qmin =1 keV, Xenon target) [93], LUX-ZEPLIN (Qmin =3.3 keV, Xenon
target)[94, 95], PICO 60 (Qmin =2.45 keV, Fluorine target) [96], DAMIC (Qmin =0.6 keV, Silicon
target) [97], SuperCDMS (Qmin = 0.27 keV, Germanium target) [98], and CRESST-III (Qmin =0.03
keV, Oxygen target) [99] detectors. Left (bottom): The ratio of mean inverse speeds for MW particles
only relative to the Isolated MW (red) and the ratio of the MW + LMC particles relative to the
Isolated MW (blue, dashed). Right (top): Expected annual modulation amplitude between June
December as a function of vmin . Line types are the same as in the left figure. Right (bottom): The
ratio of results for the MW halo particles and the MW+LMC particles relative to the MW in isolation.
The feature at ∼220 km/s is an artifact resulting from a minor shift in the zero point between the
two curves.


particles (either with or without the LMC particles) after the LMC’s passage relative to the
isolated MW. Above a geocentric speed of 600 km/s (close to the threshold for S1 + S2
analyses of xenon nuclear recoil analysis for a 10 GeV WIMP), the LMC’s passage leads to
a 25% enhancement of the signal in Model 1, and nearly a factor of 2 change for Model 2.
Especially for Model 2, the MW response to the LMC passage leads to a large enhancement
in g(vmin ), which increases sharply to factors of a few beyond vmin = 600 km/s. Above the
escape speed from the MW (≈ 750-800 km/s in Earth Frame Coordinates; Figure 3), the
ratio is undefined, and the LMC dominates the signal.
      Before we describe the key effect of the LMC on WIMP direct-detection – the tightening
of exclusion curves at low WIMP mass – we highlight the effect of the LMC on the direct-
detection annual modulation signal. In the right-hand panels of Figures 5 & 6, we show the




                                               – 13 –
Figure 6. Same as Figure 5, but for Model 2 (anisotropic MW halo). The ratio of g(vmin ) for the
perturbed MW and LMC relative to the Isolated MW (no LMC) indicate a larger increase in the
event rate relative to Figure 5, on account of the significantly higher acceleration of MW particles by
the LMC in the anisotropic MW model relative to the isotropic model.


difference in g(vmin ) at the two dates at which the isolated MW has its extrema. The relative
speed between the DM and the Earth is highest in June and lowest in December, leading to
an excess of high-speed particles (v & 200 km/s) in June and low-speed particles in December
(see also Figure 3). The difference in g(vmin ) is proportional to the amplitude of the annual
modulation of the direct-detection recoil spectrum.
      Because the LMC leads to a boost in highest-speed particles (both of LMC origin and
MW particles accelerated by the passage of the LMC), the post-LMC-impact annual modula-
tion of g(vmin ) largely follows that of the isolated MW below speeds of 600 km/s for both the
isotropic (Model 1) and anisotropic (Model 2) MW cases. There is a slight shift in the zero
point of the annual modulation amplitude, as indicated by the sharp excursions around 200
km/s in the bottom right panels of Figures 5 & 6. Above 600 km/s, the annual modulation
amplitude rises significantly relative to the isolated MW case. This pattern of annual modula-
tion amplitude as a function of vmin is unique to the LMC, as other dark-matter substructures
have different g(vmin ) shapes and annual modulation amplitudes [90].
      Because the LMC’s velocity vector is almost exactly anti-parallel to the Sun’s motion,
the phase of annual modulation largely mimics that of the isolated MW, unlike other possible
DM kinematic substructures. This point is illustrated in Figure 7, we show the date at which
g(vmin ) is maximized as a function of vmin . We have included the effect of the relative speed of
the Earth with respect to the local WIMP population, but not gravitational focusing, which
shifts the phase for speeds vmin . 300 km/s [100], below the speeds of LMC and LMC-induced
MW accelerated particle populations. Thus, the Figure shows that the signature of the LMC




                                                – 14 –
Figure 7. Phase of g(vmin ): plotted is the date where g(vmin ) is maximized, accounting for the
annular motion of the Earth. Results are plotted for Model 1 (left) and Model 2 (right). At high
speeds the event rate is expected to be maximized in June.


in annual modulation measurements lies not in its phase but in its amplitude.
      The key effect of the LMC on direct-detection experiments is to extend the reach of those
experiments to lower WIMP mass. The existence of a low-energy threshold implies that there
is a minimum WIMP mass to which experiments are sensitive, given a fixed speed distribution.
Figure 8 illustrates the resulting limits on the spin-independent DM-nucleon scattering cross
section σpSI at low DM particle mass compared to that assuming an isolated MW. In this
figure, the limits correspond to the results from the Xenon-1T 1 ton-year exposure result
[93]. We translate the experimental limit from that work to more general forms of the WIMP
speed distribution function according to the method of Ref. [48]. The presence of the LMC
causes the cross-section limits to shift downward and to lower WIMP masses. Importantly,
the effect is independent of the assumed MW dark matter velocity anisotropy at the lowest
masses.
      Because of the high-speed WIMP population induced by the LMC, the cross section
limits can be significantly lower for low-mass WIMPs (by over an order of magnitude) than
expected when the LMC is neglected. Furthermore, some experiments are more sensitive to
low-mass WIMPs than they currently claim to be. This is illustrated for specific experiments
in Figure 9, where we compare the WIMP mass that may be probed with DM at the MW
escape speed relative to the lower WIMP mass that is accessible because of the LMC-induced
high-speed tail in the Solar Neighborhood.


6   Discussion

In this work, we have shown that the LMC is responsible for the high-speed tail of the WIMP
velocity distribution in the Solar Neighborhood, and that this extends the reach of direct-
detection experiments to lower WIMP mass and lower cross section. In this section, we discuss
our findings in the context of the uncertainty in the LMC’s and MW’s total DM masses, and




                                            – 15 –
Figure 8. Limits on the spin-independent DM-nucleon scattering cross section σpSI , assuming a Xenon
target with an exposure of 1 kton per year and a 4.9 keV energy threshold. The plot focuses on the
lowest mass WIMPS. The inclusion of the LMC results in cross section limits that are significantly
lower at low DM particle mass than found in the SHM (roughly equivalent to the results for the isolated
MW: MW Isolated, blue lines). This figure illustrates that the cross section limits are affected by
both accelerated MW DM halo particles (MW: magenta lines) and also by LMC particles (LMC+MW:
Orange). Cross section limits are lower in Model 2 (radially anistropic DM halo) than in Model 1
(isotropic), but are comparable at the lowest DM masses.


in recent work in reconstructing the Solar Neighborhood WIMP phase-space density using
the stellar halo.

6.1   Impact of Uncertainties in the LMC and MW Mass and Orbit
In this study we have utilized a massive LMC halo model with infall mass of 2.5 × 1011 M .
Here, we explore the impact of the uncertainty on the LMC’s and MW’s halo masses on our
results.
      We include three different LMC infall halo mass models, as introduced in G19: 1011 M
(LMC3), 1.8 × 1011 M (LMC2), 2.5 × 1011 M (LMC1; Fiducial). These LMC mass models
encompass a representative range for the expected mass of the LMC prior to entry within
the virial radius of the MW ∼2 Gyr ago (see discussion in G19 and §2). Note that all results
presented in prior sections have focused on a fiducial (LMC1) mass model.
      The top panel of Figure 10 illustrates the resulting cross section for each LMC model
using MW Model 1. The bottom panel illustrates the ratio of these cross sections to the MW
in isolation. The cross section is impacted at low DM masses in all cases – general trends are
the same provided the LMC mass at infall is at least 1011 M . The change in cross section
owes to the increased number of LMC particles in the Solar Neighborhood as a function of




                                                – 16 –
Figure 9. Minimum DM particle mass reachable by the listed experiments, ordered by descending
energy threshold (Qmin ), when the LMC is included (red squares, vmin =850900   800 km/s) or ignored
(blue circles, vmin =750 km/s). Thresholds and target nuclei are described in the caption of Figure 5,
with the addition of CDMSlite (Qmin =0.5 keV, Germanium target) [101]. The LMC extends the
reach of experiments to lower WIMP mass.


increasing LMC infall mass. The normalized speed distribution of LMC particles does not
change significantly with increasing LMC mass, rather, there are simply more particles at all
speeds. For example, LMC1 has roughly a factor of 10 more particles at speeds in excess of
850 km/s than LMC3.
      Note that adopting a different density profile for the LMC’s DM halo at infall can also
change the amount of LMC particles in the Solar Neighborhood. The NFW density profile, for
instance, falls off less rapidly than the Hernquist profile with distance, which would increase
the amount of LMC particles. This may allow for lower LMC infall masses than studied here.
Our results assume that, at a minimum, the LMC’s halo extends for 50 kpc (which is true for
all three LMC models explored in this study). This enables the LMC’s halo to overlap with
the Solar Neighborhood at the present day, regardless of the slope of the profile.
      In contrast, the number of accelerated MW particles does not change significantly with
increasing LMC mass. This is consistent with the behavior of the halo response to the LMC’s
orbit, which does not change in amplitude as a function of LMC mass at Galactocentric
distances < 70 kpc (see right panel of G19 Figure 25). The MW particles accelerated by
the LMC are an important contributor to the high speed tail - their properties appear to be
independent of the exact LMC profile.
      The direction of motion of LMC particles in the Solar Neighborhood is dependent on
the velocity vector of the LMC at closest approach to the MW (∼48 kpc), which is model-
independent. In other words, changing either the mass or density profile of the LMC or
MW’s halo does little to change the distance, velocity vector or timing of the LMC’s closest
approach [58, 102]. Calculations presented here about the impact of LMC particles to the
Solar Neighborhood are thus robust to uncertainties in the orbit of the LMC, as these are
negligible over the past 1 Gyr [56].




                                               – 17 –
Figure 10. Impact of LMC Mass on the cross section. LMC mass ranges explored: 1011 M (LMC3,
dotted), 1.8×1011 M (LMC2, dashed-dotted), 2.5×1011 M (LMC1; Fiducial, solid). The MW mass
model is Model 1 in each case; Model 2 results in similar trends. The cross section limits come from
the same analysis of Xenon-1T limits used in Figure 8. The bottom panel shows the ratio between
the cross section of the MW in isolation (no LMC) relative to the result of the MW model including
each LMC mass model, as marked. Even in the lowest LMC mass model (LMC3) the cross section is
still impacted by an order of magnitude.




      The total DM mass and density profile of the MW may impact the amplitude of the
halo response to the passage of the LMC. Luckily, both are well-constrained by the rotation
curve within 20 kpc. As demonstrated by the exercise of changing the LMC mass, changes
in the amplitude of the halo response at large scales, >50 kpc, do little to impact the halo
response in the inner halo (G19). More significant are uncertainties in the velocity anisotropy
profile, which change the initial velocity distribution in the Solar Neighborhood before the
LMC arrives. We have studied this effect in our analysis of Model 1 and Model 2, finding that
a radially biased velocity distribution can promote the acceleration of MW particles. Note
that changing the nature of the DM particle (e.g. “fuzzy DM” vs. cold dark matter) may
change the MW’s halo response (see discussion in G19), and is the subject of future work.




                                              – 18 –
6.2   DM contribution of known substructure and debris flow vs. the LMC to the
      Solar Neighborhood
In addition to the virialized component of the MW halo (stellar and DM), several other
un-phase-mixed structures certainly contribute to the distribution of stars in the Solar Neigh-
borhood, and perhaps also to the DM. These non-equilibrium structures – gravitationally
bound satellite galaxies and subhalos, narrow streams of dissolved satellites, and the spatially
coherent but kinematically unmixed “debris flow” particles from dissolved or dissolving satel-
lites [26] – may all lead to unique kinematic signatures in direct-detection experiments. In
this section, we place the LMC’s implications for direct-detection experiments in this context,
and how various authors infer properties of the Solar Neighborhood DM phase-space density
based on stellar signatures of disequilibrium in the MW halo. We note that in our work, in
addition to the LMC’s DM debris, there is also a contribution from MW DM halo particles
that have been accelerated through a Collective Response of the halo to the passage of the
LMC [57]. These accelerated particles are distinct from the traditional definition of debris
flow.
      The most famous non-equilibrium structure is the Sagittarius dwarf spheroidal galaxy
(Sag dSph). This galaxy is moving in an orbital plane orthogonal to the MW’s disk, perpen-
dicular to that of the LMC. It has two massive stellar streams wrapped completely around the
MW [37, 103, 104]. The associated stellar and DM debris stream is expected to exhibit speeds
of 400-500 km/s [46] with respect to the Earth (see also Ref. [45, 90], who find stream debris
to contribute at ∼350 km/s). These authors find that the SHM is insufficient to describe the
non-Maxwellian velocity distribution caused by Sag dSph and that the presence of Sag dSph
may reduce the amplitude of the annual modulation of the event rate by as much as factor of
two. Furthermore, Ref. [46] find that although Sag dSph may contribute more to the Solar
Neighborhood DM density than the LMC does (1 − 2% vs ∼ 0.2%), the debris enhances event
rates by only ∼ 20% because the speed distribution of Sag dSph particles lies close to the
peak of that of the overwhelmingly dominant MW population. Thus, even though the LMC
contributes less to the Solar Neighborhood DM density than Sag dSph does, the high-speed
nature of LMC and LMC-accelerated MW particles leads to a much stronger enhancement
of events in direct-detection experiments relative to isolated MW predictions in the relevant
energy window.
      Recently, multiple authors have identified additional stellar substructures within the
inner halo of the MW. These data are consistent with a scenario in which our Galaxy has
undergone one or two substantial merger events ∼9-10 Gyr ago: 1) Gaia-Sausage, charac-
terized by radially anisotropic stellar debris [40] ; 2) retrograde stars, such as the S1 stream
and remnants of the Sequoia dwarf galaxy [41]; 3) Gaia-Enceladus debris that likely consists
of both Gaia-Sausage stars and the retrograde components of Sequoia [38, 39]; and 4) the
prograde stream Nyx [43]. These features lie somewhere in the continuum of distinct streams
and debris flow.
      These substructures suggest that the local DM halo is not in equilibrium and will de-
viate from SHM [48]. In particular, the kinematics and distribution of Gaia-Sausage stars
are best matched by the disruption of a system on a radial orbit, resulting in a strongly
radially anisotropic velocity distribution of stars in the solar neighborhood, which may have
implications for directional direct-detection experiments [14]. The Gaia-Sausage and other
debris-flow material may contribute at the ∼ 10% level to the Solar Neighborhood DM den-
sity, but the velocity distribution of stars associated with the Gaia-Sausage populate speeds
of vmin <500 km/s [13, 14, 40], much lower than the expected LMC debris flow.




                                            – 19 –
      The highest energy stars in the halo are typically retrograde [42, 105–107], suggesting
these stars were accreted through past mergers [108–111]. The S1 Stream is also a retrograde
structure and Ref. [41] suggest a common link with a single dwarf galaxy progenitor, Sequoia,
which was potentially accreted ∼9 Gyr ago, bringing ∼1010 M worth of DM. The retrograde
S1 stream is estimated to be significant at speeds of 450-650 km/s with respect to the Earth
[47, 49], causing an excess for recoil energies at vmin ∼ 550 km/s.
      While the kinematics associated with all of the listed substructures are expected to cause
deviations in the local debris flow from a Maxwellian distribution, none of these structures
impact the velocity distribution at Earth-frame-speeds as high as those expected for the LMC
debris flow (>700 km/s). In fact, the DM distribution inferred from SDSS-Gaia DR2 suggests
that there are far fewer high-speed particles than expected from the SHM [48]. The LMC is
thus expected to be the most significant contributor to the high-speed local DM debris flow.
      The inferences about Solar Neighborhood DM substructure based on the kinematic sub-
structure in stellar halo stars depends on the assumption that stars trace the kinematic
structure of DM. Indeed, Ref. [14] and others argue that the Solar Neighborhood DM can
be modeled with the SHM with the addition of DM associated with stellar substructures.
Ref. [13] suggest that the strongest correlation between stars and DM exists for the relaxed
component of the halo and the debris flow. However, relating the stellar and DM components
of unmixed and dissolving substructures is less straightforward [112]. DM halos are vastly
more extended than the stellar component of satellite galaxies, and typically at least 90% of
dark matter must be tidally stripped before the stars are touched [113]. Thus, in detail, some
of the inferences of DM kinematic substructure in the Solar Neighborhood may change as we
understand the relative kinematics of stars and DM in disrupting massive satellites [48, 112].
      Significantly, relying on stars to trace DM in the Solar Neighborhood misses any DM
component arising from satellites whose stellar component is intact, like the LMC’s. The
LMC contribution to the local DM debris flow will not have a stellar counterpart – LMC DM
particles are from the outskirts of its halo (∼ 50 kpc from the center of the LMC). Furthermore,
no simulated MW stellar disk particles in the Solar Neighborhood reach geocentric speeds in
excess of 750 km/s at the present day. This is because the kinematics of MW stellar disk
particles in the Solar Neighborhood are not affected by the resonances that impact the DM
halo, such as the Collective Response (G19). Note, however, that the outer stellar disk of the
MW (>15 kpc) is impacted by the LMC, inducing a pronounced warp [62]. Similarly, we do
not expect the LMC to dramatically alter the local kinematics of a “dark disk” of DM that is
kinematically similar to the stellar disk (whether it be of accretion origin [114] or a result of
strong dissipation in the hidden sector [115]).
      Thus, the kinematic structure in the Solar Neighborhood arising from the LMC is unique
– it cannot be traced by stars, and its super-escape-velocity average speed is much higher than
any other known component of the Solar Neighborhood.


7   Conclusions

A positive detection of DM interactions in a laboratory is the holy grail of particle physicists.
Of particular interest for the WIMP/CDM paradigm is a detection of Galactic DM as it passes
through underground laboratories. The next generation of multi-ton direct-detection experi-
ments will test conventional WIMP-nucleon interaction cross sections down to the irreducible
background of solar and atmospheric neutrinos [116].




                                             – 20 –
      In this study, we utilize a suite of controlled simulations of the recent infall of a massive
(1 − 2.5 × 1011 M ) LMC into the MW’s DM halo to study the resulting velocity distribution
of DM particles in the Solar Neighborhood [57]. These simulations account for three effects
simultaneously: 1) the MW’s disk potential; 2) the DM halo velocity anisotropy profile; and,
for the first time, 3) the presence of a massive LMC on first infall [54, 117].
      We find that the high-speed tail of the local DM distribution is overwhelmingly of LMC
origin – both as particles that were once bound to the LMC and MW halo particles that
have been accelerated owing to halo resonances induced by the motion of the LMC [57]. The
general trends we report below require that the LMC mass at infall is at least 1011 M , as
expected from CDM cosmology. Although, we note that changing the LMC’s DM halo profile
from the Hernquist profile adopted here to the more extended NFW profile may allow for
more LMC particles in the Solar Neighborhood even in lower mass LMC models.

   • The LMC both directly contributes particles and also accelerates local MW DM halo
     particles to high speeds, reaching velocities > 700 km/s, with respect to the Earth.
     These are significantly higher speeds than traditionally assumed in the SHM.
   • The velocity vector of these high-speed particles reflect the direction of motion of the
     LMC at closest approach, which is roughly coincident with the reflex motion of the
     Sun. The spatial distribution of high speed particle trajectories is distinct from that
     of the SHM model or other substructures, such as those seen in Gaia [14]. It is more
     concentrated and skewed towards the South.
   • The LMC is found to increase the the time-averaged inverse speed, g(vmin ), resulting
     in an expected increase in the event rate at speeds > 700 km/s by factors of a few or
     more.
   • The LMC causes the limits on the spin-independent DM-nucleon scattering cross sec-
     tion, σpSI , to be significantly lower for low mass WIMPS than expected when the LMC
     is neglected (e.g. SHM Model). The effect will be even more dramatic for inelastic dark
     matter models [31, 118], or for models of elastic scattering with other types of potentials
     [119, 120].
   • The LMC accelerates MW DM particles to higher speeds if the initial velocity anisotropy
     profile of the MW is radially biased (Model 2 vs. Model 1). This is in agreement with
     the augmentation of the MW’s halo response to the LMC’s orbit seen in G19 using
     cosmologically motivated, radially biased halo models.

      The LMC extends the high velocity tail of the local DM distribution to higher speeds
than previously considered in SHM or un-phase-mixed models (Sagittarius or Gaia substruc-
tures) owing to the fact that the LMC is on first infall (high energy orbit) with a trajectory
that is primarily in the same direction as the reflex motion of the Sun. Significantly, the LMC
contribution to the local DM debris flow will not have a stellar counterpart. The LMC thus
uniquely impacts the prospects of detecting low mass WIMPS (<10 GeV/c2 ) in current and
future direct-detection experiments.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Nassim Bozorgnia, Mariangela Lisanti, Lina Necib, David Spergel
and Louis Strigari for helpful comments that have improved this manuscript. This work is




                                              – 21 –
supported by a NASA ATP grant 17-ATP17-0006 to GB, and by NSF Grant No. AST-
1615838 to AHGP.

References
  [1] Planck collaboration, P. A. R. Ade et al., Planck 2015 results. XIII. Cosmological
      parameters, Astron. Astrophys. 594 (2016) A13, [1502.01589].
  [2] DES collaboration, T. M. C. Abbott et al., Dark Energy Survey Year 1 Results: Cosmological
      Constraints from Galaxy Clustering and Weak Lensing, 1708.01530.
  [3] DES collaboration, M. A. Troxel et al., Dark Energy Survey Year 1 Results: Cosmological
      Constraints from Cosmic Shear, 1708.01538.
  [4] G. Steigman and M. S. Turner, Cosmological Constraints on the Properties of Weakly
      Interacting Massive Particles, Nucl. Phys. B253 (1985) 375–386.
  [5] M. R. Buckley and A. H. G. Peter, Gravitational probes of dark matter physics, Phys. Rept.
      761 (2018) 1–60, [1712.06615].
  [6] R. D. Peccei and H. R. Quinn, CP Conservation in the Presence of Instantons, Phys. Rev.
      Lett. 38 (1977) 1440–1443.
  [7] P. Sikivie, Experimental Tests of the Invisible Axion, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51 (1983) 1415–1417.
  [8] M. W. Goodman and E. Witten, Detectability of Certain Dark Matter Candidates, Phys. Rev.
      D31 (1985) 3059.
  [9] A. K. Drukier, K. Freese and D. N. Spergel, Detecting Cold Dark Matter Candidates, Phys.
      Rev. D33 (1986) 3495–3508.
 [10] I. Wasserman, Possibility of Detecting Heavy Neutral Fermions in the Galaxy, Phys. Rev. D33
      (1986) 2071–2078.
 [11] K. Van Bibber, N. R. Dagdeviren, S. E. Koonin, A. Kerman and H. N. Nelson, Proposed
      experiment to produce and detect light pseudoscalars, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59 (1987) 759–762.
 [12] M. Pato, F. Iocco and G. Bertone, Dynamical constraints on the dark matter distribution in
      the Milky Way, JCAP 1512 (2015) 001, [1504.06324].
 [13] L. Necib, M. Lisanti, S. Garrison-Kimmel, A. Wetzel, R. Sanderson, P. F. Hopkins et al.,
      Under the Firelight: Stellar Tracers of the Local Dark Matter Velocity Distribution in the
      Milky Way, 1810.12301.
 [14] N. W. Evans, C. A. J. O’Hare and C. McCabe, Refinement of the standard halo model for
      dark matter searches in light of the Gaia Sausage, Phys. Rev. D. 99 (Jan, 2019) 023012.
 [15] A. H. G. Peter, V. Gluscevic, A. M. Green, B. J. Kavanagh and S. K. Lee, WIMP physics with
      ensembles of direct-detection experiments, Phys. Dark Univ. 5-6 (2014) 45–74, [1310.7039].
 [16] C. A. J. O’Hare, Terrestrial WIMP/Axion astronomy, in 13th Patras Workshop on Axions,
      WIMPs and WISPs (AXION-WIMP 2017) CHALKIDIKI TBC, GREECE, May 15-19, 2017,
      2017. 1710.10923.
 [17] M. Blennow, J. Herrero-Garcia and T. Schwetz, A halo-independent lower bound on the dark
      matter capture rate in the Sun from a direct detection signal, JCAP 1505 (2015) 036,
      [1502.03342].
 [18] F. Ferrer, A. Ibarra and S. Wild, A novel approach to derive halo-independent limits on dark
      matter properties, JCAP 1509 (2015) 052, [1506.03386].
 [19] A. M. Green, Effect of halo modeling on weakly interacting massive particle exclusion limits,
      Phys. Rev. D. 66 (Oct., 2002) 083003, [astro-ph/0207366].




                                              – 22 –
[20] A. H. G. Peter, Dark matter in the solar system I: The distribution function of WIMPs at the
     Earth from solar capture, Phys. Rev. D79 (2009) 103531, [0902.1344].
[21] R. Catena and P. Ullio, The local dark matter phase-space density and impact on WIMP
     direct detection, Journal of Cosmology and Astro-Particle Physics 2012 (May, 2012) 005,
     [1111.3556].
[22] L. E. Strigari, Galactic Searches for Dark Matter, Phys. Rept. 531 (2013) 1–88, [1211.7090].
[23] J. I. Read, The Local Dark Matter Density, J. Phys. G41 (2014) 063101, [1404.1938].
[24] J. D. Lewin and P. F. Smith, Review of mathematics, numerical factors, and corrections for
     dark matter experiments based on elastic nuclear recoil, Astropart. Phys. 6 (1996) 87–112.
[25] A. M. Green, Astrophysical uncertainties on the local dark matter distribution and direct
     detection experiments, J. Phys. G44 (2017) 084001, [1703.10102].
[26] M. Lisanti and D. N. Spergel, Dark Matter Debris Flows in the Milky Way, Phys. Dark Univ.
     1 (2012) 155–161, [1105.4166].
[27] J. D. Sloane, M. R. Buckley, A. M. Brooks and F. Governato, Assessing Astrophysical
     Uncertainties in Direct Detection with Galaxy Simulations, Astrophysical Journal 831 (Nov.,
     2016) 93, [1601.05402].
[28] N. Bozorgnia, F. Calore, M. Schaller, M. Lovell, G. Bertone, C. S. Frenk et al., Simulated
     Milky Way analogues: implications for dark matter direct searches, JCAP 1605 (2016) 024,
     [1601.04707].
[29] Y.-Y. Mao, L. E. Strigari and R. H. Wechsler, Connecting direct dark matter detection
     experiments to cosmologically motivated halo models, Phys. Rev. D. 89 (Mar, 2014) 063513,
     [1304.6401].
[30] M. Vogelsberger, A. Helmi, V. Springel, S. D. M. White, J. Wang, C. S. Frenk et al.,
     Phase-space structure in the local dark matter distribution and its signature in direct detection
     experiments, MNRAS 395 (May, 2009) 797–811, [0812.0362].
[31] M. Kuhlen, N. Weiner, J. Diemand, P. Madau, B. Moore, D. Potter et al., Dark matter direct
     detection with non-Maxwellian velocity structure, JCAP 2 (Feb., 2010) 030, [0912.2358].
[32] C. Kelso, C. Savage, M. Valluri, K. Freese, G. S. Stinson and J. Bailin, The impact of baryons
     on the direct detection of dark matter, JCAP 1608 (2016) 071, [1601.04725].
[33] M. Kuhlen, A. Pillepich, J. Guedes and P. Madau, The Distribution of Dark Matter in the
     Milky Way’s Disk, Astrophys. J. 784 (2014) 161, [1308.1703].
[34] P. F. de Salas, K. Malhan, K. Freese, K. Hattori and M. Valluri, On the estimation of the
     Local Dark Matter Density using the rotation curve of the Milky Way, arXiv e-prints (Jun,
     2019) arXiv:1906.06133, [1906.06133].
[35] Y.-Y. Mao, L. E. Strigari, R. H. Wechsler, H.-Y. Wu and O. Hahn, Halo-to-halo Similarity
     and Scatter in the Velocity Distribution of Dark Matter, ApJ 764 (Feb, 2013) 35, [1210.2721].
[36] D. Lynden-Bell and R. M. Lynden-Bell, Ghostly streams from the formation of the Galaxy’s
     halo, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 275 (1995) 429–442.
[37] SDSS collaboration, H. J. Newberg et al., The Ghost of Sagittarius and Lumps in the Halo of
     the Milky Way, Astrophys. J. 569 (2002) 245–274, [astro-ph/0111095].
[38] A. Helmi, C. Babusiaux, H. H. Koppelman, D. Massari, J. Veljanoski and A. G. A. Brown,
     The merger that led to the formation of the Milky Way’s inner stellar halo and thick disk, Nat
     563 (Nov, 2018) 85–88, [1806.06038].
[39] J. M. D. Kruijssen, J. L. Pfeffer, M. Reina-Campos, R. A. Crain and N. Bastian, The
     formation and assembly history of the Milky Way revealed by its globular cluster population,
     MNRAS 486 (Jul, 2019) 3180–3202, [1806.05680].




                                              – 23 –
[40] V. Belokurov, D. Erkal, N. W. Evans, S. E. Koposov and A. J. Deason, Co-formation of the
     disc and the stellar halo, MNRAS 478 (Jul, 2018) 611–619, [1802.03414].
[41] G. C. Myeong, E. Vasiliev, G. Iorio, N. W. Evans and V. Belokurov, Evidence for Two Early
     Accretion Events That Built the Milky Way Stellar Halo, MNRAS (Jul, 2019) 1731,
     [1904.03185].
[42] G. C. Myeong, N. W. Evans, V. Belokurov, N. C. Amorisco and S. E. Koposov, Halo
     substructure in the SDSS-Gaia catalogue: streams and clumps, MNRAS 475 (Apr, 2018)
     1537–1548, [1712.04071].
[43] L. Necib, B. Ostdiek, M. Lisanti, T. Cohen, M. Freytsis, S. Garrison-Kimmel et al., Evidence
     for a Vast Prograde Stellar Stream in the Solar Vicinity, arXiv e-prints (Jul, 2019)
     arXiv:1907.07190, [1907.07190].
[44] K. Freese, P. Gondolo, H. J. Newberg and M. Lewis, The effects of the Sagittarius dwarf tidal
     stream on dark matter detectors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 (2004) 111301, [astro-ph/0310334].
[45] K. Freese, P. Gondolo and H. J. Newberg, Detectability of weakly interacting massive particles
     in the Sagittarius dwarf tidal stream, Phys. Rev. D71 (2005) 043516, [astro-ph/0309279].
[46] C. W. Purcell, A. R. Zentner and M.-Y. Wang, Dark Matter Direct Search Rates in
     Simulations of the Milky Way and Sagittarius Stream, JCAP 1208 (2012) 027, [1203.6617].
[47] C. A. J. O’Hare, C. McCabe, N. W. Evans, G. Myeong and V. Belokurov, Dark matter
     hurricane: Measuring the S1 stream with dark matter detectors, Phys. Rev. D98 (2018)
     103006, [1807.09004].
[48] L. Necib, M. Lisanti and V. Belokurov, Inferred Evidence for Dark Matter Kinematic
     Substructure with SDSS-Gaia, ApJ 874 (Mar, 2019) 3.
[49] M. R. Buckley, G. Mohlabeng and C. W. Murphy, Direct Detection Anomalies in light of
     Gaia Data, arXiv e-prints (May, 2019) arXiv:1905.05189, [1905.05189].
[50] D. Stiff, L. M. Widrow and J. Frieman, Signatures of hierarchical clustering in dark matter
     detection experiments, Phys. Rev. D. 64 (Oct, 2001) 083516, [astro-ph/0106048].
[51] A. Helmi, S. D. White and V. Springel, The phase-space structure of a dark-matter halo:
     Implications for dark-matter direct detection experiments, Phys. Rev. D. 66 (Sep, 2002)
     063502, [astro-ph/0201289].
[52] M. Kamionkowski and S. M. Koushiappas, Galactic substructure and direct detection of dark
     matter, Phys. Rev. D. 77 (May, 2008) 103509, [0801.3269].
[53] M. Kuhlen, M. Lisanti and D. N. Spergel, Direct detection of dark matter debris flows, Phys.
     Rev. D 86 (Sept., 2012) 063505, [1202.0007].
[54] G. Besla, N. Kallivayalil, L. Hernquist, B. Robertson, T. J. Cox, R. P. van der Marel et al.,
     Are the Magellanic Clouds on Their First Passage about the Milky Way?, Astrophysical
     Journal 668 (Oct., 2007) 949–967, [astro-ph/0703196].
[55] M. Boylan-Kolchin, G. Besla and L. Hernquist, Dynamics of the Magellanic Clouds in a
     Lambda cold dark matter universe, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 414 (June, 2011) 1560–1572,
     [1010.4797].
[56] E. Patel, G. Besla and S. T. Sohn, Orbits of massive satellite galaxies - I. A close look at the
     Large Magellanic Cloud and a new orbital history for M33, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 464
     (Feb., 2017) 3825–3849, [1609.04823].
[57] N. Garavito-Camargo, G. Besla, C. F. P. Laporte, K. V. Johnston, F. A. Gómez and L. L.
     Watkins, Hunting for the Dark Matter Wake Induced by the Large Magellanic Cloud, arXiv
     e-prints (Feb, 2019) arXiv:1902.05089, [1902.05089].




                                              – 24 –
[58] N. Kallivayalil, R. P. van der Marel, G. Besla, J. Anderson and C. Alcock, Third-epoch
     Magellanic Cloud Proper Motions. I. Hubble Space Telescope/WFC3 Data and Orbit
     Implications, Astrophysical Journal 764 (Feb., 2013) 161, [1301.0832].
[59] M. T. Busha, P. J. Marshall, R. H. Wechsler, A. Klypin and J. Primack, The Mass
     Distribution and Assembly of the Milky Way from the Properties of the Magellanic Clouds,
     The Astrophysical Journal 743 (Dec., 2011) 40, [1011.2203].
[60] R. P. van der Marel, N. Kallivayalil and G. Besla, Kinematical structure of the Magellanic
     System, in The Magellanic System: Stars, Gas, and Galaxies (J. T. Van Loon and J. M.
     Oliveira, eds.), vol. 256 of IAU Symposium, pp. 81–92, Mar., 2009. 0809.4268. DOI.
[61] B. P. Moster, T. Naab and S. D. M. White, Galactic star formation and accretion histories
     from matching galaxies to dark matter haloes, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 428 (Feb., 2013)
     3121–3138, [1205.5807].
[62] C. F. P. Laporte, F. A. Gómez, G. Besla, K. V. Johnston and N. Garavito-Camargo, Response
     of the Milky Way’s disc to the Large Magellanic Cloud in a first infall scenario, Mon. Not.
     Roy. Astron. Soc. 473 (Jan., 2018) 1218–1230.
[63] J. Peñarrubia, F. A. Gómez, G. Besla, D. Erkal and Y.-Z. Ma, A timing constraint on the
     (total) mass of the Large Magellanic Cloud, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 456 (Feb., 2016)
     L54–L58, [1507.03594].
[64] D. Erkal, V. Belokurov, C. F. P. Laporte, S. E. Koposov, T. S. Li, C. J. Grillmair et al., The
     total mass of the Large Magellanic Cloud from its perturbation on the Orphan stream,
     MNRAS 487 (Aug, 2019) 2685–2700, [1812.08192].
[65] N. Shipp, T. S. Li, A. B. Pace, D. Erkal, A. Drlica-Wagner, B. Yanny et al., Proper Motions
     of Stellar Streams Discovered in the Dark Energy Survey, arXiv e-prints (Jul, 2019)
     arXiv:1907.09488, [1907.09488].
[66] A. D. Mackey, S. E. Koposov, D. Erkal, V. Belokurov, G. S. Da Costa and F. A. Gómez, A 10
     kpc stellar substructure at the edge of the Large Magellanic Cloud: perturbed outer disc or
     evidence for tidal stripping?, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 459 (June, 2016) 239–255,
     [1508.01356].
[67] G. Besla, D. Martínez-Delgado, R. P. van der Marel, Y. Beletsky, M. Seibert, E. F. Schlafly
     et al., Low Surface Brightness Imaging of the Magellanic System: Imprints of Tidal
     Interactions between the Clouds in the Stellar Periphery, ApJ 825 (Jul, 2016) 20,
     [1602.04222].
[68] S. Shao, M. Cautun, A. J. Deason and C. S. Frenk, Evolution of LMC-mass dwarf galaxies in
     the EAGLE simulation, ArXiv e-prints (Mar., 2018) , [1803.07269].
[69] G. Besla, D. R. Patton, S. Stierwalt, V. Rodriguez-Gomez, E. Patel, N. J. Kallivayalil et al.,
     The frequency of dwarf galaxy multiples at low redshift in SDSS versus cosmological
     expectations, MNRAS 480 (Nov., 2018) 3376–3396.
[70] G. Besla, The Orbits of the Magellanic Clouds, p. 311. 2015. 10.1007/978-3-319-10614-4-26.
[71] V. Springel, The cosmological simulation code GADGET-2, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 364
     (Dec., 2005) 1105–1134, [astro-ph/0505010].
[72] D. Yurin and V. Springel, An iterative method for the construction of N-body galaxy models in
     collisionless equilibrium, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 444 (Oct., 2014) 62–79, [1402.1623].
[73] L. Hernquist, An analytical model for spherical galaxies and bulges, ApJ 356 (June, 1990)
     359–364.
[74] B. F. Griffen, A. P. Ji, G. A. Dooley, F. A. Gómez, M. Vogelsberger, B. W. O’Shea et al., The
     Caterpillar Project: A Large Suite of Milky Way Sized Halos, ApJ 818 (Feb, 2016) 10,
     [1509.01255].




                                              – 25 –
[75] S. Garrison-Kimmel, M. Boylan-Kolchin, J. S. Bullock and K. Lee, ELVIS: Exploring the
     Local Volume in Simulations, MNRAS 438 (Mar, 2014) 2578–2596, [1310.6746].
[76] A. R. Wetzel, P. F. Hopkins, J.-h. Kim, C.-A. Faucher-Giguère, D. Kereš and E. Quataert,
     Reconciling Dwarf Galaxies with ΛCDM Cosmology: Simulating a Realistic Population of
     Satellites around a Milky Way-mass Galaxy, ApJL 827 (Aug, 2016) L23, [1602.05957].
[77] T. Sawala, C. S. Frenk, A. Fattahi, J. F. Navarro, R. G. Bower, R. A. Crain et al., The
     APOSTLE simulations: solutions to the Local Group’s cosmic puzzles, MNRAS 457 (Apr,
     2016) 1931–1943, [1511.01098].
[78] P. J. McMillan, Mass models of the Milky Way, MNRAS 414 (July, 2011) 2446–2457,
     [1102.4340].
[79] P. J. McMillan, The mass distribution and gravitational potential of the Milky Way, MNRAS
     465 (Feb, 2017) 76–94, [1608.00971].
[80] J. Herzog-Arbeitman, M. Lisanti, P. Madau and L. Necib, Empirical Determination of Dark
     Matter Velocities Using Metal-Poor Stars, Physical Review Letters 120 (Jan., 2018) 041102,
     [1704.04499].
[81] J. Binney and S. Tremaine, Galactic Dynamics: Second Edition. 2008.
[82] S. H. Hansen and B. Moore, A universal density slope Velocity anisotropy relation for relaxed
     structures, New Astronomy 11 (Mar., 2006) 333–338, [astro-ph/0411473].
[83] M. G. Abadi, J. F. Navarro and M. Steinmetz, Stars beyond galaxies: the origin of extended
     luminous haloes around galaxies, MNRAS 365 (Jan., 2006) 747–758, [astro-ph/0506659].
[84] A. M. Green, Interpreting data from WIMP direct detection experiments, arXiv High Energy
     Physics - Phenomenology e-prints (Aug., 2002) , [hep-ph/0208140].
[85] T. Piffl, C. Scannapieco, J. Binney, M. Steinmetz, R. D. Scholz, M. E. K. Williams et al., The
     RAVE survey: the Galactic escape speed and the mass of the Milky Way, AAP 562 (Feb,
     2014) A91, [1309.4293].
[86] A. H. G. Peter, Particle dark matter in the solar system. PhD thesis, Princeton University,
     Jan, 2008.
[87] S. Kazantzidis, J. Magorrian and B. Moore, Generating Equilibrium Dark Matter Halos:
     Inadequacies of the Local Maxwellian Approximation, ApJ 601 (Jan, 2004) 37–46,
     [astro-ph/0309517].
[88] F. A. Gómez, G. Besla, D. D. Carpintero, Á. Villalobos, B. W. O’Shea and E. F. Bell, And
     Yet it Moves: The Dangers of Artificially Fixing the Milky Way Center of Mass in the
     Presence of a Massive Large Magellanic Cloud, ApJ 802 (Apr, 2015) 128, [1408.4128].
[89] R. Schönrich, J. Binney and W. Dehnen, Local kinematics and the local standard of rest,
     MNRAS 403 (Apr., 2010) 1829–1833, [0912.3693].
[90] K. Freese, M. Lisanti and C. Savage, Colloquium: Annual modulation of dark matter, Reviews
     of Modern Physics 85 (Oct., 2013) 1561–1581, [1209.3339].
[91] F. Mayet et al., A review of the discovery reach of directional Dark Matter detection, Phys.
     Rept. 627 (2016) 1–49, [1602.03781].
[92] J. Engel, Nuclear form-factors for the scattering of weakly interacting massive particles, Phys.
     Lett. B264 (1991) 114–119.
[93] E. Aprile, J. Aalbers, F. Agostini, M. Alfonsi, L. Althueser, F. D. Amaro et al., Dark Matter
     Search Results from a One Ton-Year Exposure of XENON1T, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121 (Sep,
     2018) 111302, [1805.12562].




                                              – 26 –
 [94] D. S. Akerib, C. W. Akerlof, S. K. Alsum, H. M. Araújo, M. Arthurs, X. Bai et al., Projected
      WIMP sensitivity of the LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ) dark matter experiment, arXiv e-prints (Feb,
      2018) arXiv:1802.06039, [1802.06039].
 [95] D. S. Akerib, H. M. Araújo, X. Bai, A. J. Bailey, J. Balajthy, P. Beltrame et al., Improved
      Limits on Scattering of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles from Reanalysis of 2013 LUX
      Data, Physical Review Letters 116 (Apr, 2016) 161301, [1512.03506].
 [96] C. Amole, M. Ardid, I. J. Arnquist, D. M. Asner, D. Baxter, E. Behnke et al., Dark matter
      search results from the complete exposure of the PICO-60 C3 F8 bubble chamber, Phys. Rev. D.
      100 (Jul, 2019) 022001, [1902.04031].
 [97] A. Aguilar-Arevalo, D. Amidei, X. Bertou, M. Butner, G. Cancelo, A. Castañeda Vázquez
      et al., Search for low-mass WIMPs in a 0.6 kg day exposure of the DAMIC experiment at
      SNOLAB, arXiv e-prints (Jul, 2016) arXiv:1607.07410, [1607.07410].
 [98] R. Agnese, A. J. Anderson, T. Aramaki, I. Arnquist, W. Baker, D. Barker et al., Projected
      sensitivity of the SuperCDMS SNOLAB experiment, Phys. Rev. D. 95 (Apr, 2017) 082002,
      [1610.00006].
 [99] CRESST Collaboration, A. H. Abdelhameed, G. Angloher, P. Bauer, A. Bento, E. Bertoldo
      et al., First results from the CRESST-III low-mass dark matter program, arXiv e-prints (Mar,
      2019) arXiv:1904.00498, [1904.00498].
[100] S. K. Lee, M. Lisanti, A. H. G. Peter and B. R. Safdi, Effect of Gravitational Focusing on
      Annual Modulation in Dark-Matter Direct-Detection Experiments, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 (Jan,
      2014) 011301, [1308.1953].
[101] R. Agnese, A. J. Anderson, T. Aralis, T. Aramaki, I. J. Arnquist, W. Baker et al., Low-mass
      dark matter search with CDMSlite, Physical Review D 97 (Jan, 2018) 022002.
[102] M. Salem, G. Besla, G. Bryan, M. Putman, R. P. van der Marel and S. Tonnesen, Ram
      Pressure Stripping of the Large Magellanic Cloud’s Disk as a Probe of the Milky Way’s
      Circumgalactic Medium, The Astrophysical Journal 815 (Dec, 2015) 77, [1507.07935].
[103] R. Ibata, M. Irwin, G. F. Lewis and A. Stolte, Galactic Halo Substructure in the Sloan Digital
      Sky Survey: The Ancient Tidal Stream from the Sagittarius Dwarf Galaxy, The Astrophysical
      Journal 547 (Feb, 2001) L133–L136, [astro-ph/0004255].
[104] S. R. Majewski, M. F. Skrutskie, M. D. Weinberg and J. C. Ostheimer, A Two Micron All
      Sky Survey View of the Sagittarius Dwarf Galaxy. I. Morphology of the Sagittarius Core and
      Tidal Arms, The Astrophysical Journal 599 (Dec, 2003) 1082–1115, [astro-ph/0304198].
[105] G. C. Myeong, N. W. Evans, V. Belokurov, J. L. Sand ers and S. E. Koposov, Discovery of
      new retrograde substructures: the shards of ω Centauri?, Monthly Notices of the Royal
      Astronomical Society 478 (Aug, 2018) 5449–5459.
[106] G. C. Myeong, N. W. Evans, V. Belokurov, J. L. Sand ers and S. E. Koposov, The Milky Way
      Halo in Action Space, The Astrophysical Journal 856 (Apr, 2018) L26, [1802.03351].
[107] A. Helmi, J. Veljanoski, M. A. Breddels, H. Tian and L. V. Sales, A box full of chocolates:
      The rich structure of the nearby stellar halo revealed by Gaia and RAVE, Astronomy and
      Astrophysics 598 (Feb, 2017) A58, [1611.00222].
[108] P. J. Quinn and J. Goodman, Sinking Satellites of Spiral Systems, The Astrophysical Journal
      309 (Oct, 1986) 472.
[109] J. E. Norris and S. G. Ryan, Population Studies: Evidence for Accretion of the Galactic Halo,
      The Astrophysical Journal 336 (Jan, 1989) L17.
[110] D. Carollo, T. C. Beers, Y. S. Lee, M. Chiba, J. E. Norris, R. Wilhelm et al., Two stellar
      components in the halo of the Milky Way, Nature 450 (Dec, 2007) 1020–1025, [0706.3005].




                                              – 27 –
[111] T. C. Beers, D. Carollo, Ž. Ivezić, D. An, M. Chiba, J. E. Norris et al., The Case for the Dual
      Halo of the Milky Way, The Astrophysical Journal 746 (Feb, 2012) 34, [1104.2513].
[112] N. Bozorgnia, A. Fattahi, D. G. Cerdeño, C. S. Frenk, F. A. Gómez, R. J. J. Grand et al., On
      the correlation between the local dark matter and stellar velocities, JCAP 2019 (Jun, 2019)
      045, [1811.11763].
[113] J. Peñarrubia, J. F. Navarro and A. W. McConnachie, The Tidal Evolution of Local Group
      Dwarf Spheroidals, ApJ 673 (Jan, 2008) 226–240, [0708.3087].
[114] J. I. Read, G. Lake, O. Agertz and V. P. Debattista, Thin, thick and dark discs in LCDM,
      Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 389 (2008) 1041–1057, [0803.2714].
[115] J. Fan, A. Katz, L. Randall and M. Reece, Double-Disk Dark Matter, Physics of the Dark
      Universe 2 (Sep, 2013) 139–156, [1303.1521].
[116] P. Cushman, C. Galbiati, D. N. McKinsey, H. Robertson, T. M. P. Tait, D. Bauer et al.,
      Snowmass CF1 Summary: WIMP Dark Matter Direct Detection, ArXiv e-prints (Oct., 2013)
      , [1310.8327].
[117] G. Besla, N. Kallivayalil, L. Hernquist, R. P. van der Marel, T. J. Cox and D. Kereš,
      Simulations of the Magellanic Stream in a First Infall Scenario, The Astrophysical Journal
      721 (Oct, 2010) L97–L101, [1008.2210].
[118] D. Smith and N. Weiner, Inelastic dark matter, Phys. Rev. D. 64 (Aug, 2001) 043502,
      [hep-ph/0101138].
[119] J. Fan, M. Reece and L.-T. Wang, Non-relativistic effective theory of dark matter direct
      detection, JCAP 2010 (Nov, 2010) 042, [1008.1591].
[120] A. L. Fitzpatrick, W. Haxton, E. Katz, N. Lubbers and Y. Xu, The effective field theory of
      dark matter direct detection, JCAP 2013 (Feb, 2013) 004, [1203.3542].




                                              – 28 –
