                                                                    Gapped Parent Hamiltonians for the Strongly Deformed Toric Code
                                                                     Gapped Parent Hamiltonians for the Strongly Deformed Toric Code
                                                                                            Nandagopal Manoj,→∗ Zack Weinstein, and Jason Alicea
                                                                                            Nandagopal
                                                                                       Department            Manoj,
                                                                                                       of Physics     and Zack     Weinstein,
                                                                                                                            Institute             and Jason
                                                                                                                                        for Quantum               Alicea and
                                                                                                                                                          Information
                                                                                     Matter, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,and
                                                                                        Department      of Physics     and   Institute  for  Quantum      Information        USA
                                                                                       Matter, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
                                                                                                                    (Dated: July 30, 2026)
                                                                                                                    (Dated: August 3, 2026)
                                                                        Local non-unitary deformations of topologically ordered wavefunctions can drive transitions into
                                                                          Local non-unitary deformations of topologically ordered wavefunctions can drive transitions into
                                                                    peculiar states that challenge modern perspectives on gapped quantum matter. The strongly de-
                                                                      peculiar states that challenge modern perspectives on gapped quantum matter. The strongly de-
                                                                    formed toric code o!ers a curious case, hosting m anyon condensation alongside perimeter-law scaling
                                                                      formed toric code offers a curious case, hosting m anyon condensation alongside perimeter-law scaling
                                                                    of Wilson loops charged under an exact 1-form symmetry—properties that typically do not coexist
                                                                      of Wilson loops charged under an exact 1-form symmetry—properties that typically do not coexist
                                                                    iningapped
                                                                          gappedground
                                                                                    groundstates.
                                                                                             states. Nevertheless,
                                                                                                      Nevertheless, we  we rigorously
                                                                                                                             rigorously construct      local gapped
                                                                                                                                          construct local     gapped parent
                                                                                                                                                                          parent Hamiltonians
                                                                                                                                                                                    Hamiltonians
                                                                    for
                                                                      forthese
                                                                           thesestrongly
                                                                                 stronglydeformed
                                                                                            deformedtoric
                                                                                                        toriccode
                                                                                                              code states.
                                                                                                                      states. The
                                                                                                                               The Hamiltonians
                                                                                                                                    Hamiltonians we   we construct
                                                                                                                                                          construct are  are not
                                                                                                                                                                             not strictly
                                                                                                                                                                                   strictlyfinite-
                                                                                                                                                                                             finite-
                                                                    range,    but  contain   sums   of  Wilson    loop    operators   whose    coe”cients      decay
                                                                      range, but contain sums of Wilson loop operators whose coefficients decay exponentially in their  exponentially     in   their
                                                                    diameter.     If one  adopts    standard    locality   bounds    used   to  define   gapped
                                                                      diameter. If one adopts standard locality bounds used to define gapped phases—which allow for phases—which         allow   for
                                                                    such
                                                                      suchexponentially
                                                                             exponentiallydecaying
                                                                                             decayingterms—our
                                                                                                         terms—our construction
                                                                                                                        construction shows
                                                                                                                                        shows that    these states
                                                                                                                                                that these    states realize
                                                                                                                                                                       realize aa trivial
                                                                                                                                                                                   trivialgapped
                                                                                                                                                                                           gapped
                                                                    phase.
                                                                      phase.Within
                                                                               Withinthisthislocality
                                                                                              localityclass,
                                                                                                        class, we
                                                                                                               we demonstrate
                                                                                                                     demonstrate thatthat perimeter-law        scaling of
                                                                                                                                           perimeter-law scaling         of Wilson
                                                                                                                                                                            Wilson loops
                                                                                                                                                                                       loops does
                                                                                                                                                                                               does
                                                                    not
                                                                      notimply
                                                                            implya aspontaneously
                                                                                      spontaneouslybroken
                                                                                                        broken 1-form
                                                                                                                 1-form symmetry,
                                                                                                                           symmetry, and and from
                                                                                                                                              from a a dual
                                                                                                                                                        dual perspective,
                                                                                                                                                               perspective, thatthat long-range
                                                                                                                                                                                       long-range
                                                                    ferromagnetic
                                                                      ferromagneticorderorderand
                                                                                               andperimeter-law
                                                                                                     perimeter-law disorder
                                                                                                                       disorder parameter
                                                                                                                                  parameter correlations
                                                                                                                                                correlations cancan coexist
                                                                                                                                                                      coexist inin aa 2D
                                                                                                                                                                                       2D gapped
                                                                                                                                                                                           gapped
                                                                    ground    state.  Our  results   evade  a recent    no-go   theorem    [Sahay   et  al., arXiv:2503.01977]
                                                                      ground state. We evade a recent no-go theorem [Sahay et al., arXiv:2503.01977] by relaxing its as-              by  relaxing
                                                                    itssumptions
                                                                         assumptionsin ain a manner
                                                                                         manner    thatthat  we argueasis benign
                                                                                                          we quantify         benign in
                                                                                                                                      in the
                                                                                                                                          the thermodynamic
                                                                                                                                              thermodynamic limit.  limit. More
                                                                                                                                                                             Morebroadly,
                                                                                                                                                                                     broadly,ourour
                                                                    results
                                                                      resultshighlight
                                                                               highlightthat
                                                                                          thatstronger
                                                                                                strongernotions
                                                                                                           notionsof of locality
                                                                                                                         locality are
                                                                                                                                  are necessary
                                                                                                                                       necessary for    prohibiting these
                                                                                                                                                   for prohibiting      these counterintuitive
                                                                                                                                                                                counterintuitive
arXiv:2607.28740v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 30 Jul 2026




                                                                    properties
                                                                      propertieswithin
                                                                                    withinaagapped
                                                                                              gappedphase.
                                                                                                        phase.

                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                       Ground
                                                         Groundstatesstatesofoflocal
                                                                                  localgapped
                                                                                         gappedHamiltonians
                                                                                                    Hamiltonianshave   have been
                                                                                                                             been       (a) Deformed toric code state: |ω(ε)→ = e(ω/2)                            e Ze   |TC→
                                                   rigorously
                                                     rigorouslyproven proventotoexhibit
                                                                                    exhibitexponentially
                                                                                               exponentially decaying
                                                                                                                   decaying cor-
                                                                                                                              cor-     H Gap
                                                                                                                                                     HCC (ε)                               H(ε) (this work)
                                                   relations
                                                     relations[1,[1,2].2].The
                                                                            Thenature
                                                                                   natureofofthetheconverse
                                                                                                     converserelationship—
                                                                                                                 relationship—
                                                                                                                                       Parent



                                                   the
                                                     thesu!cient
                                                             sufficientconditions
                                                                          conditionsfor   foraaquantum
                                                                                                  quantum statestate toto be
                                                                                                                           be the
                                                                                                                               the
                                                     gappedground
                                                   gapped         groundstatestateofofaalocal
                                                                                            localHamiltonian—remains
                                                                                                   Hamiltonian—remains aa                                                                                                       ε
                                                     fundamentalopen
                                                   fundamental           openproblem
                                                                                 problemoutside
                                                                                             outsideofofoneonespatial
                                                                                                                 spatial dimen-
                                                                                                                           dimen-               0     Topological          εc                  m-condensed
                                                                                                                                              !                        "                   !                  "
                                                     sion.    In  one   dimension,     the   identification
                                                   sion. In one dimension, the identification of matrix prod-   of matrix   prod-                    Z Z Z Z                                    Z Z Z Z
                                                                                                                                                                        ↑0                                        ↑ const
                                                     uct    states   as the   relevant    ‘corner   of Hilbert
                                                   uct states as the relevant ‘corner of Hilbert space’ enables   space’  enables                   m       m                                  m       m

                                                   anananalytical
                                                           analyticalclassification
                                                                         classificationofofgapped
                                                                                               gappedphases
                                                                                                         phases[3–7]
                                                                                                                   [3–7]and
                                                                                                                          and un-
                                                                                                                               un-              ↓XL → ↔ perimeter law                          ↓XL → ↔ perimeter law
                                                     derlies    powerful     variational     techniques    for
                                                   derlies powerful variational techniques for their numerical  their  numerical
                                                                                                                                        (b)             Av
                                                     study[8–12].
                                                   study       [8–12]. Attaining
                                                                           Attainingan    ananalogous
                                                                                               analogous understanding
                                                                                                             understanding in    in                            Z
                                                     two     (and    higher)    dimensions       potentially
                                                   two (and higher) dimensions potentially paves the way         paves   the  way                          Z       Z                                       X
                                                                                                                                                               Z                               Z   Z     X Bp X
                                                   forforsimilar
                                                            similarapplications.
                                                                      applications.
                                                                                                                                                           X       X       X               Z           Z   X
                                                         Deformedtoric
                                                       Deformed         toriccode
                                                                                codestates
                                                                                       states[see
                                                                                                [seeEq.
                                                                                                      Eq.(2)]
                                                                                                           (2)]provide
                                                                                                                  provide anan in-
                                                                                                                                in-                    X                       X                         Z    Z
                                                                                                                                                                                   X       Z            ZL̃           Z
                                                     terestingedge
                                                   teresting        edgecase
                                                                           casethat
                                                                                  thatsubtly
                                                                                         subtlychallenges
                                                                                                  challenges modern
                                                                                                                 modern meth-
                                                                                                                            meth-
                                                                                                                                                       X           XL                  X       Z   Z     Z        Z
                                                     odsofofclassifying
                                                   ods           classifyingphases.
                                                                                 phases. TheseThese states
                                                                                                       states arise
                                                                                                                 arise from
                                                                                                                        from de-
                                                                                                                               de-                         X       X       X       X
                                                     forming       toric  code     ground     states   by
                                                   forming toric code ground states by a non-unitary op-    a  non-unitary     op-
                                                     eratorthat thatcreates
                                                                        createsm-anyon
                                                                                   m-anyon pairs,pairs, driving
                                                                                                         driving aa quantum
                                                                                                                        quantum       FIG.
                                                                                                                                      FIG. 1. 1. (a)   Properties of
                                                                                                                                                   (a) Properties    of the
                                                                                                                                                                         the deformed
                                                                                                                                                                              deformed toric
                                                                                                                                                                                          toric code
                                                                                                                                                                                                 code state
                                                                                                                                                                                                          state
                                                   erator                                                                             |ω(ε)→.
                                                     phase      transition      out   of   the   topological     phase    beyond      |ψ(β)⟩. For    ε beyond
                                                                                                                                                 For β  beyond aa critical
                                                                                                                                                                   critical deformation
                                                                                                                                                                             deformation strength
                                                                                                                                                                                            strengthβεc ,c ,mm
                                                   phase transition out of the topological phase beyond                               anyons
                                                     a    critical   deformation        strength     [13].    In   the  resulting     anyons condense     and destroy
                                                                                                                                                condense and   destroy thethe topological
                                                                                                                                                                               topologicalorder,
                                                                                                                                                                                            order,yet
                                                                                                                                                                                                    yetWil-Wil-
                                                   a critical deformation strength [13]. In the resulting                             son  loops  continue  to exhibit   perimeter-law    scaling.
                                                                                                                                      son loops continue to exhibit perimeter-law scaling. The ver- The     ver-
                                                     strongly deformed phase, a peculiar combination of prop-
                                                   strongly     deformed phase, a peculiar combination of prop-                       tical
                                                                                                                                      tical axis
                                                                                                                                             axis on  the phase
                                                                                                                                                  on the  phase diagram
                                                                                                                                                                 diagram sketches
                                                                                                                                                                             sketches the
                                                                                                                                                                                       thespectral
                                                                                                                                                                                            spectralgap
                                                                                                                                                                                                      gapofof
                                                     erties emerges: (i) condensed m anyons; (ii) an exact                            two                               |ω(ε)→: the
                                                   erties emerges: (i) condensed m anyons; (ii) an exact                              two parent    Hamiltonians for
                                                                                                                                            parent Hamiltonians    for |ψ(β)⟩:    theCastelnovo-Chamon
                                                                                                                                                                                      Castelnovo-Chamon
                                                     ‘electric’ 1-form symmetry; and (iii) perimeter-law scal-                        Hamiltonian
                                                                                                                                      Hamiltonian H   HCC  [Eq. (6)]
                                                                                                                                                        CC [Eq. (6)] and
                                                                                                                                                                      and our
                                                                                                                                                                           our parent
                                                                                                                                                                                parentHamiltonian
                                                                                                                                                                                        HamiltonianH(β)  H(ε)
                                                   ‘electric’ 1-form symmetry; and (iii) perimeter-law scal-
                                                     ing of Wilson loops [14]. The final property is espe-                            [Eq.
                                                                                                                                      [Eq. (9)], proved to to be
                                                                                                                                                              be gapped
                                                                                                                                                                  gapped andand non-degenerate
                                                                                                                                                                                  non-degeneratefor  forsuf-suf-
                                                   ing of Wilson loops [14]. The final property is espe-
                                                     cially puzzling, given the first two: such a perimeter                           ficiently
                                                                                                                                      ficiently large β.
                                                                                                                                                       ε. (b)
                                                                                                                                                           (b) Toric-code
                                                                                                                                                                Toric-code stabilizers
                                                                                                                                                                              stabilizers AAvv and
                                                                                                                                                                                                andBBp p, ,the
                                                                                                                                                                                                             the
                                                   cially puzzling, given the first two: such a perimeter                             associated            symmetry ZZL̃L̃,, and
                                                                                                                                                                               and Wilson
                                                                                                                                                                                    Wilson loop
                                                                                                                                                                                              loop operator
                                                                                                                                                                                                    operator
                                                     law is typically interpreted as a signature of deconfined                        associated 1-form symmetry
                                                   law is typically interpreted as a signature of deconfined                          X
                                                                                                                                      XLL.
                                                     e anyons and a spontaneously broken 1-form symme-
                                                   e anyons and a spontaneously broken 1-form symme-
                                                     try [15, 16], both of which appear incompatible with a
                                                   try    [15, 16], both
                                                     conventional              of which gapped
                                                                         m-condensed         appear incompatible
                                                                                                        phase [17]. Based with on a
                                                   conventional        m-condensed          gapped     phase
                                                     this observation, Ref. 18 proved a rigorous no-go theorem [17].   Based   on        In
                                                                                                                                         In this    Letter, we
                                                                                                                                             this Letter,    we explicitly
                                                                                                                                                                explicitly construct
                                                                                                                                                                             construct local
                                                                                                                                                                                         local parent
                                                                                                                                                                                                parent
                                                   this    observation, Ref.
                                                     showing—subject            to 18  proved
                                                                                    several       a rigorous
                                                                                              technical         no-go theorem
                                                                                                           assumptions—that           Hamiltonians     for which the  strongly  deformed    toric
                                                                                                                                      Hamiltonians for which the strongly deformed toric code     code
                                                   showing—subject            to  several    technical   assumptions—that
                                                     the strongly deformed toric code states are intrinsically                        states  are  the unique  gapped    ground  states.  We
                                                                                                                                      states are the unique gapped ground states. We circum-   circum-
                                                   the    strongly
                                                     gapless;     thatdeformed
                                                                         is, they do toric
                                                                                         notcode
                                                                                              admitstates
                                                                                                       a localaregapped
                                                                                                                    intrinsically
                                                                                                                           parent     vent
                                                                                                                                      vent the
                                                                                                                                            the no-go   theorem of
                                                                                                                                                  no-go theorem  of Ref.
                                                                                                                                                                    Ref. 18
                                                                                                                                                                          18 by
                                                                                                                                                                             byrelaxing
                                                                                                                                                                                relaxingits
                                                                                                                                                                                          itsassump-
                                                                                                                                                                                              assump-
                                                   gapless;
                                                     Hamiltonianthat is,with
                                                                           theya do    notground-state
                                                                                   finite    admit a localdegeneracy.
                                                                                                                gapped parent         tions
                                                                                                                                      tions in
                                                                                                                                             in aa physically motivated way—such
                                                                                                                                                   physically motivated   way—suchthatthatthetheviola-
                                                                                                                                                                                                 viola-
                                                   Hamiltonian with a finite ground-state degeneracy.                                 tions to these assumptions vanish exponentially quickly
                                                                                                                            2

                                                                  contractible loop L̃ in the dual lattice, and thus differs
TABLE I. Corollaries of the parent Hamiltonian construc-
tion. Gapped ground state is in reference to an exponential-
                                                                  slightly from the deformed state considered in Ref. 18;
in-diameter-local Hamiltonian [cf. Eq. (15)].                     we address the latter as well in later sections.
                                                                     The norm of |ψ(β)⟩,
 1. Perimeter-law Wilson loops in a gapped ground state do                                       X
    not imply 1-form SSB.                                                         ⟨ψ(β)|ψ(β)⟩ ∝      e−2β|L| ,           (3)
 2. Long-range order parameter correlations and perimeter-                                         L
    law disorder correlations can coexist in a 2D gapped
    ground state.                                                 is proportional to the partition function of the two-
 3. Toric code under strong Pauli-Z decoherence is separa-        dimensional (2D) classical Ising model, where each L
    ble as a convex sum of trivial gapped ground states.          represents a configuration of magnetic domain walls [20].
 4. 2D classical Ising ferromagnet at low temperature is          This connection suggests that |ψ(β)⟩ exhibits a phase
    dual to a Z2 gauge theory with exponentially decaying         transition in the 2D classical Ising⋆ universality√ class
                                                                                                                          
    interactions at high temperature.                             at a critical deformation strength βc = 12 ln 1 + 2 ≈
                                                                  0.441. Within the strongly deformed phase β > βc ,
                                                                  |ψ(β)⟩ Q exhibits long-range order in the string operator
tions to these assumptions vanish exponentially quickly           ZP̃ = e∈P̃ Ze that creates m anyons at the endpoints
in the thermodynamic limit. Our parent Hamiltonians               of the dual-lattice path P̃ , indicating that m anyons are
naturally incorporate the perimeter law by containing             condensed [17]. The resulting state is topologically triv-
sums of Wilson loop operators with coefficients decay-            ial, as indicated by a vanishing topological entanglement
ing exponentially in their support; although the resulting        entropy [13, 21, 22].
Hamiltonians are not strictly finite-range, they neverthe-           In typical Hamiltonian deformations of HTC that
less satisfy standard locality bounds commonly used to            condense the m anyons while preserving the exact 1-
define and analyze gapped phases of matter [1, 2]. More           form symmetry [23, 24], the resulting ground states ex-
broadly, we demonstrate that within the standard defi-            hibit area-law scaling of Wilson loop expectation val-
nition of locality, perimeter-law decay of Wilson loops is        ues: ⟨XL ⟩ ∼ e−αArea(L) , for a large contractible loop
compatible with a trivial symmetric phase and is there-           L. In contrast, Ref. 14 emphasized that |ψ(β)⟩ exhibits
fore not a reliable probe of 1-form spontaneous symme-            perimeter-law scaling ⟨XL ⟩ ∼ e−µ|L| for any finite β, even
try breaking (SSB). Our construction yields a number of           within the strongly deformed phase. These authors in-
nontrivial corollaries, highlighted in Table I.                   terpreted the perimeter-law scaling of Wilson loops in
   Deformed toric code. Consider an Lx × Ly square                the β > βc phase as indicative of spontaneous 1-form
lattice with periodic boundary conditions, where each             symmetry-breaking without topological order, in appar-
edge e hosts a qubit equipped with Pauli operators                ent violation of the generalized Landau paradigm [16].
Xe , Ze . The code space of the toric code is the simul-          Subsequently, Ref. 18 suggested that the combination of
taneous
Q         +1 eigenspace of the vertex stabilizers  Q Av =         exact 1-form symmetry under ZL̃ , long-range order in
   e∋v Ze and the plaquette stabilizers Bp =        e∈p Xe        ⟨ZP̃ ⟩, and perimeter-law scaling in ⟨XL ⟩ cannot arise in
[see Fig. 1(b)]. In other words, it is the four-dimensional       the ground state of a gapped Hamiltonian with a finite
ground-state subspace of the Hamiltonian [19]                     degeneracy. Here we will offer an alternative perspective
                   X                    X                         on the state |ψ(β)⟩ by constructing, at large deformation
           HTC =          (1 − Av ) +       (1 − Bp ).      (1)   strengths β, an exact local parent Hamiltonian for which
                      v                 p                         |ψ(β)⟩ is the unique gapped ground state.
                                                                     Parent Hamiltonian constructions. Equation (2)
We will initially
          P       focus on the logical ‘++’
                                       Q toric code state         reveals two complementary perspectives on |ψ(β)⟩. At
|TC⟩ =       L XL |0⟩, where XL =        e∈L Xe is a prod-        small β, where the topological order persists, |ψ(β)⟩
uct over a collection of (possibly disconnected or non-           is most naturally viewed as a deformation of the HTC
contractible) closed loops L in the direct lattice, and |0⟩       ground state |TC⟩.        Conversely, large β massacres
is the simultaneous +1 eigenstate of each Ze . This state         the topological order and exponentially suppresses large
satisfies XL |TC⟩ = |TC⟩ for any loop L, and is therefore         loops in the representation on the right side of Eq. (2).
the +1 eigenstate of the two logical-X operators.                 There it is more natural to view |ψ(β)⟩ as a deforma-
   Given |TC⟩, the (unnormalized) deformed toric code             tion of the trivial product state |0⟩, which is the unique
state is defined by [13]                                          zero-energy ground state of
                   β P                  X                                                    X
       |ψ(β)⟩ = e 2   e Ze   |TC⟩ ∝         e−β|L| XL |0⟩   (2)                        H0 =      (1 − Ze ).                (4)
                                        L                                                    e

with |L| the number of edges in L. This state is sym-             We will show that these two viewpoints lead to distinct
metric under the 1-form symmetry ZL̃ [Fig. 1(b)] for any          parent Hamiltonians—adiabatically connected to HTC
                                                                                                                                     3

and H0 , respectively—that are local and gapped in their            Indeed, similar to the Castelnovo-Chamon Hamilto-
‘natural’ regimes.                                                  nian (6), H(β) sums Hermitian, positive-semidefinite
   Let us start with the former viewpoint and define man-           terms that individually annihilate |ψ(β)⟩.
ifestly Hermitian, positive-semidefinite operators Qp by               Contrary to the Castelnovo-Chamon Hamiltonian, lo-
the following deformation of the Bp projectors in Eq. (1):          cality of H(β) is not manifest but can be argued heuristi-
                   β P                         β P                  cally at large β as follows. In the extreme limit β → ∞,
         Qp = e− 2    e∈p Ze       (1 − Bp )e− 2     e∈p Ze
                                                                    each JL for non-empty loop configurations L vanishes,
                      P                                       (5)
              = e−β    e∈p Ze      − Bp .                           and H(β → ∞) reduces to the trivial local parent Hamil-
                                                                    tonian (4). More generally, each JL decays asymptoti-
Notice that the exponentials in the first line   contain
                                             β P                    cally in |L| as e−β|L| , exponentially suppressing large loop
only pieces of the non-unitary deformation e 2 e Ze from            contributions to We . Furthermore, as we carefully ex-
Eq. (2) that do not commute with a particular Bp . All of           plain below, the logarithm in Eq. (8) ensures that poten-
the operators (1 − Av ) and Qp clearly annihilate |ψ(β)⟩,           tially problematic nonlocal loop configurations consisting
which accordingly admits the finite-range, frustration-             of far-separated disconnected loops are effectively absent
free parent Hamiltonian                                             in W . This observation—which one can readily verify to
                        X              X
             HCC (β) =     (1 − Av ) +   Qp           (6)           low orders by Taylor expanding the logarithm—closely
                              v                  p                  relates to the linked-cluster theorem from diagrammatic
                                                                    perturbation theory [25], and crucially ensures extensiv-
for any β. One can readily show that HCC (β) is an
                                                                    ity of the “free energy” W for the disordered Ising model
exact parent Hamiltonian      for any toric code ground
                       β P                                          Z [26]. Consequently, it is natural to expect that each
state deformed by e 2 e Ze . Equation (6) is precisely              operator e−2We is locally supported near the edge e, and
the Castelnovo-Chamon Hamiltonian [13] and is indeed                can be organized as a sum of terms that decay exponen-
gapped for β < βc but, interestingly, gapless for β >               tially in their diameter about e in the large-β regime.
βc [18].
                                                                       Proving locality and spectral gap. We now outline
  Next we apply similar logic at large β, where |ψ(β)⟩
                                                                    a rigorous proof that, for sufficiently large β, our parent
appears ‘close’ to |0⟩. First note that the operator
         X                  X        P
                                                                    Hamiltonian H(β) is local in the sense of Refs. 1, 2, and
    Z=      e−β|L| XL ∝           eK ⟨vv′ ⟩ Xvv′ sv sv′ (7)         18 and consequently exhibits a finite spectral gap. Tech-
          L                   {sv =±1}                              nical details are deferred to the Supplemental Mate-
                                                                    rial [27]. Our approach uses the Mayer cluster expan-
acting on |0⟩ in Eq. (2) is positive-definite for all β > 0.        sion [28] to explicitly write Eq. (8) as a sum of exponen-
This observation follows from the right side of Eq. (7),            tially localized terms, bolstering the intuition developed
which identifies Z with the partition function of a bond-           above. Locality of H(β) arises directly from properties
disordered Ising model at inverse temperature K =                   of the cluster expansion, and the spectral gap at large β
artanh(e−β ) > 0. There, sv ’s represent auxiliary classical        then follows from the gap stability results of Refs. 29 and
spins on the vertices v of the lattice, and the Pauli oper-         30.
ators Xvv′ ≡ Xe on the links e connecting vertices v, v ′
                                                                       To this end, we interpret Z in Eq. (7) as the (operator-
encode signs of the Ising couplings. Positive-definiteness
                                                                    valued) partition function for a hard-core polymer model.
of Z guarantees that the operator
                                X                                   Each loop configuration L is first decomposed into a col-
                 W = log Z ≡        JL XL                (8)        lection of connected loops γ (‘polymers’), each carrying
                                       L                            the operator-valued weight w(γ) = e−β|γ| Xγ . Each pair
is well-defined and Hermitian. Furthermore, W com-                  of polymers γ, γ ′ is then assigned a hard-core interaction
mutes with each vertex stabilizer Av and hence can be               δ(γ, γ ′ ) = 0 if they intersect and 1 otherwise. With this
expanded as a sum over loop operators XL with real-                 notation, Eq. (7) can be rewritten as
valued coefficients JL , as shown above.                                                                                 
   At this point we have expressed |ψ(β)⟩ as the trivial                       X           Y             Y
                                                                         Z=                   w(γ)              δ(γ, γ ′ ) ,   (10)
state |0⟩ deformed by a non-unitary operator Z = eW ,
                                                                               Γ′ ⊆Γ   γ∈Γ′          {γ,γ ′ }⊆Γ′
where W is a sum of commuting operators—paralleling
the middle
       P representation in Eq. (2). Defining operators              where Γ denotes the set of all possible polymers γ, and
We = L∋e JL XL that contain only the components of
                                                                    Γ′ sums over all subsets of Γ. The hard-core interactions
W that anticommute with Ze , we analogously obtain our
                                                                    ensure that the contributing subsets Γ′ are in one-to-one
alternate frustration-free parent Hamiltonian for |ψ(β)⟩,
                      X                                             correspondence with the loop configurations L in Eq. (7).
             H(β) =        e−We (1 − Ze ) e−We                         The Mayer cluster expansion expresses the ‘polymer
                          e                                         free energy’ W as a sum over connected clusters C,
                       X                                     (9)
                   =              e−2We − Ze .                      each defined as a (possibly repeating) finite sequence of
                          e                                         polymers (γ1 , γ2 , . . . , γn ) whose union is connected [28].
                                                                                                                         4

Eq. (8) accordingly admits the more constrained form           up to corrections that vanish super-polynomially in sys-
                        X                                      tem size [34], where c1 is a constant and ∆0 = 2 is the
                   W =      f (C)XC ,              (11)        gap of H0 . Since J(β) decays exponentially with β, we
                             C                                 have shown that for sufficiently large β, our local parent
                                                               Hamiltonian H(β) admits the unique ground state |ψ(β)⟩
where XC=(γ1 ,...,γn ) ≡ Xγ1 Xγ2 . . . Xγn , and the coeffi-
                                                               with a finite spectral gap ∆(β) [35].
cients f (C) are defined precisely
                            P      in the End Matter. We
                                                                  Consistency with the no-go theorem. Let us de-
can then identify We =         C∈Se f (C)XC , where Se ≡       scribe the relationship between our construction and the
{C : support(XC ) ∋ e} defines the set of connected clus-
                                                               rigorous no-go theorem from Ref. 18. Thus far we have
ters for which XC anticommutes with Ze . Our par-
                                                               focused on the deformed logical ‘++’ state—Eq. (2)—
ent Hamiltonian then admits the useful representation
                                                               which we now denote more explicitly by |ψ++ (β)⟩. Our
H(β) = H0 + V (β), where
                                                               parent Hamiltonian H(β) for this state does not violate
                        "                  #    !              the no-go theorem, since |ψ++ (β)⟩ does not satisfy all of
              X              X
      V (β) =       exp −2        f (C)XC − 1 .        (12)    its assumptions: namely, the theorem requires an exact
               e              C∈Se                             1-form symmetry ZL̃ about both contractible and non-
                                                               contractible loops L̃ in the dual lattice. To meet these
   In the Supplemental Material [27], we derive several        assumptions, we should     instead consider the logical ‘00’
properties of the coefficients f (C) relevant for the local-                      P′
                                                               state |ψ00 (β)⟩ ∝ L e−β|L| XL |0⟩, where the prime in-
ity of H(β). We first show that the coefficients decay         dicates that the sum is performed over only contractible
exponentially with the sizeQof the constituent polymers        loops L.
defining C—i.e., |f (C)| ≲ γ∈C e−β|γ| . This fact alone
                                                                  Since non-contractible loops in |ψ++ (β)⟩ are expo-
does not suffice for locality, since each We sums over
                                                               nentially suppressed in the linear system size L ≡
combinatorially many connected clusters. To prove that
                                                               min(Lx , Ly ) throughout the strongly deformed phase
H(β) is bounded and local, we further derive the crucial
                                                               β > βc , the (normalized) fidelity between |ψ00 (β)⟩ and
inequality (see also Ref. 31 for a tighter bound)
                                                               |ψ++ (β)⟩ is lower-bounded by 1 − e−O(L) at large β.
                X                                              Consequently, these two states are indistinguishable from
                     |f (C)| ≤ const × e−4β             (13)
                                                               each other in the thermodynamic limit; in particular,
                   C∈Se
                                                               H(β) is an excellent approximate parent Hamiltonian for
which involves the sum of all f (C)’s contributing to a        |ψ00 (β)⟩, with a variational energy e−O(L) . Since phases
given We , and holds for β > β ∗ = 2 + log 3. These            of matter are strictly well-defined in the thermodynamic
bounds are proved using graph-theoretic techniques that        limit L → ∞, we should regard |ψ00 (β)⟩ as belonging to
are standard to the cluster expansion [28, 32, 33]; the        the same phase of matter as |ψ++ (β)⟩, namely, a trivial
nontrivial step involves bounding the ∼ n! growth in the       gapped phase. This observation is again consistent with
number of ways the same set of n polymers can form             the results of Ref. 18, which focuses on the existence of
a cluster. Equation (13), together with the exponential        exact parent Hamiltonians.
decay of f (C) in cluster size, ensures that H(β) is a sum        Nevertheless, by employing identical cluster expansion
of exponentially localized operators for sufficiently large    techniques as in the previous section, we can indeed con-
β, in harmony with the intuition developed earlier.            struct an exact 1-form symmetric parent Hamiltonian
   Finally, since H(β) in Eq. (9) is obtained from a           H (00) (β) for which |ψ00 (β)⟩ is the unique gapped ground
local perturbation V (β) to the trivial gapped Hamil-          state [27]. This Hamiltonian differs from Eq. (12) by
tonian H0 in Eq. (4), we can leverage the results of           terms of total spectral norm e−O(L) in the large-β regime,
Bravyi et al. [29, 30] to prove that H(β) is also gapped       and satisfies a locality criterion analogous to Eq. (14) for
for sufficiently large β. Explicitly, we first decompose       any fixed aspect ratio axy ≡ Lx /Ly . Once more, this re-
          P      P
V (β) =      r≥1   A∈S(r) Vr,A into a sum of local terms,
                                                               sult is consistent with the no-go theorem, which forbids
where S(r) is the set of all r × r squares A on the lattice,   the existence of a parent Hamiltonian obeying an aspect-
and Vr,A exhibits trivial support outside of A. Next, we       ratio-independent locality bound. Specifically, Ref. 18
prove in the Supplemental Material [27] that the operator      beginsPfrom the standard definition of local Hamiltonians
norm ∥Vr,A ∥ of each local term can be (conservatively)        H = R⊆Λ hR with exponentially decaying tails [1, 2],
upper-bounded as                                               which are required to satisfy the bound [36]
                                                                                   X
 ∥Vr,A ∥ ≤ J(β)e−r ,      J(β) = e−4β × (4.11 × 105 ), (14)                  sup         ∥hR ∥|R|eµ diam(R) ≤ s       (15)
                                                                             i∈Λ
                                                                                   R∋i
which shows that ∥Vr,A ∥ decays (at least) exponentially
in the diameter of A. With this precise definition of a        for finite constants µ, s, but additionally demands that
local perturbation V (β), Ref. 29 proved that the gap          µ, s can be chosen independently of the aspect ratio
∆(β) of H(β) is lower-bounded as ∆(β) ≥ [1−c1 J(β)]∆0          axy . On the other hand, our Hamiltonian H (00) (β)
                                                                                                                        5

contains terms which create pairs of far-separated non-       taneously broken global (0-form) Ising symmetry, its
contractible closed loops. Although the total norm of         symmetric ground state exhibits long-range order param-
such terms is exponentially suppressed in L, the aspect       eter correlations and area-law disorder parameter corre-
ratio can always be chosen sufficiently small that Eq. (15)   lations. Indeed, a no-go theorem [39] rules out the coexis-
is violated for any constants µ, s fixed in advance. Our      tence of long-range order parameter and long-range disor-
parent Hamiltonian construction therefore demonstrates        der parameter correlations in 1D, and a recent result [40]
that the aspect-ratio-independent locality criterion is not   demonstrates that exponential-in-volume local perturba-
just a technical assumption, but physically necessary for     tions to the 2D ferromagnetic Ising fixed point result in
proving enforced gaplessness of |ψ00 (β)⟩.                    area-law disorder parameters. In contrast, the strongly
   Discussion.         We have demonstrated that the          deformed toric code state |ψ00 (β)⟩ is dual to a ferromag-
strongly deformed toric code state |ψ(β)⟩ admits a lo-        netic ground state |φ(β)⟩ with perimeter-law disorder pa-
cal and gapped parent Hamiltonian H(β) with |ψ(β)⟩ as         rameters, and our gapped parent Hamiltonian H (00) (β)
the unique ground state. Since H(β) is connected to the       is correspondingly dual to a gapped Ising-symmetric par-
trivial Hamiltonian H0 by a gap-preserving deformation,       ent Hamiltonian Hdual (β) for |φ(β)⟩; see the End Mat-
this result demonstrates that |ψ(β)⟩ lies within the triv-    ter for details. Interestingly, although Hdual (β) satisfies
ial phase for sufficiently large β. Although our cluster      the exponential-in-diameter locality bound of Eq. (15), it
expansion techniques only prove that H(β) is local and        fails to satisfy the more stringent exponential-in-volume
gapped at large β, it is natural to conjecture that the       locality criterion. We expect that with a restriction to
entire β > βc regime realizes a trivial phase with a cor-     exponential-in-volume local Hamiltonians, long-range or-
responding gapped parent Hamiltonian.                         der parameters and area-law disorder parameters cannot
   An immediate corollary of our result is that, within the   coexist in a gapped ground state.
space of Hamiltonians exhibiting exponentially decaying          Our results highlight that the specific notion of local-
interactions [see Eq. (15)], perimeter-law decay of Wilson    ity imposed on the space of allowed Hamiltonians is a
loops is not a reliable diagnostic of 1-form SSB. In the      subtle but physically consequential choice in the classi-
presence of an exact 1-form symmetry, it is commonly          fication of gapped quantum phases. It is particularly
argued [15, 16] that a perimeter-law Wilson loop can be       interesting to consider whether a more restrictive no-
“locally dressed” into an additional topological operator     tion of locality can resurrect the correspondence between
that braids nontrivially with the 1-form symmetry, re-        perimeter-law Wilson loops, 1-form SSB, and topologi-
sulting in topological order and ground-state degeneracy      cal order. Crucially, the exponential-in-volume locality
on the torus. Our construction demonstrates that this in-     criterion previously discussed is insufficient for this pur-
tuition fails in the deformed toric code states. A natural    pose: in the Supplemental Material [27], we show that
question is whether there might be more robust diagnos-       our parent Hamiltonians H(β) and H (00) (β) satisfy even
tics of 1-form SSB at the level of individual states, i.e.,   these locality bounds. Inspired by the dual Ising par-
without reference to a particular parent Hamiltonian.         ent Hamiltonian, perhaps the physically correct notion
   The techniques developed in this work also shed light      of locality in 1-form symmetric systems requires the sup-
on the mixed-state separability of the strongly decohered     pression of Wilson loop operators XL not by the volume
toric code. Previously, Refs. 37 and 38 demonstrated          |L| of their support, but by the area of the region they
that the toric code under strong Pauli-Z decoherence          bound. Alternatively, it may be preferable to focus on
can be expressed as an incoherent mixture of topologi-        Hamiltonian-agnostic criteria for gapped phases, such as
cally trivial pure states with condensed m anyons. These      the (approximate) entanglement bootstrap axioms [41–
states are structurally similar to the deformed toric code    43]. Given that the deformed toric code states satisfy
states, and given the results of Ref. 18, one might wonder    these axioms as well [27], it is interesting to ask whether
whether they are intrinsically gapless. As described in       there might exist a stronger Hamiltonian-agnostic defini-
the End Matter, and elaborated in the Supplemental Ma-        tion of a gapped state which restores the intrinsic gap-
terial [27], one can construct exact gapped parent Hamil-     lessness of these funky states.
tonians for these states at large decoherence strengths          Note added: During the completion of this work, we
by an identical procedure as for the deformed toric code.     became aware of a forthcoming work by Sahay, Zhang,
This result completes the argument of Refs. 37 and 38         von Keyserlingk, and Verresen that overlaps in part with
into a rigorous proof that the strongly Z-decohered toric     the mixed state results of this work. Where our results
code is separable, i.e., can be written as a convex sum of    overlap they agree.
short-range entangled pure states.                               Acknowledgements.          We thank Rahul Sahay for
   From a dual perspective, our result also demonstrates      inspiring discussions and introducing us to this prob-
that gapped Ising-symmetric wavefunctions can simul-          lem. We also thank Tarun Grover, Ethan Lake, Anton
taneously exhibit long-range ferromagnetic correlations       Kapustin, John McGreevy, Spyridon Michalakis, Olexei
and perimeter-law disorder parameter correlations. Con-       Motrunich, Zohar Nussinov, Daniel Ranard, Ruben Ver-
ventionally, when a gapped Hamiltonian exhibits a spon-       resen, Curt von Keyserlingk, and Carolyn Zhang for help-
                                                                                                                                   6

ful discussions and comments. This work was primar-                     (2023).
ily supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office             [17] F. Burnell, Anyon Condensation and Its Applications,
of Science, National Quantum Information Science Re-                    Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 9, 307 (2018).
search Centers, Quantum Science Center. We also ac-                [18] R. Sahay, C. von Keyserlingk, R. Verresen, and C. Zhang,
                                                                        Enforced Gaplessness from States with Exponentially
knowledge funding provided by the Institute for Quan-                   Decaying Correlations, arXiv:2503.01977 (2025).
tum Information and Matter, an NSF Physics Frontiers               [19] A. Kitaev, Fault-tolerant quantum computation by
Center (NSF Grant PHY-2317110).                                         anyons, Ann. Phys. 303, 2 (2003).
                                                                   [20] Since there is no constraint that the loops be homolog-
                                                                        ically trivial, Eq. (3) sums over all periodic and anti-
                                                                        periodic boundary conditions for the 2D Ising model.
                                                                   [21] M. Levin and X.-G. Wen, Detecting Topological Order
   ∗                                                                    in a Ground State Wave Function, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96,
     nmanoj@caltech.edu
 [1] M. B. Hastings and T. Koma, Spectral Gap and Ex-                   110405 (2006).
     ponential Decay of Correlations, Commun. Math. Phys.          [22] A. Kitaev and J. Preskill, Topological Entanglement En-
     265, 781 (2006).                                                   tropy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 110404 (2006).
 [2] M. B. Hastings, Locality in quantum systems,                  [23] F. J. Wegner, Duality in Generalized Ising Models and
     arXiv:1008.5137 (2010).                                            Phase Transitions without Local Order Parameters, J.
 [3] F. D. M. Haldane, Continuum dynamics of the 1-D                    Math. Phys. 12, 2259 (1971).
     Heisenberg antiferromagnet: Identification with the O(3)      [24] J. B. Kogut, An introduction to lattice gauge theory and
     nonlinear sigma model, Phys. Lett. A 93, 464 (1983).               spin systems, Rev. Mod. Phys. 51, 659 (1979).
 [4] F. D. M. Haldane, Nonlinear field theory of large-spin        [25] J. Zinn-Justin, Quantum Field Theory and Critical Phe-
     heisenberg antiferromagnets: Semiclassically quantized             nomena, fifth edition ed., International Series of Mono-
     solitons of the one-dimensional easy-axis Néel state,             graphs on Physics No. 171 (Oxford University Press, New
     Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1153 (1983).                                  York, NY, 2021).
 [5] X. Chen, Z.-C. Gu, and X.-G. Wen, Local unitary trans-        [26] M. Kardar, Statistical Physics of Fields (Cambridge Uni-
     formation, long-range quantum entanglement, wave func-             versity Press, Cambridge ; New York, 2007).
     tion renormalization, and topological order, Phys. Rev.       [27] See the Supplemental Material, which contains Refs. [44–
     B 82, 155138 (2010).                                               51], for further details of the cluster expansion, details of
 [6] X. Chen, Z.-C. Gu, and X.-G. Wen, Classification of                the proof of locality for the parent Hamiltonian (includ-
     gapped symmetric phases in one-dimensional spin sys-               ing exponential-in-volume locality), a detailed discussion
     tems, Phys. Rev. B 83, 035107 (2011).                              of the parent Hamiltonian for the deformed toric code in
 [7] N. Schuch, D. Pérez-Garcı́a, and I. Cirac, Classifying            the ‘00’ sector, equivalence of locality bounds (14) and
     quantum phases using matrix product states and pro-                (15), a discussion showing that the strongly deformed
     jected entangled pair states, Phys. Rev. B 84, 165139              toric code satisfies approximate entanglement bootstrap
     (2011).                                                            axioms, and a proof that the strongly Pauli-Z decohered
 [8] S. R. White, Density matrix formulation for quantum                toric code is short-range entangled.
     renormalization groups, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2863 (1992).     [28] S. Friedli and Y. Velenik, Cluster expansion, in Statis-
 [9] S. Östlund and S. Rommer, Thermodynamic limit of den-             tical Mechanics of Lattice Systems: A Concrete Mathe-
     sity matrix renormalization, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3537             matical Introduction (Cambridge University Press, 2017)
     (1995).                                                            p. 232–261.
[10] G. Vidal, Efficient classical simulation of slightly entan-   [29] S. Bravyi, M. B. Hastings, and S. Michalakis, Topological
     gled quantum computations, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 147902             quantum order: Stability under local perturbations, J.
     (2003).                                                            Math. Phys. 51, 093512 (2010).
[11] F. Verstraete and J. I. Cirac, Matrix product states rep-     [30] S. Bravyi and M. B. Hastings, A Short Proof of Stability
     resent ground states faithfully, Phys. Rev. B 73, 094423           of Topological Order under Local Perturbations, Com-
     (2006).                                                            mun. Math. Phys. 307, 609 (2011).
[12] J. I. Cirac, D. Pérez-Garcı́a, N. Schuch, and F. Ver-        [31] R. Fernández and A. Procacci, Cluster Expansion for Ab-
     straete, Matrix product states and projected entangled             stract Polymer Models. New Bounds from an Old Ap-
     pair states: Concepts, symmetries, theorems, Rev. Mod.             proach, Commun. Math. Phys. 274, 123 (2007).
     Phys. 93, 045003 (2021).                                      [32] O. Penrose, Convergence of fugacity expansions for clas-
[13] C. Castelnovo and C. Chamon, Quantum topological                   sical systems, in Statistical Mechanics: Foundations and
     phase transition at the microscopic level, Phys. Rev. B            Applications, edited by A. Bak (W. A. Benjamin, New
     77, 054433 (2008).                                                 York, 1967) pp. 101–109.
[14] J. Huxford, D. X. Nguyen, and Y. B. Kim, Gaining              [33] R. Kotecký and D. Preiss, Cluster expansion for abstract
     insights on anyon condensation and 1-form symmetry                 polymer models, Commun. Math. Phys. 103, 491 (1986).
     breaking across a topological phase transition in a de-       [34] Although Refs. 29 and 30 assume an L × L torus in their
     formed toric code model, SciPost Phys. 15, 253 (2023).             proofs, the proof generalizes to arbitrary aspect ratio
[15] D. Gaiotto, A. Kapustin, N. Seiberg, and B. Willett, Gen-          with no changes.
     eralized global symmetries, J. High Energy Phys. 2015,        [35] We note that the expectation values of Wilson loops ori-
     172.                                                               ented in the xτ or yτ planes in Euclidean spacetime, de-
[16] J. McGreevy, Generalized Symmetries in Condensed                   fined via imaginary time evolution by H(β), display area-
     Matter, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 14, 57                    law scaling. Creating two e anyons from the ground state
                                                                        costs energy proportional to their separation, although
                                                                  7

     this is not reflected in the xy-oriented Wilson loops.
[36] The two locality bounds (14) and (15) are equivalent; see
     the Supplemental Material [27] for a simple proof.
[37] Y.-H. Chen and T. Grover, Separability Transitions in
     Topological States Induced by Local Decoherence, Phys.
     Rev. Lett. 132, 170602 (2024).
[38] T.-T. Wang, M. Song, Z. Y. Meng, and T. Grover, Analog
     of Topological Entanglement Entropy for Mixed States,
     PRX Quantum 6, 010358 (2025).
[39] M. Levin, Constraints on Order and Disorder Parameters
     in Quantum Spin Chains, Commun. Math. Phys. 378,
     1081 (2020).
[40] B. T. McDonough, C. Yin, A. Lucas, and C. Zhang, Lieb-
     Robinson Bounds with Exponential-in-Volume Tails,
     PRX Quantum 6, 040322 (2025).
[41] B. Shi, K. Kato, and I. H. Kim, Fusion rules from entan-
     glement, Ann. Phys. 418, 168164 (2020).
[42] B. Shi and I. H. Kim, Entanglement bootstrap approach
     for gapped domain walls, Phys. Rev. B 103, 115150
     (2021).
[43] I. H. Kim, T.-C. Lin, D. Ranard, and B. Shi,
     Strict area law implies commuting parent Hamiltonian,
     arXiv:2404.05867 (2024).
[44] E. Dennis, A. Kitaev, A. Landahl, and J. Preskill, Topo-
     logical quantum memory, J. Math. Phys. 43, 4452 (2002).
[45] R. Fan, Y. Bao, E. Altman, and A. Vishwanath, Diagnos-
     tics of Mixed-State Topological Order and Breakdown of
     Quantum Memory, PRX Quantum 5, 020343 (2024).
[46] C. Yin and A. Lucas, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
     as Stable Phases of Quantum Matter, PRX Quantum 6,
     030329 (2025).
[47] W. De Roeck, V. Khemani, Y. Li, N. O’Dea, and
     T. Rakovszky, Low-Density Parity-Check Stabilizer
     Codes as Gapped Quantum Phases: Stability under
     Graph-Local Perturbations, PRX Quantum 6, 030330
     (2025).
[48] J. B. Kruskal, On the shortest spanning subtree of a
     graph and the traveling salesman problem, Proc. Am.
     Math. Soc. 7, 48 (1956).
[49] J. Kleinberg and É. Tardos, Algorithm Design
     (Pearson/Addison-Wesley, Boston, 2006).
[50] D. Ueltschi, Cluster expansions and correlation functions,
     arXiv:math-ph/0304003 (2003).
[51] E. Fradkin and J. E. Moore, Entanglement entropy of 2d
     conformal quantum critical points: Hearing the shape of
     a quantum drum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 050404 (2006).
                                                                                                                                           8

                                                                        END MATTER

   Exact expression for the parent Hamilto-                                     that define our parent Hamiltonian H(β) [see Eq. (12)].
nian. We now provide exact expressions for the coeffi-                             Dual Ising Wavefunction. From a dual description,
cients f (C) appearing in Eq. (12), thereby fully specifying                    our construction demonstrates that long-range ferromag-
the parent Hamiltonian H(β) for the strongly deformed                           netic order and perimeter-law disorder parameter corre-
toric code |ψ(β)⟩ = eW |0⟩ at large β. In our derivation                        lations can coexist in a gapped ground state. Explicitly,
we wrote                                                                        the no-go state |ψ00 (β)⟩ is related by Wegner duality to
                               X                                                the Ising wavefunction
                W = log Z =        f (C)XC ,            (16)
                                        C
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                          β X          
where Z is the polymer-model partition function in                                          |φ(β)⟩ = exp           Zp Zq |+⟩ ,       (22)
                                                                                                          2            
Eq. (10). The weights and hard-core interaction param-                                                         ⟨pq⟩
eters in Z respectively read
                                 (                                              where Zp , Xp are a new set of Pauli operators defined
           −β|γ|            ′     0 γ, γ ′ intersect                            on the dual lattice (i.e., at the centers of plaquettes p, q
  w(γ) = e       Xγ , δ(γ, γ ) =                     , (17)
                                  1 otherwise                                   of the original lattice), and |+⟩ is the simultaneous +1
               Q                                                                eigenstate of each
                                                                                               Q Xp . This state is symmetric under the
where Xγ = e∈γ Xe , and two polymers γ, γ ′ intersect                           Z2 symmetry p Xp , and exhibits long-range ferromag-
if there exists edges e ∈ γ and e′ ∈ γ ′ such that e, e′                        netic correlations ⟨Zp Zp′ ⟩ ∼ O(1) for β > βc ; i.e., the Z2
share a vertex on the square lattice. (For example, this                        symmetry is spontaneously broken at large β.
convention counts a ‘figure 8’ as a single polymer, rather                         Conventional quantum ferromagnets, such as the 2D
than two intersecting polymers.)                                                transverse-field Ising model,Qexhibit area-law scaling of
   The Mayer cluster expansion [28] rewrites the polymer                        the disorder parameter, ⟨ p∈R Xp ⟩ ∼ e−α|R| for a
free energy W as a sum over connected clusters C, allow-                        large 2D region R. This scaling is especially natural
ing us to extract f (C) through the right side of Eq. (16).                     from a “mean-field” perspective, where the ferromag-
Specifically, the cluster expansion provides the decompo-                       netic ground state is approximated as a symmetry-broken
sition                                                                          product state. In contrast, |φ(β)⟩ exhibits    Q perimeter-
              ∞
              X       X                                 n
                                                        Y                       law correlations of the disorder parameter, ⟨ p∈R Xp ⟩ ∼
    log Z =                       φ(γ1 , . . . , γn )         w(γi ).    (18)   e−µ|∂R| . Indeed, the latter operators are directly related
              n=1 γ1 ,...,γn ∈Γ                         i=1                     to the Wilson loops XL of the deformed toric code via
Here Γ denotes the set of all possible polymers γ, while                        Wegner duality [23].
φ are Ursell functions, defined as φ(γ) = 1 and                                    In 1D gapped ground states, a rigorous theorem [39]
                                                                                forbids the coexistence of long-range order parameter cor-
                        1 X    Y
                                                                                relations and perimeter-law (i.e., long-ranged) disorder
  φ(γ1 , . . . , γn ) =              [δ(γi , γj ) − 1] (19)
                        n! c                                                    parameter correlations, and a natural question is whether
                          G∈Gn (i,j)∈E(G)
                                                                                a similar result can hold in two dimensions. Our par-
for n > 1. The sum is performed over all connected                              ent Hamiltonian H (00) (β) for |ψ00 (β)⟩ is dual to a Z2 -
graphs G on n vertices {1, . . . , n}, with Gnc the set of all                  symmetric gapped parent Hamiltonian Hdual (β) with an
such connected graphs, and E(G) the edge set of G. Note                         exact two-fold degeneracy at large β. This Hamiltonian
that if the polymers γ1 , . . . , γn have any mutually non-                     demonstrates via counterexample that a result analogous
intersecting bipartition, then for any connected graph                          to Ref. 39 cannot hold in 2D under the standard defini-
G ∈ Gnc , there will always be an edge (i, j) ∈ E(G) such                       tion of local Hamiltonians, which allows for interactions
that δ(γi , γj ) − 1 = 0, ensuring that φ(γ1 , . . . , γn ) = 0.                decaying exponentially in their diameter [see Eq. (15)].
Therefore, we can restrict the sum over polymers in                                Recently, Ref. 40 proved that weak Z2 -symmetric per-
Eq. (18) to connected sets of polymers—i.e., connected                          turbations of the 2D ferromagnetic fixed point yield
clusters—that we compactly label by C = (γ1 , . . . , γn ),                     ferromagnetic ground
where n can range from 1 to ∞. We can then write                                                    Q states exhibiting area-law disor-
                                                                                der parameters, ⟨ p∈R Xp ⟩ ∼ e−α|R| , so long as these
                                        length(C)                               perturbations exhibit interactions which decay expo-
                         X                  Y
              log Z =          φ(C)                  w(γi ),             (20)   nentially with their volume. This result is consistent
                           C                i=1                                 with our parent Hamiltonian Hdual (β), which violates
                                                                                this exponential-in-volume locality constraint.QIndeed,
and read off, with the aid of Eq. (16), the coefficients                        Hdual (β) contains interaction terms of the form p∈R Xp
                                    length(C)                                   which are only suppressed in their perimeter |∂R|, rather
                                       Y
                 f (C) = φ(C)                     e−β|γi |               (21)   than their volume |R|. It is natural to conjecture that
                                       i=1                                      long-range ferromagnetic order and perimeter-law dis-
                                                                                                                               9

order parameters cannot coexist in 2D gapped ground                  p; in particular, they are indistinguishable from a corre-
states of exponential-in-volume local Hamiltonians.                  sponding separable state in the thermodynamic limit.
   The Strongly  Q Decohered Toric Code is Separa-                      Classical High-Low Temperature Duality. Our
ble. Let ρp = [ e Ee ](|TC⟩⟨TC|) be the mixed state ob-              rewriting of the deformed toric code state |ψ(β)⟩ =
tained by applying a phase-flip channel Ee (ρ) = (1 −                eW |0⟩ as a deformation of the trivial paramagnet leads
p)ρ + pZe ρZe of strength p to each qubit of a toric code            to a novel high/low temperature duality between the 2D
state |TC⟩. Such a mixed state is well-known to un-                  classical Ising model and a 2D gauge theory with expo-
dergo a mixed-state decodability phase transition [44, 45]           nentially decaying interactions. This duality is valid at
at a critical threshold pc ≈ 0.109, such that the initial            large β, where the Ising model lies in a ferromagnetic
state |TC⟩ can no longer be reliably recovered from ρp               phase and the dual gauge theory lies within a confined
for p > pc . Reference 37 argued that this transition coin-          phase.
cides with a separability phase transition, whereupon ρp                Recall first from Eq. (3) that the norm of |ψ(β)⟩ can be
can be expressed as a convex sum of short-range entan-               expressed as the partition function of a 2D Ising model,
gled states for p > pc . Specifically, letting the initial state     where the loop configurations L are understood as mag-
|TC⟩ be the ‘++’ logical state, Ref. 37 demonstrated that            netic domain walls. On the other hand, by Eq. (11), the
ρp admits a decomposition into a mixture of the states               same norm can be written as
                      X q Ising
                                                                                                           P
                                                                        ⟨ψ(β)|ψ(β)⟩ = ⟨0| e2W |0⟩ = ⟨0| e2 C f (C)XC |0⟩ . (25)
    |ψL (K)⟩ = XL               ZK ({xe }) |{xe }⟩x , (23)
                     {xe =±1}                                                              P
                                                                     By expanding |0⟩ ∝ {xe } |{xe }⟩x in the Pauli-X basis,
                                                                     we find that the 2D Ising partition function is propor-
where K = − 21 log[p/(1 − p)], |{xe }⟩x arePthe Pauli-X
                      Ising          P        K ⟨vv′ ⟩ xvv′ sv sv′   tional to the following dual partition function with Ising
basis states, and ZK        ({xe }) = {sv } e                        spins xe = ±1 on the edges of the square lattice:
is the partition function of a bond-disordered Ising model                               X                         YY
                                                                                                P
with disorder realization {xe }.                                       ⟨ψ(β)|ψ(β)⟩ ∝          e2 C f (C)xC , xC =          xe .
   Similar to the deformed toric code state (2), the states                           {xe =±1}                      γ∈C e∈γ
|ψL (K)⟩ are 1-form symmetric under contractible loop                                                                       (26)
operators ZL̃ , exhibit condensed m anyons for p > pc ,              This classical partition function is invariant under the lo-
but maintain perimeter-law Wilson loops for all p < 12 .             cal Z2 symmetry transformation xvv′ 7→ sv xvv′ sv′ , where
Therefore, although each |ψL (K)⟩ is topologically triv-             we’ve written xvv′ ≡ xe for e = ⟨vv ′ ⟩, and {sv = ±1}.
ial for p > pc , the results of Ref. 18 call into question           Consequently, the above partition function describes a
whether these states are indeed short-range entangled.               pure Z2 gauge theory. It is unclear whether this dual
Using identical cluster expansion techniques to those de-            model can be extended to (or past) the critical point,
scribed in the main text, we answer this question in the             since the cluster expansion generally fails to converge at
affirmative for sufficiently large p < 21 [27].                      sufficiently small β.
   Explicitly, recalling the expression for the operator Z
in the right-hand side of Eq. (7), we see that |ψL (K)⟩
can be rewritten as
                             √
           |ψL (K)⟩ ∝ XL Z |0⟩ = XL eW/2 |0⟩ ,              (24)

where we have used the simple identity Z |{xe }⟩x =
   Ising
ZK       ({xe }) |{xe }⟩x [see Eq. (7)]. Using an identical
approach as for the deformed toric code state |ψ(β)⟩,
one can construct a local parent Hamiltonian HL (K) for
which |ψL (K)⟩ is the unique gapped ground state at suf-
ficiently large p. Applying the results of Ref. [46, 47],
|ψL (K)⟩ can be prepared via finite-time unitary evolu-
tion with a local generator, and is therefore short-range
entangled.
    In the Supplemental Material [27], we note that there
is a minor subtlety when the ‘++’ initial state is re-
placed by a general toric code state |TC⟩. For certain
choices of |TC⟩, the pure-state decomposition of ρp is not
completely trivial: instead, it contains an exponentially
small (in trace norm) sector of gapless states. Such mixed
states ρp are therefore approximately separable at large
Supplemental Material For: Gapped Parent Hamiltonians for the Strongly Deformed
                                  Toric Code

                                  Nandagopal Manoj,∗ Zack Weinstein, and Jason Alicea
                              Department of Physics and Institute for Quantum Information and
                          Matter, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA
                                                     (Dated: August 3, 2026)
This supplemental material describes the technical statements in the Letter in more detail and, wherever applicable,
provides rigorous proofs and bounds.


                                                        CONTENTS

     SI. Setup and Notation                                                                                          1

    SII. Polymer models and Mayer Cluster Expansion                                                                  2
         A. Polymer model definition                                                                                 2
         B. Cluster Expansion and Ursell Functions                                                                   3

    SIII. Proof of Locality and Spectral Gap                                                                         4
          A. Proving that H(β) is local                                                                              5

    SIV. Proof of Cluster Expansion Bound                                                                            6

    SV. The 00 sector: deriving the parent Hamiltonian with aspect-ratio dependent locality bounds                  10
        A. Cluster Expansion                                                                                        11
        B. Modified Cluster Expansion Bound                                                                         12
        C. Proving that H00 (β) is local and gapped                                                                 14

    SVI. Equivalent Definitions of locality                                                                         15
         A. Definition 1 =⇒ Definition 2                                                                            16
         B. Definition 2 =⇒ Definition 1                                                                            16

SVII. Exponential-in-volume locality bounds                                                                         16

SVIII. The Strongly Pauli-Z Decohered Toric Code is Short-Range Entangled                                           18
       A. Review: Separability Transition of the Decohered Toric Code                                               18
       B. Constructing a Parent Hamiltonian for |ϕ(p)⟩                                                              20
       C. More General Decohered Toric Code States                                                                  21

    SIX. Verifying entanglement bootstrap axioms for the strongly deformed toric code                               22


                                              SI.   SETUP AND NOTATION

   We work on an Lx × Ly square lattice Λ with periodic boundary conditions, where we assume Lx ≥ Ly without loss
of generality. The qubits live on the edges, labeled by e. We write Pauli operators acting on these qubits as Xe , Ze .
We use L to denote closed (not necessarily connected) loop configurations in the direct lattice—that is, L is a subset
of edges e such that each vertex v ∈ Λ is incident to an even number of edges in L. For each L, we define the operator
                                                            Y
                                                      XL ≡     Xe ,                                               (S1)
                                                               e∈L

and denote by |L| the number of edges in L.



∗    nmanoj@caltech.edu
                                                                                                                       2

  The deformed toric code states are defined as
                                                             β P
                                                |ψ(β)⟩ ∝ e 2    e Ze
                                                                 |TC⟩ ,                                     (S2)
                                                                   Q                  Q
where |TC⟩ is a simultaneous +1 eigenstate of the stabilizers Av ≡ e∋v Ze and Bp ≡ e∈p Bp . In the main text, we
primarily focused on the state obtained by deforming the ‘++’ logical state |TC++ ⟩, given explicitly by
                                                β P               X
                                  |ψ++ (β)⟩ ∝ e 2 e Ze |TC++ ⟩ ∝     e−β|L| XL |0⟩ ,                        (S3)
                                                                        L

where |0⟩ is the simultaneous +1 eigenstate of each Ze . In other words, |ψ++ (β)⟩ contains a superposition of all closed
loops of Ze = −1 in the direct lattice, including both contractible and non-contractible loops.
  Similarly, the “no-go state” is obtained by deforming the ‘00’ logical state, and is given by
                                                 β P               X
                                   |ψ00 (β)⟩ ∝ e 2 e Ze |TC00 ⟩ ∝      e−β|L| XL |0⟩ .                               (S4)
                                                                    L=∂R

This state contains only contractible loops in the superposition, and consequently satisfies the assumptions of The-
orem 1 in Ref. 18. We shall initially focus on the simpler state |ψ++ (β)⟩, which we denote by |ψ(β)⟩ to lighten the
notation; we return to the no-go state |ψ00 (β)⟩ in Sec. SV.
  Finally, we define the gapped parent Hamiltonian for the trivial product state |0⟩ by
                                                         X
                                                   H0 =     (1 − Ze ),                                          (S5)
                                                            e

which hosts a unique ground state with the spectral gap ∆0 = 2.


                      SII.   POLYMER MODELS AND MAYER CLUSTER EXPANSION

  In order to construct parent a Hamiltonian for the state |ψ(β)⟩ at large β, it is insightful to view it as non-unitary
deformation of the trivial state |0⟩. From Eqs. (S3) we have |ψ(β)⟩ = Ẑ(β) |0⟩, where the operator Ẑ(β) is defined by
                                                         X
                                                 Ẑ(β) ≡    e−β|L| XL .                                             (S6)
                                                            L

As described in the main text [see Eq. (7)], this operator can be expressed as the high-temperature expansion of a
bond-disordered Ising model with coupling constant K = artanh(e−β ), and is therefore a positive-definite operator.
Its logarithm,

                                                     Ŵ (β) ≡ log Ẑ(β),                                            (S7)

is therefore a well-defined Hermitian operator.
   The locality of the parent Hamiltonian H(β) we will construct depends sensitively on the locality properties of
Ŵ (β). Heuristically, since Ŵ is the free energy of a bond-disordered Ising model, we expect it to be an extensive sum
of terms which are exponentially localized at large β. We will formally demonstrate this property using the Mayer
cluster expansion, described extensively in Ref. 28. Here we review the basics of this series expansion.


                                           A.       Polymer model definition

   A polymer, labeled by γ, is a collection of edges that form a connected closed loop. Note that polymers can be
self-intersecting, like a figure of eight. We define Γ to be the set of all polymers on the Lx × Ly square lattice. A
polymer model is defined by associating a complex weight w : Γ → C to each polymer and a real symmetric interaction
δ : Γ × Γ → [−1, 1] to each pair of polymers. Given (Γ, w, δ), the polymer partition function is defined as
                                                                               
                                             X Y                  Y
                                         Z=           w(γ)           δ(γ, γ ′ ).                              (S8)
                                            Γ′ ⊆Γ    γ∈Γ′        {γ,γ ′ }⊆Γ′
                                                                                                                                      3

Throughout this work, we will largely focus on the weight function w(γ) = e−β|γ| . To describe the operator-valued
partition function (S6), we will later promote w(γ) to the operator-valued weight function
                                                            ŵ(γ) ≡ e−β|γ| Xγ ,                                                     (S9)
                Q
where Xγ ≡ e∈γ Xe . These operators mutually commute, so we can regard the operator-valued partition func-
tion Ẑ(β) obtained from these weights as an ordinary polymer partition function within each simultaneous Pauli-X
eigenstate.
   Finally, it will be sufficient to work with a hard-core interaction where δ(γ, γ ′ ) ∈ {0, 1}, defined presently1 as follows:
                                                             (
                                                              0, γ, γ ′ intersect
                                                δ(γ, γ ′ ) =                      .                                       (S10)
                                                              1, otherwise
Two polymers γ, γ ′ are defined as intersecting if there exists edges e ∈ γ and e′ ∈ γ ′ such that e, e′ share a common
vertex in the lattice. Note that by this definition, two diagonally adjacent polymers which touch at a single corner
are considered intersecting. Loop configurations such as ‘figure-eights’ are therefore considered as a single polymer.
  We say that two intersecting polymers γ, γ ′ are incompatible, as if the subset Γ′ in the partition sum contains
two such polymers, the summand will be zero and will not contribute. We also say that γ, γ ′ are compatible, or
non-interacting, if δ(γ, γ ′ ) = 1.


                                         B.    Cluster Expansion and Ursell Functions

  A cluster C is a finite non-empty sequence of polymers (γ1 , γ2 , . . . , γn ), with repetitions allowed. A cluster is called
disconnected if there exists a partition of the integers {1, . . . , n} = I1 ⊔ I2 such that, for all i ∈ I1 and j ∈ I2 , γi is
compatible with γj (i.e., δ(γi , γj ) = 1); in other words, a disconnected cluster can be divided into two sub-clusters C1
and C2 such that each γi ∈ C1 is compatible with each γj ∈ C2 . Finally, a cluster is connected if it is not disconnected.
  The Mayer cluster expansion [28, 32, 33] provides an explicit series expansion for the polymer free energy W = log Z
as a sum over connected clusters:
Theorem 1 (Mayer Cluster Expansion [28]). =
   Given the polymer model (Γ, w, δ) and the corresponding polymer partition function Z [see Eq. (S8)], the polymer
free energy W ≡ log Z can be expressed as the following infinite series over clusters C:
                                                     X                                                 n
                                                                                                       Y
                                    W ≡ log Z =            f (C),      f (C) ≡ φ(γ1 , . . . , γn )           w(γi ).               (S11)
                                                       C                                               i=1

Here φ(γ1 , . . . , γn ) is the Ursell function, defined for each cluster C = (γ1 , . . . , γn ) as
                                                                  1 X    Y
                                            φ(γ1 , . . . , γn ) ≡              ζ(γi , γj ),                                        (S12)
                                                                  n! c  G∈Gn (i,j)∈E(G)

where Gnc is the set of all connected graphs G with vertex set V (G) = {1, . . . , n}, E(G) is the edge set of G, and
ζ(γ, γ ′ ) ≡ δ(γ, γ ′ ) − 1, so that ζ(γ, γ ′ ) vanishes if the polymers are compatible. For n = 1 we define φ(γ1 ) = 1. Note
that the Ursell functions vanish on disconnected clusters, and so we can restrict the sum in Eq. (S11) to connected
clusters C. For a derivation of Eq. (S11) and details on its convergence, we refer the reader to Ref. 28.
  We can apply the cluster expansion to Eq. (S6), using the weights (S9) and interactions (S10). As the weights ŵ(γ)
are composed only of Xe operators, we can ignore the operator nature of the weights by working in the Xe eigenbasis.
Then, we have
                                                 X         X                               n
                                                                                           Y                      X
                        Ŵ (β) ≡ log Ẑ(β) =                         φ(γ1 , . . . , γn )         e−β|γi | Xγi ≡        f (C)XC ,   (S13)
                                                 n≥1 γ1 ,...,γn ∈Γ                         i=1                    C
             Qn
where XC ≡ i=1 Xγi for any cluster C = (γ1 , . . . , γn ). A crucial bound satisfied by these coefficients f (C) is Eq. (13)
in the main text (Lemma 5). Since the proof of this bound is rather technical, we postpone its proof to Appendix SIV.



1 A slightly more intricate definition will be necessary to describe the no-go state; see Sec. SV.
                                                                                                                                           4

                                 SIII.    PROOF OF LOCALITY AND SPECTRAL GAP

  In this Appendix, we provide explicit technical details to prove that our parent Hamiltonian H(β) is local and
exhibits a nonzero spectral gap at large values of β. Our essential strategy is to use properties of the cluster expansion—
specifically, the bound in Eq. (13) of the main text—to show that H(β) satisfies the locality properties demanded by
the assumptions of Refs. 29 and 30. The gap stability results of these works then immediately imply that H(β) is
gapped at sufficiently large β.
  Let us first recall the derivation of our parent Hamiltonian H(β). We begin by using the cluster expansion to
express the deformed toric code state |ψ(β)⟩ as an exponential deformation of the trivial state |0⟩:
                                                                        (             )
                                                                         X
                                                       Ŵ (β)
                                |ψ(β)⟩ = Ẑ(β) |0⟩ = e        |0⟩ = exp      f (C)XC |0⟩ ,                             (S14)
                                                                                      C

c.f. Eqs. (S6) and (S13). As described in the main text, this form naturally motivates the construction of a frustration-
free parent Hamiltonian as follows: we first define the manifestly positive-semidefinite Hermitian operators Pe (β) via
                                                        P                             P
                                         Pe (β) ≡ e−     C∈Se f (C)XC   (1 − Ze )e−       C∈Se f (C)XC
                                                         P                                                                            (S15)
                                                 = e−2      C∈Se f (C)XC   − Ze ,
where Se denotes the set of connected clusters C for which XC anticommutes with Ze . Each Pe (β) clearly annihilates
|ψ(β)⟩, and therefore the Hamiltonian
                                          X            X      P                 
                                 H(β) ≡       Pe (β) =     e−2 C∈Se f (C)XC − Ze                              (S16)
                                                    e               e

admits |ψ(β)⟩ as a frustration-free ground state. In the same way that the Castelnovo-Chamon Hamiltonian HCC (β)
[see Eq. (6) of the main text] can be viewed as a deformation of the fixed-point toric code  P Hamiltonian HTC , our
parent Hamiltonian H(β) can be viewed as a deformation of the trivial Hamiltonian H0 = e (1 − Ze ).
   To prove a spectral gap, it will suffice to demonstrate that H(β) is exponentially localized at sufficiently large β.
More precisely, our goal is to write H(β) in the form
                                                             H(β) = H0 + V,                                                           (S17)
                P
where H0 =       e (1 − Ze ) is the trivial Hamiltonian, while V   is a perturbation of the form
                                                                X X
                                                            V =        Vr,A ,                                                         (S18)
                                                                 r≥1 A∈S(r)

where S(r) is the set of all r × r squares of lattice sites2 , and Vr,A is an operator supported on the r × r square A
with a spectral norm bounded as
                                                     ∥Vr,A ∥ ≤ Je−µr         ∀A ∈ S(r)                                                (S19)
for constants J, µ > 0 to be determined. Note that this locality criterion is equivalent to that of Eq. (15) of the main
text (see Appendix SVI). As we shall see, we will be able to choose µ = 1 and J = J(β) ∝ e−4β , so that J(β) becomes
exponentially small at large β. The following theorem then guarantees that |ψ(β)⟩ is the unique gapped ground state
of H(β) with a nonvanishing spectral gap:
Theorem 2 (Stability of Gap [29]). There exist constants J0 , c1 > 0 depending only on µ and the spatial dimension
D, such that for all J ≤ J0 , the spectrum of H0 + V is contained (up to an overall energy shift) in the union of
intervals ∪k≥0 Ik , where k runs over the spectrum of H0 and Ik is the closed interval
                                                Ik = [k(1 − c1 J) − δ, k(1 + c1 J) + δ]                                               (S20)
for some δ bounded by J times a quantity decaying faster than any power of the system size L.
  We can ignore δ as we are ultimately interested in the thermodynamic limit. This theorem tells us that the spectral
gap of H(β) is lower-bounded by 2 − 2c1 J, which is positive for sufficiently small J.



2 For simplicity, we group the edges e = (v, v + x̂) and e = (v, v + ŷ) together on the vertex v, so that each vertex is regarded as hosting

  two qubits.
                                                                                                                                       5

                                                   A.   Proving that H(β) is local

  We now set out to prove that H(β) is local at sufficiently large β, in the sense of Eqs. (S17), (S18), and (S19).
Theorem 2 will then immediately imply the existence of a spectral gap at sufficiently large values of β. The results of
this section will crucially rely on the bound in Eq. (13) of the main text, which we repeat here for convenience: for
β > β ∗ = 2 + log 3, we have the inequality
                                                X
                                                    |f (C)| ≤ Cclus e−4β ,                                       (S21)
                                                        C∈Se

where Cclus ≈ 5.115 × 103 is a constant. Since the proof of this bound is rather technical, we defer it to Appendix SIV.
  We begin by Taylor expanding the exponential in Eq. (S16) [justified by the bound in Eq. (S21)] to write
                                                              "              #n
                                               X X (−2)n X
                                 H(β) = H0 +                         f (C)XC
                                                e n≥1
                                                         n!
                                                                C∈Se
                                                                          n
                                                                                                                   (S22)
                                               X X (−2)n          X Y                   
                                      = H0 +                                   f (Cj )XCj .
                                                e
                                                         n!
                                                            n≥1          j=1    C1 ...Cn ∈Se

Our goal is to express the second term above in the form of Eq. (S18). For each vertex v and odd values of r, let
Av (r) ∈ S(r) denote the set of vertices contained within the r × r square centered on v. We then define the operator
Vr,v supported on Av (r) via
                                                 X             X (−2)n                 X           n
                                                                                                   Y
                                 Vr,v ≡                                                                [f (Cj )XCj ],               (S23)
                                                                       n!
                                          e=(v,v+x̂),(v,v+ŷ) n≥1                  C1 ...Cn ∈Se j=1
                                                                                 maxj ∥Cj ∥=r+1
               P
where ∥C∥ ≡ γ∈C |γ| denotes the total length of all polymers (including repetitions) contained in the cluster C. In
the above, we have restricted the sum over clusters C1 . . . Cn such that the maximum value of any ∥Cj ∥ is precisely
r + 1. It is straightforward to show3 that with this restriction, Vr,v is supported on the r × r square Av (r). We then
have the decomposition4
                                                            X X
                                            H(β) = H0 +                 Vr,v ,                                    (S24)
                                                                            v    r≥3,odd

which matches the desired form in Eq. (S18).                                        Q
   Next, we want to bound the spectral norm of each Vr,v as in Eq. (S19). Since each j XCj has a spectral norm of
1, the triangle inequality immediately gives
                                            X           X 2n                X             n
                                                                                          Y
                        ∥Vr,v ∥ ≤                                                              |f (Cj )|                           (S25a)
                                                               n!
                                     e=(v,v+x̂),(v,v+ŷ) n≥1          C1 ...Cn ∈Se   j=1
                                                                    maxj ∥Cj ∥=(r+1)
                                            X                n
                                                        X 2n X                   X         n
                                                                                           Y
                                 ≤                                                             |f (Cj )|                           (S25b)
                                                               n!
                                     e=(v,v+x̂),(v,v+ŷ) n≥1        k=1 C1 ...Cn ∈Se j=1
                                                                        ∥Ck ∥=(r+1)
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                        !n−1
                                            X           X         2n     X                               X
                                 =                                                        |f (C)|               |f (C)|      .   (S25c)
                                                               (n − 1)!                          
                                     e=(v,v+x̂),(v,v+ŷ) n≥1                      C∈Se                     C∈Se
                                                                                ∥C∥=r+1




3 Indeed, the “worst-case scenario” arises when a cluster C consists of a single closed-loop polymer of width 1 and length ⌊r/2⌋, whose
                                                           j
 perimeter is precisely r + 1.
4 For r ≥ L = min(L , L ), one may worry that many different squares A (r) ∈ S(r) (namely, shifts of v in the y direction) actually
           y       x   y                                              v
 describe the same set of lattice points. This is not an issue, since the bound we will prove demonstrates that the spectral norms of
 resulting operators Vr,v are exponentially suppressed in r ≥ Ly . By Weyl’s inequality, such terms cannot shift the eigenvalues of H(β)
 by more than an e−O(Ly ) amount, and we can therefore neglect them in proving the stability of the gap for sufficiently large system
 sizes.
                                                                                                                           6

To obtain Eq. (S25b), we replace the maximization over Cj with a sum over all possible Ck for which ∥Ck ∥ = r + 1;
Eq. (S25c) then follows immediately by noting that the summand for each k is identical.
  The latter sum over clusters is immediately bounded using Eq. (S21). To bound the former sum over clusters,
we note from Eq. (21) that |f (C)| = e−β∥C∥/2 fβ/2 (C) , where fβ/2 (C) is the same function f (C) evaluated at the
deformation strength β/2 instead of β. If we assume for simplicity that β ≥ 2β ∗ , we can once again use Eq. (S21) to
bound the former sum over clusters as follows:
                                                                                  
                                                                                                  !n−1
                             X         X 2n                       X                X
               ∥Vr,v ∥ ≤                             e −β(r+1)/2
                                                                         fβ/2 (C)        |f (C)|             (S26a)
                                            (n − 1)! 
                        e=(v,v+x̂),(v,v+ŷ) n≥1                              C∈Se                        C∈Se
                                                                            ∥C∥=r+1
                                                    X  2n                n−1
                      ≤ 2e−β(r+1)/2 Cclus e−2β                 Cclus e−4β                                              (S26b)
                                                     (n − 1)!
                                                 n≥1
                          −βr/2        −5β/2
                                                            
                      = 4e      Cclus e      exp 2Cclus e−4β                                                           (S26c)
                                                    
                      = 4Cclus e−4β exp 2Cclus e−4β e−β(r−3)/2                                                         (S26d)
                                        h           ∗
                                                       i
                      ≤ 4Cclus e−4β exp 2Cclus e−8β       e−(r−3) ,                                                    (S26e)

where we’ve used β/2 ≥ β ∗ ≥ 1 inside the r-dependent exponential, recalling that r ≥ 3. Altogether, we have proven
the bound
                                                            h                 i
                                 ˜ −4β e−r , J˜ = 4Cclus exp 3 + 2Cclus e−8β ∗ ≈ 4.11 × 105 .
                      ∥Vr,v ∥ ≤ Je                                                                            (S27)

We have therefore proven that our parent Hamiltonian H(β) = H0 + V satisfies the locality bound in Eq. (S18), with
µ = 1. Since J(β) ≡ Je ˜ −4β can be made arbitrarily small at large β (eg. for β = 5, J(β) ≈ 10−3 ), it follows from
Theorem 2 that H(β) is gapped and nondegenerate for sufficiently large β. Moreover, since H(β) is continuously
connected to the trivial Hamiltonian H0 by a gap-preserving deformation, we also find that |ψ(β)⟩ lies in the trivial
phase at large β.


                               SIV.     PROOF OF CLUSTER EXPANSION BOUND

  Having proven the locality of our parent Hamiltonian H(β) utilizing the bound in Eq. (13) of the main text, we now
return and demonstrate this bound. We will prove this result in several steps, using techniques which are standard
to the cluster expansion [28, 31–33, 48, 49].

Lemma 1 (Tree-graph identity for the Ursell function [32]). For any n ≥ 1 and polymers γ1 , . . . , γn (repetitions
allowed), the Ursell functions (S12) can be expressed as a sum over tree graphs as follows:
                                                                                                             
                                             1 X          Y                            Y
                       φ(γ1 , . . . , γn ) =                         ζ(γi , γj )                    δ(γi , γj ) ,    (S28)
                                             n!
                                              T ∈Tn    (i,j)∈E(T )                (i,j)∈Eextra (T )


where Tn is the set of spanning trees over n labeled vertices, and Eextra is defined below.

Proof. This result was first derived in Ref. 32 to show convergence of the cluster expansion. For completeness, we
include a proof here.
  First, we describe Kruskal’s algorithm [48, 49] , which constructs a unique spanning tree T ∈ Tn given any G ∈ Gnc .
We start by defining an ordering over all possible edges in G (we will call this set En ). We choose the ordering

                      (1, 2), (1, 3), . . . , (1, n), (2, 3), (2, 4), . . . , (2, n), (3, 4), . . . , (n − 1, n).       (S29)

Kruskal’s algorithm then defines a map K : Gnc → Tn which goes through each link in G ∈ Gnc in the above order, and
adds the link to the resulting tree if it does not create a cycle, skipping the link otherwise. While K assigns a unique
T ∈ Tn to each G ∈ Gnc , note that K is not injective; several different connected graphs G are mapped to each tree T .
                                                                                                                                                   7

  Using Kruskal’s algorithm, we can reorder the sum as
                                         1 X              X                  Y
                 φ(γ1 , . . . , γn ) =                                                ζ(γi , γj )                                              (S30a)
                                         n!
                                          T ∈Tn G∈Gn
                                                   c :K(G)=T (i,j)∈E(G)
                                                                                
                                     1 X                 Y                                  X                    Y
                                   =                                  ζ(γi , γj )                                              ζ(γi , γj ).   (S30b)
                                     n!
                                          T ∈Tn       (i,j)∈E(T )                       c :K(G)=T (i,j)∈E(G)\E(T )
                                                                                     G∈Gn

Next, consider the set E(G) \ E(T ). By the construction of Kruskal’s algorithm, an edge is present in G but excluded
from T if and only if its addition would create a cycle with the edges already selected. Consequently, there exists a set
of edges Eextra (T ) ⊆ En that would be skipped over in Kruskal’s algorithm for any input that resulted in T . Therefore,
instead of summing over all graphs such that K(G) = T , we can equivalently sum over all subsets of Eextra (T ):
                                 X             Y                       X        Y
                                                        ζ(γi , γj ) =                ζ(γi , γj )                  (S31a)
                                c :K(G)=T (i,j)∈E(G)\E(T )
                             G∈Gn                                                       E⊆Eextra (T ) (i,j)∈E
                                                                                                  Y
                                                                                    =                       [1 + ζ(γi , γj )]                  (S31b)
                                                                                        (i,j)∈Eextra (T )
                                                                                                  Y
                                                                                    =                       δ(γi , γj ),                       (S31c)
                                                                                        (i,j)∈Eextra(T )

from which Eq. (S28) follows.
  A useful feature of this rewriting is that every spanning tree T ∈ Tn has precisely n − 1 edges; consequently, every
term in Eq. (S28) contributes with the same sign [unlike the original expression in Eq. (S12)]. We therefore have the
immediate corollary:
                                                                                              
                                              1 X  Y                        Y
                      |φ(γ1 , . . . , γn )| =              |ζ(γi , γj )|            δ(γi , γj ).              (S32)
                                              n!
                                                    T ∈Tn        (i,j)∈E(T )                        (i,j)∈Eextra (T )


Lemma 2 (Kotecky-Preiss inequality [33]). When β ≥ β ∗ = 2 + log 3, the weight w(γ) = e−β|γ| satisfies
                                            X             ′
                                                w(γ ′ )e|γ | ≤ |γ|,                                                                             (S33)
                                                             γ ′ ≁γ

where γ ′ ≁ γ indicates the sum is performed over all polymers γ ′ which are incompatible with the fixed polymer γ
(i.e., such that δ(γ, γ ′ ) = 0).
Proof. The number of polymers on the square lattice of length s containing a given vertex v is upper bounded by 3s .
Therefore, the number of incompatible γ ′ of fixed length |γ ′ | = s is upper-bounded by |γ|3s , since γ ′ has no more
than |γ| options where it can intersect γ. Then,
                                         X             ′    X
                                             w(γ ′ )e|γ | ≤       |γ|3s e−βs es                                 (S34a)
                                             γ ′ ≁γ                         s≥4,even

                                                                            (3e1−β )4
                                                                        =               |γ|                                                    (S34b)
                                                                          1 − (3e1−β )2
                                                                            e−4 −4(β−β ∗ )
                                                                        ≤         e         |γ|                                                (S34c)
                                                                          1 − e−2
                                                                        ≤ |γ|                                                                  (S34d)

where the first sum converges as long as β > β ∗ − 1 = 1 + log 3. The parameter β ∗ is chosen for convenience, so that
the numerical prefactor is smaller than unity.
Lemma 3 (Rooted tree recursion). Define, for any polymer γ, the absolute rooted cluster weight
                                          X           X                                     n
                                                                                            Y
                                 g(γ) =         n                |φ(γ, γ2 , . . . , γn )|         w(γi ),       γ1 ≡ γ.                         (S35)
                                          n≥1       γ2 ,...,γn                              i=1
                                                                                                                                                     8

Then g(γ) satisfies the recursive inequality
                                                                                   P             ′
                                                                 g(γ) ≤ w(γ)e          γ ′ ≁γ g(γ )   .                                        (S36)
Proof. We refer the reader to [31, 33, 50] for detailed discussions (including regarding convergence), leaving only the
essential derivation here. Using Eq. (S32), we have
                                                                                              
                       X              X X            Y                        Y                    Yn
                              1                 
              g(γ1 ) =                                      |ζ(γi , γj )|           δ(γi , γj )     w(γi ).    (S37)
                           (n − 1)! γ ,...,γ
                            n≥1               2     n T ∈Tn        (i,j)∈E(T )                     i=1    (i,j)∈Eextra (T )

  To derive Eq. (S36), we regard each spanning tree T ∈ Tn as a rooted tree, with vertex 1 as the root. If vertex 1 is
connected to k other vertices c1 , . . . , ck by edges in E(T ), then removing vertex 1 splits the rooted tree into k disjoint
rooted subtrees T1 , . . . , Tk with Tr rooted at cr . Letting Vr denote the vertex set of Tr , we note that V1 , . . . , Vk forms
a partition of {2, . . . , n}.
  We now simplify g(γ1 ) as follows. First, we can write the product over edges (i, j) ∈ E(T ) as
                                                                                               
                                     Y                       k
                                                             Y                 Y
                                             |ζ(γi , γj )| =   |ζ(γ1 , γcr )|     |ζ(γi , γj )|.                           (S38)
                                      (i,j)∈E(T )                     r=1                     (i,j)∈E(Tr )

Similarly, the product over weights trivially factorizes:
                                                         n
                                                         Y                           k Y
                                                                                     Y
                                                               w(γi ) = w(γ1 )                  w(γi ).                                        (S39)
                                                         i=1                        r=1 i∈Vr

To handle the product over Eextra (T ), we will use the inequality
                                                    Y                            k
                                                                                 Y           Y
                                                                 δ(γi , γj ) ≤                                δ(γi , γj ).                     (S40)
                                             (i,j)∈Eextra (T )                   r=1 (i,j)∈Eextra (Tr )

This inequality follows from noting that Eextra (Tr ) ⊆ Eextra (T ) for each subtree Tr , so the former product contains
extra delta functions which can cause the left-hand side to vanish. Finally, we organize the sum over trees T ∈ Tn as
a sum over all possible subtrees T1 . . . Tk : for some function F (T ) which only depends on the graph structure of T
(i.e., F (T ) = F (T ′ ) for isomorphic trees T, T ′ ), we have
                   X                 X 1            X        (n − 1)!                   X     X
                          F (T ) =                                          n1 . . . nk   ...   F (T = (T1 . . . Tk )),                        (S41)
                                           k! n +...+n =n−1 n1 ! . . . nk !
                  T ∈Tn              k≥0       1        k                                      T1 ∈Tn1           Tk ∈Tnk

where k sums over the number of possible subtrees, and n1 . . . nk sums over the number of vertices in each subtree.
The multinomial coefficient (n − 1)!/n1 ! . . . nk ! counts the number of ways of sorting vertices {2, . . . , n} into the k
subtrees, and the factor 1/k! accounts for the fact that the ordering of the k subtrees is immaterial. The product
n1 . . . nk accounts for the nr choices of root vertex in each subtree. Finally, the notation T = (T1 . . . Tk ) indicates
that the rooted tree T ∈ Tn is constructed by joining the roots of the subtrees Tr as children to a new root.
  Putting all of these facts together, we arrive at the inequality
                                                                                                                                                         
                  X 1 Y   k    X                     X         X                         Y                             Y                           Ynr
                                          1
g(γ1 ) ≤ w(γ1 )                                                      |ζ(γ1 , γ1′ )|             ζ(γi′ , γj′ )                    δ(γi′ , γj′ )     w(γi′ )
                      k! r=1          (nr − 1)! ′ ′
                  k≥0         nr ≥1                γ1 ...γnr Tr ∈Tnr                (i,j)∈E(Tr )                 (i,j)∈Eextra (Tr )                i=1
                                                         
                  X 1 Y   k   X
         = w(γ1 )                  |ζ(γ1 , γ1′ )|g(γ1′ )
                      k! r=1    ′
                  k≥0          γ1
                                                
                      X                         
         = w(γ1 ) exp       |ζ(γ1 , γ1′ )|g(γ1′ ) .
                       ′                        
                           γ1
                                                                                                                                               (S42)
Finally noting that |ζ(γ1 , γ1′ )| is unity when γ1 ≁ γ1′ and zero otherwise, we arrive at Eq. (S36).
                                                                                                                                      9

Lemma 4 (Absolute rooted cluster bound [31]). The absolute rooted cluster weight is bounded above as

                                                                   g(γ) ≤ w(γ)e|γ| .                                              (S43)

Proof. We begin by defining, for any function h : Γ → R on the polymers, a new function J [h] : Γ → R as follows:
                                                                                 P
                                                         J [h](γ) ≡ w(γ)e            γ ′ ≁γ h(γ)   .                              (S44)

We also define a partial ordering on the space of such functions: for any two real-valued functions h, h′ on the polymers,
we write h ≤ h′ if h(γ) ≤ h′ (γ) for all γ ∈ Γ.
  Note that the functional map J has the following two properties:
   1. J is monotone: if h ≤ h′ , then J [h] ≤ J [h′ ].
   2. the function b(γ) ≡ w(γ)e|γ| is an upper-barrier : for any h ≤ b, we have
                                                                       
                                                          X            
                          J [h](γ) ≤ J [b](γ) = w(γ) exp        w(γ)e|γ| ≤ w(γ)e|γ| = b(γ),                                       (S45)
                                                           ′           
                                                                              γ ≁γ

     where we have used the result of Lemma 2. In other words, whenever h ≤ b, we also have J [h] ≤ b.
To prove Eq. (S43), let us recursively define the sequence of functions hn : Γ → R by h0 (γ) ≡ 0 and hd ≡ J [hd−1 ] for
d ≥ 1; from the above two properties of J , we immediately have h0 ≤ h1 ≤ h2 ≤ . . . ≤ b. We also define the functions
                                                                                             
                   X            X       X            Y                        Y                   Yn
                         1                      
        gd (γ1 ) ≡                                         |ζ(γi , γj )|           δ(γi , γj )     w(γi ),    (S46)
                     (n − 1)! γ ,...,γ
                   n≥1            2         n     T ∈Tn ,      (i,j)∈E(T )                        i=1
                                                                                                   (i,j)∈Eextra (T )
                                                depth(T )≤d

which are identical to the absolute rooted cluster weight g(γ) [see Eq. (S37)], save for the restriction to trees T of
depth less than or equal to d. So long as Eq. (S37) converges, we have limd→∞ gd (γ) = g(γ).
  We now make the following observations:
   1. For d = 1, we have h1 (γ) = g1 (γ) = w(γ).
                                                  P           ′
   2. For d = 2, we have h2 (γ) = w(γ)e             γ ′ ≁γ w(γ )   . On the other hand, by dropping the Eextra product in the definition
      of g2 , we obtain the inequality
                                      X                   X      Yn                  P
                                               1                                                 ′
                         g2 (γ1 ) ≤                                  w(γj ) = w(γ1 )e γ ′ ≁γ1 w(γ ) = h2 (γ1 ),                   (S47)
                                            (n − 1)! γ ,...,γ ≁γ j=1
                                      n≥1                2       n    1


     i.e., g2 ≤ h2 .
   3. More generally, suppose gn−1 ≤ hn−1 . Then, by following an identical strategy to the proof of Lemma 3, we
      obtain the inequality
                                                       P                 ′              P                 ′
                                 gd (γ) ≤ w(γ)e            γ ′ ≁γ gd−1 (γ )   ≤ w(γ)e       γ ′ ≁γ hd−1 (γ )   = hd (γ),          (S48)

     where the first inequality follows from noting that the subtrees (T1 , . . . , Tk ) of a depth-d tree T each have depth
     d − 1. By induction, we therefore learn that gd ≤ hd for all d. In the limit d → ∞, we obtain the result

                                                    g(γ) ≤ lim hd (γ) ≤ b(γ) = w(γ)e|γ| ,                                         (S49)
                                                              d→∞

     as desired.


Lemma 5. Let e be an arbitrary edge on the lattice Λ. When β ≥ β ∗ = 2 + log 3, there exists Cclus > 0 such that
                                           X
                                                |f (C)| ≤ Cclus e−4β ,                                       (S50)
                                                              C∈Se

where Cclus is a constant defined below.
                                                                                                                           10

Proof. Using Lemma 4,

                                 X                  X X                                      n
                                                                                             Y
                                        |f (C)| ≤                    |φ(γ1 , . . . , γn )|         w(γj )               (S51a)
                                 C∈Se               n≥1 γ1 ,...,γn                           j=1
                                                         ∃γk ∋e
                                                    X         X       X                                  n
                                                                                                         Y
                                               ≤          n                      |φ(γ1 , . . . , γn )|         w(γj )   (S51b)
                                                    n≥1       γ1 ∋e γ2 ,...,γn                           j=1
                                                    X
                                               =            g(γ1 )                                                      (S51c)
                                                    γ1 ∋e
                                                    X
                                               ≤          w(γ)e|γ|                                                      (S51d)
                                                    γ∋e
                                                        X
                                               ≤                 3s e−βs es                                             (S51e)
                                                    s≥4,even

                                                      (3e1−β )4
                                               =                                                                        (S51f)
                                                    1 − (3e1−β )2
                                               = Cclus e−4β                                                             (S51g)

where we’ve noted that the number of polymers of length s containing the edge e is upper-bounded by 3s . In the last
line we identify the constant Cclus ≡ (3e)4 /(1 − e−2 ) ≈ 5.115 × 103 .


       SV.   THE 00 SECTOR: DERIVING THE PARENT HAMILTONIAN WITH ASPECT-RATIO
                              DEPENDENT LOCALITY BOUNDS

   Having proven that the deformed toric code state |ψ(β)⟩ ≡ |ψ++ (β)⟩ admits a gapped parent Hamiltonian, we now
return to the “no-go” state |ψ00 (β)⟩; see Eq. (S4). As noted in the main text, the slightly simpler state |ψ++ (β)⟩ does
not strictly satisfy the assumptions of Ref. 18’s Theorem 1, which requires an exact 1-form symmetry about both
contractible and non-contractible cycles of the torus. In contrast, |ψ00 (β)⟩ does exhibit an exact 1-form symmetry
about all cycles, and therefore satisfies Ref. 18’s assumptions.
   We begin by comparing the no-go state |ψ00 (β)⟩ to the state |ψ++ (β)⟩ we have studied thus far. From Eqs. (S3) and
(S4), it is clear that these two states only differ by the inclusion of non-contractible loops in the latter state |ψ++ (β)⟩.
Deep in the strongly deformed phase, large loops are rare, and the relative amplitude of these non-contractible loops
is suppressed exponentially in linear system size L. Indeed, a simple Peierls argument [28] allows for the overlap
between the two states to be lower-bounded for large β as
                                                    2
                             |⟨ψ00 (β)|ψ++ (β)⟩|                      Ze-e
                                                         =                           ≥ 1 − e−O(L) ,                      (S52)
                     ⟨ψ00 (β)|ψ00 (β)⟩ ⟨ψ++ (β)|ψ++ (β)⟩   Ze-e + Ze-o + Zo-e + Zo-o

where Ze-e is the partition function of the Ising ferromagnet at inverse temperature β with periodic (even) boundary
conditions (BC), Ze-o has periodic (even) BC along x and anti-periodic (odd) BC along y, and so on. We bound
the middle expression by noting that every contribution to the odd sectors contains a system-spanning polymer, and
consequently the odd-sector partition functions are all exponentially suppressed relative to Ze-e at large β.
  As a direct consquence, the states |ψ00 (β)⟩ and |ψ++ (β)⟩ are essentially indistinguishable from each other in the
thermodynamic limit: the difference in expectation values of any observable is upper-bounded by e−O(L) . In particular,
the original state |ψ++ (β)⟩ is 1-form symmetric about non-contractible loops up to exponentially small corrections,
and our parent Hamiltonian H(β) is an excellent approximate parent Hamiltonian for the no-go state |ψ00 (β)⟩.
  Nevertheless, it is interesting to construct an exact parent Hamiltonian for |ψ00 (β)⟩ to see how our approach relates
to the rigorous result of Ref. 18. Towards this end, we write |ψ00 (β)⟩ in terms of a deformation operator Ẑ00 (β)
analogously to Eq. (S14):
                                                                                             X
                                  |ψ00 (β)⟩ ∝ Ẑ00 (β) |0⟩ ,              Ẑ00 (β) =                e−β|L| XL ,          (S53)
                                                                                           L=∂R

where the sum is restricted to contractible closed loops L, which can always be represented as the boundary of a
                                                                                                                                         11

collection of plaquettes R. As in the previous case, Ẑ00 (β) is a positive-definite operator5 , and its logarithm is
therefore well-defined. Our goal is to use the Mayer cluster expansion to explicitly take the logarithm of Ẑ00 (β),
thereby deriving a parent Hamiltonian by the same strategy as in Appendix SIII. Explicitly, we will show similar to
the ‘++’ case that the logarithm admits an expansion of the form
                                                  X                                       n
                                                                                          Y
                        Ŵ00 (β) ≡ log Ẑ00 (β) =   f (C)XC , f (C) ≡ φ(γ1 , . . . , γn )   w(γi ),             (S55)
                                                            C                                           i=1

in perfect analogy to Eq. (S13). The only difference is that the collection of allowed polymers γ ∈ Γ and the form of
their interactions δ(γ, γ ′ ) needs to be slightly modified relative to the ‘++’ case, so as to disallow non-contractible
loop configurations. Once this modification is made, we obtain a parent Hamiltonian for |ψ00 (β)⟩ of an identical form
to that of |ψ++ (β)⟩ [see Eq. (S16)]:
                                                    X        P                
                                          H00 (β) ≡       e−2 e∈Se f (C)XC − Ze .                                  (S56)
                                                                e

Finally, we will use similar techniques as in Appendices SIII A and SIV to obtain a bound on the cluster weights f (C),
which will in turn allow us to demonstrate the locality of H00 (β) for any fixed aspect ratio axy ≡ Lx /Ly .


                                                       A.       Cluster Expansion

   To employ the cluster expansion for Ẑ00 (β), our first goal is to express it as a polymer model. We immediately see
that we cannot use the same set of polymers Γ as for the ++ case, which allow for homologically nontrivial polymers
in the partition function. Instead, we define the set of polymers Γ to contain:
   1. The set of connected, closed (possibly self-intersecting) loops with trivial homology, and
   2. Pairs of connected, closed (possibly self-intersecting) loops with non-trivial homology, such that they are dis-
      connected from each other.
For brevity, we will call these “type-1” and “type-2” polymers respectively. The disconnected condition in the second
case implies that both loops must be in the same homology class (i.e., they are either both contractible or both
non-contractible), and therefore are together the boundary of some region R (note that if they were connected, then
the two loops are regarded as a single type-1 polymer). The associated weights are defined the same way as before,
                                                                      Y
                                          ŵ(γ) = e−β|γ| Xγ ,   Xγ ≡      Xe ,                                  (S57)
                                                                                        e∈γ

but the interaction is modified. We define
                                 
                                          ′
                                 0, γ, γ intersect,
                             ′
                       δ(γ, γ ) = 0, γ and γ ′ are type-2, and are disconnected and unlinked ,                                       (S58)
                                 
                                 
                                   1, otherwise.
We say two disconnected type-2 polymers γ, γ ′ are linked if, for any R, R′ such that γ = ∂R andγ ′ = ∂R′ , then R
and R′ have overlapping plaquettes. They are unlinked otherwise.
  To justify this choice of polymers and interactions, we must show that writing out the polymer partition function (S8)
produces the correct deformation operator
                                                                                          
                                        X               X Y                  Y
                             Ẑ00 (β) =     e−βL XL =            ŵ(γ)          δ(γ, γ ′ ).                    (S59)
                                           L=∂R                     Γ′ ⊆Γ   γ∈Γ′          {γ,γ ′ }⊆Γ′




5 To see that Ẑ
               00 (β) is positive-definite, we take a similar strategy as for Ẑ(β) in Eq. (7). Specifically, we can express Ẑ00 (β) as the
  high-temperature expansion of a bond-disordered Ising model summed over periodic and antiperiodic boundary conditions:
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                  X        X                 X      (ηx ,ηy )
                                      Ẑ00 (β) ∝                  exp K            Ue         Xe sv sv′ ,                              (S54)
                                                                                 ′
                                                                                                      
                                               {sv =±1} ηx ,ηy =±1            e=⟨vv ⟩

          (η ,η )
  where Ue x y equals +1 everywhere besides along two non-contractible loops L̃x , L̃y in the dual lattice; along L̃x (L̃y ), Ue instead
  equals ηx (ηy ). The sum over ηx , ηy effectively imposes a sum over periodic and antiperiodic boundary conditions, which eliminates
  non-contractible cycles from the high-temperature expansion.
                                                                                                                          12




FIG. S1. A loop configuration with three type-2 polymers, in maroon, blue, and green respectively. These type-2 polymers are
each pairwise compatible, since they satisfy the linking criterion [see Eq. (S58)] with δ(γ, γ ′ ) = 1.


It is clear from the preceding discussion that the right-hand side produces only contractible loop configurations.
Therefore, we only need to ensure that for any L on the left-hand side, the right-hand side produces the same term
with the correct coefficient (i.e., without overcounting). To this end, we make the following observations:
   1. Given a loop configuration L, there is a unique decomposition into connected loops such that all connected loops
      are mutually disconnected.
   2. For a given L, if there are no non-contractible connected loops in this decomposition, then L is reproduced exactly
      by a subset Γ′ ⊂ Γ on the right-hand side containing only type-1 polymers, where each polymer corresponds to
      a connected loop in L.
   3. If the decomposition of L contains two non-contractible connected loops wrapping the same cycle of the torus (a
      single non-contractible loop is disallowed), L is reproduced by a subset Γ′ containing a single type-two polymer.
   4. The nontrivial case is when L is decomposed into four or more non-contractible connected loops, each wrapping
      the same cycle of the torus (Fig. S1). Naively, if L contains 2n such loops, there are (2n − 1)!! ways to pair these
      loops into type-2 polymers. The middle condition in the interaction (S58) ensures that only one of these pairings
      gives a nonzero contribution to Ẑ00 . Specifically, a subset Γ′ containing multiple type-2 polymers contributes
      to Ẑ00 only if all type-2 polymers in Γ′ are pairwise linked. The only way to achieve this pairwise linking is to
      pair the loops antipodally; that is, if the non-contractible connected loops are labeled 1, . . . , 2n in order, only
      the pairing

                                            {{1, n + 1}, {2, n + 2}, . . . , {n, 2n}}                                  (S60)

      into type-2 polymers leads to a nonvanishing contribution to Ẑ00 (β) (see Fig. S1).
In this way, we see that the preceding definition of polymers together with the interaction (S58) avoids overcounting
in the polymer partition function on the right-hand side of Eq. (S59), reproducing Ẑ00 (β) exactly.
   We briefly note that the polymer model for the no-go state differs from that of the ++ state only by the properties
of non-contractible loops; the weights and interactions for type-1 polymers are identical in both partition functions.
In the large-β regime, we therefore expect that the differences between the two polymer models will be largely
inconsequential in the thermodynamic limit, consistent with the observations of the preceding section and with our
final conclusions. However, for purposes of constructing an exact parent Hamiltonian for any finite system size, we
will exactly keep track of these exponentially small contributions from non-contractible loops.


                                       B.    Modified Cluster Expansion Bound

   Since the definition of our polymer model has changed slightly, the technical details required to prove the cluster
expansion bound in Eq. (13) of the main text are slightly modified. The most important qualitative modification is
that, whereas Eq. (13) held at sufficiently large β for any system size, the same bound holds in the present setting only
for sufficiently large Lx , Ly , and at a fixed aspect ratio axy ≡ Lx /Ly . While the aspect ratio can be chosen arbitrarily,
it is crucial that it is held fixed as Lx , Ly are taken large; as we will see, our parent Hamiltonian construction can fail
if we take (for example) Lx to scale as eO(Ly ) , consistent with Theorem 1 of Ref. 18.
                                                                                                                              13

  For notational simplicity, we will assume throughout Lx ≥ Ly without loss of generality.

Lemma 6 (Kotecky-Preiss inequality for the polymer model Ẑ00 ). When β ≥ β ∗ = 2 + log 3, and for sufficiently
large system sizes Lx , Ly with any fixed aspect ratio axy , the weight w(γ) = e−β|γ| satisfies
                                                  X              ′
                                                       w(γ ′ )e|γ | ≤ |γ|                                (S61)
                                                               γ ′ ≁γ

where γ ′ ≁ γ means the two polymers are incompatible (δ(γ, γ ′ ) = 0) according to the interaction (S58).

   Note that the statement of the bound is identical to that of Lemma 2; the only difference lies in the collection of
allowed type-2 polymers and their interactions.

Proof. Our strategy is to divide the incompatible polymers γ ′ ≁ γ into type-1 and type-2 polymers, respectively:
                                X             ′    X             ′    X               ′
                                    w(γ ′ )e|γ | =     w(γ ′ )e|γ | +       w(γ ′ )e|γ |
                                      γ ′ ≁γ                      γ ′ ≁γ                        γ ′ ≁γ
                                                               γ ′ type-1                    γ ′ type-2
                                                                 X                   ′         X                     ′
                                                                                                                            (S62)
                                                          =                 w(γ ′ )e|γ | +                w(γ ′ )e|γ | ,
                                                                  γ ′ ≁γ                     γ ′ type-2
                                                               γ ′ type-1

where in the second line, we have extended the second sum to run over all type-2 polymers (including those compatible
with γ). The sum over incompatible type-1 polymers is bounded by an identical method to that of Lemma 2: the
number of such polymers γ ′ of fixed length |γ ′ | = s is upper-bounded by |γ|3s .
  To bound the sum over type-2 polymers γ ′ , let s1 and s2 denote the respective lengths of the two connected
components of γ ′ . Each of s1 and s2 can be no smaller than Ly , since these connected components must form non-
contractible loops. For a fixed pair of lengths (s1 , s2 ), The total number of type-2 polymers is upper-bounded by
(Lx + Ly )2 3s1 +s2 ; the two factors of (Lx + Ly ) come from observing that each of the two non-contractible loops must
cross either the x-axis or the y-axis, and there are Lx (Ly ) locations at which the loop can cross the x-axis (y-axis).
We therefore obtain the bound
                                 X               ′                X
                                       w(γ ′ )e|γ | ≤ (Lx + Ly )2     3s1 +s2 e−β(s1 +s2 ) es1 +s2                (S63a)
                                 γ ′ type-2                                    s1 ,s2 ≥Ly
                                                                           2
                                                                            1−β Ly
                                                                 (3e     )
                                                         ≤ 4L2x                                                            (S63b)
                                                                 1 − 3e1−β
                                                               4                          ∗
                                                         ≤             (Lx e−Ly )2 e−2(β−β )Ly ,                           (S63c)
                                                           (1 − e−1 )2

valid whenever β > β ∗ − 1. Combined with the bound on type-1 polymers obtained in the proof of Lemma 2, we
obtain the result
                       X                   ′       e−4 −4(β−β ∗ )           4                          ∗
                                w(γ ′ )e|γ | ≤           e        |γ| +             (Lx e−Ly )2 e−2(β−β )Ly                (S64a)
                                                 1 − e−2                (1 − e−1 )2
                       γ ′ ≁γ

                                               ≤ |γ|,                                                                      (S64b)

where the last inequality holds for sufficiently large Ly , with Lx = axy Ly .

  Using the result of Lemma 6, the analogs of Lemmas 3 and 4 are obtained by identical proofs. The analog of
Lemma 5 is obtained similar to Lemma 6, and results in a bound over cluster weights f (C):

Lemma 7. Let e be an arbitrary edge on the lattice Λ. When β ≥ β ∗ = 2 + log 3, and for sufficiently large system
sizes Lx , Ly with any fixed aspect ratio axy , there exists Cclus > 0 such that
                                               X
                                                   |f (C)| ≤ Cclus (1 + ε)e−4β ,                            (S65)
                                                        C∈Se

where ε can be chosen arbitrarily small.
                                                                                                                                14

Proof. By an identical strategy as in Lemma 5, we have
                            X             X X                           Y
                                |f (C)| ≤         |φ(γ1 , . . . , γn )|   w(γi )                                             (S66a)
                            C∈Se               n≥1 γ1 ,...,γn                             i
                                                    ∃γk ∋e
                                               X         X        X                                 Y
                                           ≤         n                      |φ(γ1 , . . . , γn )|       w(γi )               (S66b)
                                               n≥1       γ1 ∋e γ2 ,...,γn                           i
                                               X
                                           =           g(γ1 )                                                                (S66c)
                                               γ1 ∋e
                                               X
                                           ≤         w(γ)e|γ|                                                                (S66d)
                                               γ∋e
                                                                                                         
                                                       X                            X
                                           ≤                   3s e−βs es +                  w(γ)e|γ|                      (S66e)
                                                 s≥4,even                         γ type-2

                                                 (3e1−β )4           4                         ∗
                                           ≤           1−β   2
                                                               +       −1 2
                                                                            (Lx e−Ly )2 e−2(β−β )Ly                          (S66f)
                                               1 − (3e     )     (1 − e )
                                           ≤ Cclus (1 + ε)e−4β ,                                                             (S66g)
where we have once again broken the sum over polymers into type-1 and type-2 polymers, using the bound in Eq. (S63),
and we have identified Cclus = [(3e)4 /(1 − e−2 )] ≈ 5.115 × 103 . The arbitrarily small parameter ε in the last expression
is used to bound the second term in the previous line; for any fixed ε > 0, Ly and Lx = axy Ly can be taken sufficiently
large that the inequality is satisfied.



                                      C.    Proving that H00 (β) is local and gapped

  Finally, we use the result of Lemma 7 to prove that the parent Hamiltonian H00 (β) is local in the sense of Eqs. (S17),
(S18), and (S19) at sufficiently large β, from which Theorem 2 implies that H00 (β) exhibits a nonzero spectral gap.
Our approach mirrors that of the ‘++’ case in Appendix SIII: once again, we Taylor expand the exponential in
Eq. (S56) (justified by Lemma 7) to write
                                                         X X (−2)n                   X         n
                                                                                               Y           
                                 H00 (β) = H0 +                                                   f (Cj )XCj .                (S67)
                                                           e n≥1
                                                                        n!
                                                                                 C1 ...Cn ∈Se j=1

To divide the sum into local terms, it is convenient to distinguish between clusters C containing entirely type-1
polymers and clusters which contain some type-2 polymers. We call a cluster C = (γ1 , . . . , γn ) type-1 if all of its
constituent polymers are all type-1; otherwise, we call C type-2. We then group terms in Eq. (S67) based on whether
they contain type-2 clusters or not. Specifically, we first define
                                               X                X (−2)n                 X               n
                                                                                                        Y
                             Vr,v ≡                                                                         [f (Cj )XCj ],    (S68)
                                                                        n!
                                      e=(v,v+x̂),(v,v+ŷ) n≥1                      C1 ...Cn ∈Se j=1
                                                                                  Cj type 1 ∀j
                                                                                 maxj ∥Cj ∥=r+1

for all vertices v and all odd r ≥ 3, in perfect analogy to Eq. (S23), save for the restriction to exclusively type-1
clusters. Recall that the restriction to clusters with maximum length maxj ∥Cj ∥ = r + 1 implies that Vr,v is contained
within the r × r square Av (r) ∈ S(r) centered on vertex v. To capture terms with type-2 clusters, we also define the
(highly nonlocal) operators
                                                X                X (−2)n               X            n
                                                                                                    Y
                                Vv′ ≡                                                                   [f (Cj )XCj ].        (S69)
                                                                            n!
                                        e=(v,v+x̂),(v,v+ŷ) n≥1                    C1 ...Cn ∈Se j=1
                                                                                   ∃ type-2 Cj

Combining these two terms, we obtain a partition of H00 (β) into terms as follows:
                                                 X X                 X
                                       H00 (β) =              Vr,v +   Vv′ .                                                  (S70)
                                                                 v   r≥3, odd                  v
                                                                                                                            15

  By an identical calculation to that of Eqs. (S25) and (S26), we immediately obtain the same bound on the spectral
norm of Vr,v in the present setting:

                                          ∥Vr,v ∥ ≤ J(β)e−r ,                          ˜ −4β ,
                                                                         J(β) ≡ (1 + ε)Je                                 (S71)

where J˜ is given explicitly in Eq. (S27), and the parameter ε can be chosen to be arbitrarily small (see Lemma 7).
Therefore, by Theorem 2, the modified Hamiltonian
                                                          X X
                                               e 00 (β) ≡
                                               H                   Vr,v                                       (S72)
                                                                     v    r≥3, odd

is gapped and nondegenerate atP sufficiently large β and sufficiently large system sizes. On the other hand, we will now
show that the remainder term v Vv′ exhibits an exponentially small spectral norm, and therefore the exact parent
Hamiltonian H00 (β) is also gapped and nondegnerate in this regime. Explicitly, by a calculation similar to Eq. (S25),
we have
                                          X            X 2n          X        n
                                                                              Y
                        ∥Vv′ ∥ ≤                                                     |f (Cj )|                           (S73a)
                                                             n!
                                   e=(v,v+x̂),(v,v+ŷ) n≥1        C1 ...Cn ∈Se j=1
                                                                  ∃ type-2 Cj
                                                                                                
                                                                                                                  !n−1
                                          X            X        2n     X                           X
                              ≤                                          |f (C)|                          |f (C)|      (S73b)
                                                             (n − 1)!           
                                   e=(v,v+x̂),(v,v+ŷ) n≥1                  C∈Se                     C∈Se
                                                                           C type-2


Analogously to Eq. (S26), we bound the last sum over clusters using the result of Lemma 7, and we bound the sum
over type-2 clusters by noting that f (C) ≤ e−βLy fβ/2 (C), since each type-2 cluster C has cluster length ∥C∥ ≥ 2Ly .
Following the same steps as in Eq. (S26), we obtain the bound
                                                                        ∗
                                                                             h           ∗
                                                                                           i
                          ∥Vv′ ∥ ≤ Cglobal e−βLy , Cglobal ≡ 4Cclus e−2β exp 2Cclus e−4β .                      (S74)
                   P
Correspondingly, ∥ v Vv′ ∥ ≤ Lx Ly Cglobal e−βLy is exponentially small for sufficiently large Lx , Ly , so long as the
aspect ratio axy is held fixed. By Weyl’s Pinequality, the spectral gap of H00 (β) cannot differ from that of H  e 00 (β)
                                                ′
by more than twice the spectral norm of v Vv , and therefore H00 (β) also exhibits a nonzero spectral gap in the
thermodynamic limit for sufficiently large β.


                              SVI.       EQUIVALENT DEFINITIONS OF LOCALITY

  In this Appendix, we show that the exponential-in-diameter notion of locality [as defined in Eq. (15) of the main
text] and the notion of locality used to prove the stability of gap theorem in Ref. 29 [Eq. (S19)] are equivalent. For
completeness, we recap the definitions here. Note that the exponential-in-volume definition of locality [Eq. (S80)] is
a strictly stronger criterion than the definitions discussed in this section.
                                                                            P
Definition 1 (Exponential-in-diameter locality). A Hamiltonian H = R⊆Λ hR , where each local term hR is sup-
ported on subregion R, is considered exponential-in-diameter local if there exists finite constants µ, s > 0 such that
                                                  X
                                             sup      ∥hR ∥|R|eµ diam(R) ≤ s.                                     (S75)
                                                 v∈Λ
                                                       R∋v

Definition
P    P        2 (Bravyi-Hastings-Michalakis (BHM) locality [29]). We write the Hamiltonian as H =
  r≥1   A∈S(r) r,A , where S(r) is the set of all r × r squares on the lattice, and Vr,A has support on the r × r
              V
square A. Such a Hamiltonian is BHM-local if there exists constants J, µ′ > 0 such that
                                                                                      ′
                                                        sup ∥Vr,A ∥ ≤ Je−µ r .                                            (S76)
                                                       A∈S(r)


We will call J the strength of the Hamiltonian and µ′ the decay exponent.
                                                                                                                     16

                                          A.    Definition 1 =⇒ Definition 2

                                                                       P
  Given an exponential-in-diameter local Hamiltonian H =                 R⊆Λ hR , let us define the local terms

                                                                 X            1
                                                   Vr,v ≡                        hR .                              (S77)
                                                                             |R|
                                                                R∋v
                                                             diam(R)=r
                                                                                 P     P
Note that each hR contributes to |R| distinct terms Vr,v , and therefore H =       v∈Λ   r≥1 Vr,v . Moreover, Vr,v is
supported on the (2r − 1) × (2r − 1) square centerd at v. Finally, its norm is upper-bounded as
                                                       X        1
                                       ∥Vr,v ∥ ≤                   ∥hR ∥                                          (S78a)
                                                               |R|
                                                      R∋v
                                                   diam(R)=r
                                                             X          |R|
                                               = e−µr                       ∥hR ∥eµ diam(R)                       (S78b)
                                                                       |R|2
                                                           R∋v
                                                        diam(R)=r

                                               ≤ se−µr                                                            (S78c)
                                                             −µ
                                               = se−µ/2 e     2 (2r−1)   .                                        (S78d)

We therefore find that exponential-in-diameter locality implies BHM locality, with strength J = se−µ/2 and decay
exponent µ′ = µ/2.


                                          B.    Definition 2 =⇒ Definition 1

                                        P     P
  Given a BHM-local Hamiltonian H = r≥1 A∈S(r) Vr,A , we simply identify hR = Vr,A with R = A. Then, letting
µ be an unspecified constant for now, we have
                               X                        X X
                                   ∥hR ∥|R|eµ diam(R) =     ∥Vr,A ∥|A|eµ diam(A)                     (S79a)
                                 R∋v                             r≥1 A∈S(r)
                                                                      A∋v
                                                                 X X                          √
                                                             =                  ∥Vr,A ∥r2 eµ 2r                   (S79b)
                                                                 r≥1 A∈S(r)
                                                                      A∋v
                                                                 X               ′
                                                                                        √
                                                             ≤         r2 Je−µ r r2 eµ 2r ,                       (S79c)
                                                                 r≥1

                               noted that there are r2 squares A ∈ S(r) containing a given vertex v. The final sum
where in the final line, we’ve √
                            ′
converges as long as µ < µ /√ 2. We therefore find that BHM locality implies exponential-in-diameter locality, for
some decay constant µ < µ′ / 2 and strength s ∝ J given explicitly by the above sum.


                         SVII.    EXPONENTIAL-IN-VOLUME LOCALITY BOUNDS

  In this Appendix, we show that our parent Hamiltonian H(β) not only satisfies the exponential-in-diameter and
BHM locality conditions described in Appendix SVI, but also satisfies a stronger exponential-in-volume locality
condition:
                                                                  P
Definition 3 (Exponential-in-volume locality). A Hamiltonian H = R⊆Λ hR , where each local term hR is supported
on the connected subregion R, is considered exponential-in-volume local if there exists finite constants µ, s > 0 such
that
                                                X
                                            sup    ∥hR ∥|R|eµ|R| ≤ s.                                            (S80)
                                                   v
                                                       R∋v

Note that this condition effectively requires ∥hR ∥ to decay exponentially with the volume |R| of the subregion R.
This is a stronger condition than the exponential-in-diameter decay required of the preceding section.
                                                                                                                                                    17

   From the explicit form of our parent Hamiltonian H(β) [see Eq. (S16)], it is quite natural that H(β) satisfies such a
bound: indeed, the nontrivial component of H(β) consists of a sum of loop operators exponentially suppressed in their
length L, which is generally proportional to both the loop’s diameter and the volume of its support. Furthermore,
using the results of Ref. 46 and 47, the existence of a gapped exponential-in-volume local parent Hamiltonian H(β)
for |ψ(β)⟩ implies that |ψ(β)⟩ can be prepared (up to an error exponentially small in the system size) by finite-time
unitary evolution using an exponential-in-volume local quasiadiabatic generator.
   To prove that H(β) = H0 + V satisfies exponential-in-volume locality, it is sufficient to focus on the nontrivial
component V , which we once again expand in Taylor series:

                                X            P                            X X (−2)n               X           n
                                                                                                                Y
                                         −2       C∈Se f (C)XC
                          V ≡        e                           −1 =                                               [f (Cj )XCj ].                (S81)
                                e                                               e n≥1
                                                                                         n!
                                                                                                C1 ...Cn ∈Se j=1


Our first goal is to group V into local terms. Towards this end, we associate a connected region R(C1 , . . . , Cn ) to each
                                                                (j)          (j)
collection of connected clusters (C1 , . . . , Cn ) with Cj ≡ (γ1 , . . . , γmj ) as follows:
                                                                           [  (j)              
                                                                                            (j)
                                                   R(C1 , . . . , Cn ) ≡      γ1 ∪ . . . ∪ γm j
                                                                                                 .                                                (S82)
                                                                            j

Such regions R appearing in V are guaranteed to be connected, since all of the clusters Cj comprising a given region
are required to contain the same edge e. Note that the same region will generally appear several times within V ; by
treating them as separate in computing the sum (S80), we are strictly overestimating the left-hand side, since we are
ignoring potential sign cancellations. We therefore have the inequality
              X                               XX              X            2n
        sup         ∥VR ∥|R|eµ|R| ≤ sup                                       |f (C1 )| . . . |f (Cn )||R(C1 , . . . , Cn )|eµ|R(C1 ,...,Cn )|
         e                               e                                 n!                                                                     (S83)
              R∋e                             e′ n≥1 C1 ...Cn ∈Se′
                                                    R(C1 ,...,Cn )∋e


Due to translation invariance, the supremum over e can be discarded. In fact, we can simplify the sum by averaging
over all e as follows:
                            XX                X                       1 XX                X
                                                         (· · · ) =                                  (· · · )                                    (S84a)
                                                                      Ne ′
                            e′ n≥1 C1 ...Cn ∈Se′                           e,e n≥1 C1 ...Cn ∈Se′
                                  R(C1 ,...,Cn )∋e                                R(C1 ,...,Cn )∋e
                                                                   1 XX          X
                                                                 =                        |R(C1 , . . . , Cn )|(· · · )                          (S84b)
                                                                   Ne ′
                                                                      e n≥1 C1 ...Cn ∈Se′
                                                                   X X
                                                                 =            |R(C1 , . . . , Cn )|(· · · ),                                     (S84c)
                                                                      n≥1 C1 ...Cn ∈Se


where in the second line we’ve performed the sum over e by noting that there are precisely |R(C1 , . . . , Cn )| nonvanishing
terms in the sum, each with the same value; and in the third line we’ve noted that every term in the sum over e′
yields the same value, allowing us to replace the sum over e′ with a fixed edge e. We therefore have the inequality
          X                         X         X    2n                                               2
                ∥VR ∥|R|eµ|R| ≤                       |f (C1 )| . . . |f (Cn )||R(C1 , . . . , Cn )| eµ|R(C1 ,...,Cn )|                          (S85a)
                                                   n!
          R∋e                     n≥1 C1 ...Cn ∈Se
                                  X X              2n                          h                        i2               
                                ≤                     |f (C1 )| . . . |f (Cn )| ∥C1 ∥ + . . . + ∥Cn ∥ eµ ∥C1 ∥+...+∥Cn ∥                         (S85b)
                                                   n!
                                  n≥1 C1 ...Cn ∈Se
                                  X X                                                                                
                                                   2n
                                ≤                     |f (C1 )| . . . |f (Cn )|e ∥C1 ∥+...+∥Cn ∥ eµ ∥C1 ∥+...+∥Cn ∥                              (S85c)
                                                   n!
                                  n≥1 C1 ...Cn ∈Se
                                      (                                )
                                            X
                                                          (µ+1)∥C∥
                                = exp 2          |f (C)|e                 − 1,                                                                   (S85d)
                                              C∈Se
                     P
recalling that ∥C∥ = γ∈C |γ| is the total length of all polymers in the cluster C. In the third line we have used the
inequality x2 ≤ ex for all x > 0, applied to x = ∥C1 ∥ + . . . + ∥Cn ∥.
                                                                                                                      18

   As in the proofs of Sec. SIII A, we bound the sum over clusters by writing f (C) = e−β∥C∥/2 fβ/2 (C), where fβ/2 (C)
is the same function evaluated at deformation strength β/2. As long as β > 2(µ + 1), we then have
                                                            (                                      )
                             X                                  X
                                               µ|R|                                 (µ+1−β/2)∥C∥
                                   ∥VR ∥|R|e          ≤ exp 2          fβ/2 (C) e                      −1
                             R∋e                                C∈Se
                                                            (                     )
                                                                X                                                  (S86)
                                                      ≤ exp 2          fβ/2 (C)       −1
                                                                C∈Se
                                                            
                                                      ≤ exp 2Cclus e−2β − 1,

where in the final line, we have used the bound in Eq. (13) of the main text (proven in Lemma 5), valid for β > 2β ∗ =
2(2 + log 3). Note that the final expression can be made arbitrarily small at large β.
  Altogether, we find that for any choice of the constants µ, s, the perturbation V satisfies the exponential-in-volume
locality criterion in Eq. (S80) at sufficiently large values of β. A similar locality bound can be immediately obtained
for the full parent Hamiltonian H(β) = H0 + V by adding eµ to the value of s, to account for the contribution from
the strictly local term in H0 .


  SVIII.    THE STRONGLY PAULI-Z DECOHERED TORIC CODE IS SHORT-RANGE ENTANGLED

   In this section, we outline a rigorous proof that the 2D toric code under sufficiently large Pauli-Z decoherence
strength is separable as a convex sum of trivial pure states. To do so, we exploit the decomposition of the deco-
hered toric code into pure states given in Refs. 37 and 38, and utilize our construction to construct gapped parent
Hamiltonians for these states.


                       A.    Review: Separability Transition of the Decohered Toric Code

   For completeness, we first review the main result of Ref. 37, which constructs a particular pure-state decomposition
for the toric code subjected to a single species of Pauli errors. Readers who are already familiar with the result of
Ref. 37 can skip to the next section.
   We consider the toric code subjected to incoherent Pauli-Z decoherence, such that the local error channel on edge
e is given by

                                                  Ee (ρ) = (1 − p)ρ + pZe ρZe .                                    (S87)

Applying the same channel independently to all edges, we have
                                                       X
                            ρp ≡ E(|TC⟩⟨TC|) =          (1 − p)Ne −|E| p|E| ZE |TC⟩⟨TC| ZE
                                                        E
                                                                 X  p |E|                                        (S88)
                                                  = (1 − p)Ne               ZE |TC⟩⟨TC| ZE ,
                                                                    1−p
                                                                  E
            Q
where E ≡ e Ee , and EQis the ‘error configuration’, i.e., the collection of edges which were acted on nontrivially by
the error, so that ZE ≡ e∈E Ze is the corresponding error.
  To simplify
      Q        the decohered state, first note that ZE |TC⟩ = ZE ′ |TC⟩ whenever ZE and ZE ′ differ by vertex stabilizers
Av = e∋v Ze . We can therefore sort errors into equivalence classes, denoted [E] with representative E, and reorganize
the sum over errors as a sum over equivalence classes:
                                                "               ′ #
                                            X X  p |E |
                                      ρp ∝                          ZE |TC⟩⟨TC| ZE
                                                        1−p
                                            [E] E ′ ∼E
                                            X                                                                      (S89)
                                          =     Zp (E) ZE |TC⟩⟨TC| ZE ,
                                           [E]
                                                                                                                          19

where E ′ ∼ E means that ZE and ZE ′ differ by products of Av stabilizers, and the relative probabilities Zp (E) of
each equivalence class are proportional to the partition functions of a bond-disordered Ising model [44]:

                                         X  p |E |
                                                                    ′


                                Zp (E) ≡
                                         ′
                                            1−p
                                             E ∼E
                                                                                                                      (S90)
                                                                        X                     X                  
                                              Ising
                                           ∝ ZK     ({xe }) ≡                  exp       K               xe sv sv′ ,
                                                                                                                 
                                                                   {sv =±1}                  e=⟨vv ′ ⟩


with K = − 21 log[p/(1 − p)], and xe = −1 (xe = +1) whenever e ∈ E (e ̸∈ E). Note that Zp (E) is independent
of the choice of representative E; in the language of the Ising model, the partition function depends only on the
locations of frustrated plaquettes and the homology of the disorder lines connecting them through the dual lattice.
It can be shown from the above representation of ρp that there is a sharp phase transition at p = pc ≈ 0.109 in the
behavior of an optimal decoder which attempts to recover |TC⟩ from ρp , whose critical phenomena is described by
the random-bond Ising model on the Nishimori line [44, 45].
   In Ref. 37, the authors argued that the phase transition in optimal decoding coincides with a separability transition:
for p > pc , it becomes possible to express ρp as a convex sum of short-range entangled (SRE) states. To demonstrate
this result, let us first consider the initial state |TC⟩ = |TC++ ⟩. In this case, ZE |TC++ ⟩ is orthogonal to ZE ′ |TC++ ⟩
whenever E ≁ E ′ . This allows us to trivially take the square root of ρp :
                                          √       Xq
                                            ρp ∝        Zp (E) ZE |TC++ ⟩⟨TC++ | ZE .                                 (S91)
                                                    [E]

                                      √ √
Following Ref. 37, we write ρp =       ρp ρp and insert a resolution of identity in the Pauli-Z basis:
                                                            X      √                         √
                                                ρp ∝                    ρp |{ze }⟩⟨{ze }|        ρp
                                                        {ze =±1}
                                                        X          √                √                                  (S92)
                                                    =         XL        ρp |0⟩⟨0|    ρp XL ,
                                                          L

Where we’ve noted that the only Pauli-Z basis states having nonzero overlap with ρp are those satisfying Av = +1
(i.e., closed loop states), and therefore can be written as XL |0⟩ for some loop operator XL ; additionally, note that
                              √
XL commutes with ρp and ρp . We can further simplify the pure state in the parenthesis as follows:

                      √              Xq
                          ρp |0⟩ =          Zp (E) ZE |TC++ ⟩⟨TC++ | ZE |0⟩                                            (S93a)
                                     [E]
                                                                                               !
                                     Xq                       Y         Y          Y
                                ∝           Zp (E) ZE          (1 + Av ) (1 + Bp )   (1 + X µ ) ZE |0⟩                 (S93b)
                                     [E]                      v                p                 µ=1,2
                                                                                     !
                                     Xq                       Y          Y
                                =           Zp (E) ZE          (1 + Bp )   (1 + X µ ) ZE |0⟩                           (S93c)
                                     [E]                      p               µ=1,2
                                                                                     !
                                     Xq                       Y          Y               X
                                ∝           Zp (E) ZE          (1 + Bp )   (1 + X µ ) ZE   ZE ′ |+⟩ ,                  (S93d)
                                     [E]                      p               µ=1,2                          E′


where in the second line, X µ ≡ XLµ are a basis of two logical-X operators, given by Wilson loop operators about two
representative non-contractible loops Lµ of the torus. In the final line, |+⟩ is the simultaneous +1 eigenstate of each
Xe , and the projector ZE (· · · )ZE annihilates the state to the right unless E and E ′ are homologous. Finally using
that Zp (E) is independent of the chosen representative, we obtain the simple expression
                                         √          Xq
                                           ρp |0⟩ ∝       Zp (E) ZE |+⟩
                                                              E
                                                               X        p                                               (S94)
                                                        ∝                   ZK ({xe }) |{xe }⟩x ,
                                                            {xe =±1}
                                                                                                                        20

where |{xe }⟩x are the simultaneous Pauli-X eigenstates. In summary, we find that ρp can be written as a convex sum
of pure states as follows:
                          X                                √          X p
                    ρp ∝     XL |ϕ(p)⟩⟨ϕ(p)| XL , |ϕ(p)⟩ ≡ ρp |0⟩ ∝           ZK ({xe }) |{xe }⟩x .            (S95)
                          L                                             {xe =±1}


  The authors of Ref. 37 argued that the state |ϕ(p)⟩ (and thereby each state XL |ϕ(p)⟩, which differs from |ϕ(p)⟩ by
the finite-depth unitary XL ) is short-range entangled from the following properties:

   1. One-form symmetry: for contractible loops L̃ in the dual lattice, ZL̃ |ϕ(p)⟩ = |ϕ(p)⟩. This follows by noting that
                           √                 √          √
      ZL̃ commutes with ρp , so that ZL̃ ρp |0⟩ = ρp |0⟩. Alternatively, ZL̃ ads a contractible closed loop to the
      disorder realization {xe }, leaving the partition functions ZK ({xe }) invariant.

   2. Condensed m anyons: if we instead consider an open string P̃ through the dual lattice, we find
                                                                        s
                              ⟨ϕ(p)| ZP̃ |ϕ(p)⟩ X           Ne −|E| |E|   Zp (E ⊕ P̃ )
                                               =    (1 − p)        p                   .                             (S96)
                                ⟨ϕ(p)|ϕ(p)⟩                                 Zp (E)
                                                      E

      This quantity is a two-point disorder parameter correlator in the Nishimori random-bond Ising model; it decays
      exponentially for p < pc and is long-range ordered for p > pc . We therefore find that |ϕ(p)⟩ exhibits condensed
      m anyons for p > pc .

Subsequently, Ref. 38 demonstrated numerically that |ϕ(p)⟩ exhibits zero topological entanglement entropy. It follows
from these observations that |ϕ(p)⟩ realizes a topologically trivial confined phase.
   However, it is also interesting to note that |ϕ(p)⟩ exhibits perimeter-law Wilson loop correlation functions; indeed,
                            √
since XL commutes with ρp , we have

             ⟨ϕ(p)| XL |ϕ(p)⟩   ⟨0| XL ρp |0⟩ X                     ⟨0| XL ZE |TC⟩ ⟨TC|0⟩
                              =              =  (1 − p)Ne −|E| p|E|                       = (1 − 2p)|L| .            (S97)
               ⟨ϕ(p)|ϕ(p)⟩        ⟨0| ρp |0⟩                            ⟨0|TC⟩ ⟨TC|0⟩
                                                  E

In other words, the state |ϕ(p)⟩ is qualitatively similar to the deformed toric code state studied in the main text.
Given the results of Ref. 18, one may naturally wonder whether these states are indeed short-range entangled (SRE)
or not. In the following section, we will demonstrate explicitly that |ϕ(p)⟩ is SRE at sufficiently large p by constructing
a local gapped parent Hamiltonian for which |ϕ(p)⟩ is the unique ground state.


                                 B.   Constructing a Parent Hamiltonian for |ϕ(p)⟩

  To construct a parent Hamiltonian for |ϕ(p)⟩, we note from Eq. (S95) that it can be expressed in terms of the
deformation operator Ẑ(β) defined for the deformed toric code [see Eq. (S6), as well as Eq. (7) of the main text]:
                                                                                  (                )
                      X q                     q
                                                                 1                     1X
           |ϕ(p)⟩ ∝           Ẑ(β) |{xe }⟩x ∝ Ẑ(β) |0⟩ = exp Ŵ (β) |0⟩ = exp             f (C)XC |0⟩ ,       (S98)
                                                                 2                     2
                     {xe =±1}                                                                C


where β ≡ − log tanh K = 2 artanh[p/(1 − p)]. We see that |ϕ(p)⟩ is nearly identical to the deformed toric code state
                                                  1
|ψ(β)⟩, except that the deformation operator is e 2 Ŵ instead of eŴ . By an identical construction as for |ψ(β)⟩, we
obtain the following parent Hamiltonian for |ϕ(p)⟩:
                                                 X P                       
                                      Hdec (p) =        e− C∈Se f (C)XC − Ze ,                                   (S99)
                                                      e

which differs from the parent Hamiltonian H(β) only by a factor of two inside the exponential term.
  Although we will not explicitly prove that Hdec (p) is gapped for sufficiently large p, it is clear that an essentially
identical proof to the one of Appendices SIII and SIV will lead to an analogous result: namely, Hdec (p) can be shown
to be local in the sense of Eqs. (S17), (S18), and (S19), and therefore Theorem 2 proves that Hdec (p) is gapped and
exhibits the unique ground state |ϕ(p)⟩ for sufficiently large p.
                                                                                                                                21

                                         C.   More General Decohered Toric Code States


 Thus far, we have studied the ++ state |TC++ ⟩ under strong Pauli-Z decoherence. It is interesting to consider
more general initial toric code states, which can be written in the form
                                                                 X
                                                     |TCΞ ⟩ =          Ξℓ Z ℓ |TC++ ⟩ ,                                      (S100)
                                                                   ℓ


where Z ℓ ≡ ZLℓ are a collection of four logical-Z operators (for example: Z 0 = 1, Z 1 = ZL˜x for a non-contractible
x-loop L̃x , etc), and Ξℓ are four complex numbers. Since each Z ℓ commutes with the Pauli-Z decoherence channel,
we can immediately write down the corresponding decohered state:
                                                                                                                       !
                        X                                                  X                   X
                 ρp ≡         Ξℓ Ξ∗ℓ′ Z ℓ E(|TC++ ⟩⟨TC++ |)Z ℓ′ ∝                Ξℓ Ξ∗ℓ′ Z ℓ       XL |ϕ(p)⟩⟨ϕ(p)| XL Z ℓ′
                        ℓℓ′                                                ℓℓ′                 L                             (S101)
                                                                           X
                                                                       =         |ΞL (p)⟩⟨ΞL (p)| ,
                                                                           L

where
                                                                 X
                                                    |ΞL (p)⟩ ≡         Ξℓ Z ℓ XL |ϕ(p)⟩ .                                    (S102)
                                                                   ℓ


For sufficiently large p and generic complex coefficients Ξℓ , each state |ΞL (p)⟩ is once again SRE up to exponentially
                                                         1
small corrections. To see this, recall that |ϕ(p)⟩ = e 2 Ŵ |0⟩ is a sum over Ze = −1 loop configurations such that
large loops are suppressed exponentially in their system size. Consequently, |ϕ(p)⟩ is approximately 1-form symmetric
under non-contractible loops—that is, for each nontrivial logical operator Z ℓ ,

                                                     Z ℓ |ϕ(p)⟩ = |ϕ(p)⟩ + e−O(L) ,                                          (S103)

where the correction term is a vector of exponentially small norm (relative to that of |ϕ(p)⟩). Therefore, for generic
Ξℓ , we have

                                                   |ΞL (p)⟩ ∝ XL |ϕ(p)⟩ + e−O(L) .                                           (S104)

As a result, |ΞL (p)⟩ is a SRE state, we find that once again that Eq. (S101) constitutes an exact decomposition into
SRE states for generic Ξℓ .
  On the other hand, for certain special choices of the wavefunction amplitudes Σℓ , it is possible to obtain long-range
entangled (LRE) states |ΞL (p)⟩. For example, consider the state with (Ξ0 , Ξ1 , Ξ2 , Ξ3 ) = (1, −1, 0, 0) and L = ∅, given
explicitly by

                                                |(1, −1, 0, 0)∅ (p)⟩ ≡ (1 − Z Lx ) |ϕ(p)⟩ .                                  (S105)

This state is a sum over all loop configurations with a non-contractible Ze = −1 loop about the y cycle of the torus;
it can be regarded as a “loop-wave” state, in the terminology of Ref. 18. Such states are expected to be LRE, and
so Eq. (S101) does not constitute an exact decomposition into SRE states. Nevertheless, since non-contractible loops
comprise an e−O(L) component of |ϕ(p)⟩, the norm of states such as Eq. (S105) is e−O(L) . In terms of normalized
SRE states ψiSRE and normalized LRE states ψjLRE , the full density matrix ρp therefore has the general structure
                                     X                        X                                    X
                              ρp =       ci ψiSRE ψiSRE +          dj ψiLRE ψiLRE ,                    dj = e−O(L) .         (S106)
                                     i                         j                                   j


  In other words, although ρp is not exactly decomposed into a convex sum of SRE states (at least in this particular
decomposition), the total probability of all LRE states to in this decomposition of ρp is exponentially small; conse-
quently, in the thermodynamic limit, ρp cannot be distinguished from a genuine SRE state by any observable. In this
specific sense, we can once again regard ρp as an SRE mixed state.
                                                                                                                                22


                         B                                                B

                                      A0: 0 = ∆(B, C)                                  A1: 0 = ∆(B, C, D)
                         C                                                C
                                      ≡ (SBC + SC − SB )σ                              ≡ (SBC + SCD − SB − SD )σ

                                                                          D


FIG. S2. The two axioms of the entanglement bootstrap. Calling A the region outside the annulus in either case, both axioms
reduce to having vanishing conditional mutual information I(A : C|B) = 0. Away from fixed point gapped states, these axioms
will only be approximately satisfied, i.e. I(A : C|B) ∼ exp(−ℓ/ξ), where ℓ is the width of the annulus and ξ is a partition-
independent length scale called the Markov length. In the (infrared) limit where the annulus is scaled up such that ℓ ≫ ξ, the
axioms become exact.


  SIX.    VERIFYING ENTANGLEMENT BOOTSTRAP AXIOMS FOR THE STRONGLY DEFORMED
                                   TORIC CODE

  In this Appendix, we provide an informal physicists’ argument showing that the strongly deformed toric code
satisfies the A0 and A1 axioms of entanglement bootstrap [41–43] approximately, such that the axioms become exact
as we scale up the partition size.
  We quickly recap the axioms through Fig. S2. In this section, we show that both ∆(B, C) of A0 and ∆(B, C, D) of
A1 scale as ∼ rC exp(−2βℓ), where ℓ is the width of the annulus and rC is the radius of the inner circle. To show this,
we use the result of Ref. 13 (see [51] for a field-theoretic version) which states that, for any region A, we can write
the Von Neumann entanglement entropy of the reduced density matrix ρA = TrA [|ψ(β)⟩⟨ψ(β)|] / ⟨ψ(β)|ψ(β)⟩ as
                          X e−β|L|        ∂A                X                         X
                                           ZL                                                        ′
                  SA = −             log           ,    Z≡       e−β|L| ,    ZL∂A ≡            e−β |L | .        (S107)
                                Z           Z                                             ′
                              L                                   L                            L:
                                                                                           L′ =L on ∂A

The quantity ZL∂A can be regarded as the partition function of an Ising model with its configuration on ∂A constrained
to agree with that of L. This relation maps the von Neumann entanglement entropy of the deformed toric code on
a subsystem A to the entropy of the subsystem spin configuration a classical Ising model6 at inverse temperature β,
where the latter subsystem lives on the boundary ∂A. We refer the reader to [13] for a derivation of the above result
using the replica trick.
  Using p(L) = e−β|L| /Z as a probability measure over the space of closed loops, we can write
                                              ∆(B, C) = SBC + SC − SB                                                     (S108a)
                                                            "               !#
                                                                   ∂(BC) ∂C
                                                                  ZL     ZL
                                                      = −EL log                                                           (S108b)
                                                                    ZL∂B Z
We analyze the argument of the log within a large-β (low-temperature in the Ising language) expansion. The highest
weight configuration when we take the expectation value EL over the probability measure p(L) is the empty loop
configuration L = {}. Correspondingly, the constrained partition functions ZL∂R sum over configurations with no
loops cutting across the boundary ∂R. In this sector, we see that all small loop configurations occur an equal number
                                                       ∂(BC) ∂C
of times in the two ‘product’ partition functions ZL        ZL and ZL∂B Z. The lowest order loop ‘diagram’ that
distinguishes the two is a thin connected loop that cuts across both boundaries of region B, as such a diagram cannot
           ∂(BC)
occur in ZL      , ZL∂C , or ZL∂B 
                                  but can appear in Z. Within a large-β (low temperature) expansion, such diagrams
                                        ∂(BC)
contribute as ∼ rC e−2βℓ to log ZL     ZL∂C /ZL∂B Z , where ℓ is the width of the annulus B and rC is the radius of
the inner disk C.
  For loop
         configurations L consisting
                                     of sparse small connected loops, we anticipate that a similar conclusion holds,
            ∂(BC) ∂C
that log ZL       ZL /ZL∂B Z ∼ rC e−2βℓ . Since the low temperature expansion for EL is dominated by such loop



6 Technically the Ising⋆ model, i.e., an Ising model summed over both periodic and antiperiodic boundary conditions, so that domain

  walls may exhibit non-contractible loops.
                                                                                                                     23

configurations, we argue that for sufficiently large β, we the deformed toric code satisfies the A0 axiom approximately,
given by

                                                 ∆(B, C) ∼ rC e−ℓ/ξ ,                                            (S109)

where ξ ≈ 1/2β may be renormalized from the value predicted by this low-temperature expansion by entropic effects
that we ignore. Notably, as we uniformly scale up the partition BC, ∆(B, C) vanishes exponentially quickly in linear
partition size.
  For the axiom A1, a very similar argument holds. Using the replica trick, we can write

                                    ∆(B, C, D) = SBC + SCD − SB − SD                                            (S110a)
                                                     "                  !#
                                                            ∂(BC) ∂(CD)
                                                          ZL      ZL
                                               = −EL log                   .                                    (S110b)
                                                             ZL∂B ZL∂D

One can argue that a very similar diagram (a thin connected loop) that cuts across both the inner and outer boundaries
of B (D) is the smallest “distinguishing diagram” that appears in no partition function in (S110b) except ZL∂D (ZL∂B )
for typical loop configurations L. Therefore, we expect that, once again

                                        ∆(B, C, D) ∼ rC e−ℓ/ξ ,      ξ ≈ 1/2β.                                   (S111)

As we increase the partition size compared to ξ, A1 becomes approximately satisfied.
