                                              Chapter in Advancing Astrophysics with the SKA – II




                                              Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories
                                              with spatially resolved H I observations
arXiv:2608.07290v1 [astro-ph.GA] 7 Aug 2026




                                              Federico Lelli,1 Antonino Marasco,2 Timothy A. Davis,3 Nathan Deg,4
                                              Jonathan Freundlich,5 Gyula I. G. Jòzsa,6,7 Peter Kamphuis,8 Pavel E. Mancera Piña,9
                                              Stacy S. McGaugh,10 Amidou Sorgho11 and Kristine Spekkens4
                                              1 INAF, Osservatorio Astrofisico di Arcetri, Largo Enrico Fermi 5, 50125, Firenze, Italy
                                              2 INAF, Osservatorio Astronomico di Padova, Vicolo dell’Osservatorio 5, 35122, Padova
                                              3 Cardiff Hub for Astrophysics Research & Technology, School of Physics & Astronomy, Cardiff University,

                                               Queens Buildings, Cardiff, CF24 3AA, UK
                                              4 Department of Physics, Engineering Physics, and Astronomy,Queen’s University, Kingston ON K7L 3N6,

                                               Canada
                                              5 Observatoire Astronomique de Strasbourg, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS UMR 7550, F-67000

                                               Strasbourg, France
                                              6 Max-Planck-Institut für Radioastronomie, Auf dem Hügel 69, D-53121 Bonn, Germany
                                              7 Centre for Radio Astronomy Techniques & Technologies (RATT), Department of Physics and Electronics,

                                               Rhodes University, Makhanda, EC, South Africa
                                              8 Ruhr University Bochum, Faculty of Physics and Astronomy, Astronomical Institute (AIRUB), 44780,

                                               Bochum, Germany
                                              9 Leiden Observatory, Leiden University, P.O. Box 9513, 2300 RA, Leiden, The Netherlands
                                              10 Department of Astronomy, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106
                                              11 Instituto Astrofísica Andalucía, Glorieta de la Astronomía s/n, 18008, Granada, Spain

                                              E-mail: federico.lelli@inaf.it, antonino.marasco@inaf.it,
                                              davist@cardiff.ac.uk, nathan.deg@queensu.ca,
                                              jonathan.freundlich@astro.unistra.fr, gjozsa@mpifr-bonn.mpg.de,
                                              peterkamphuisastronomy@gmail.com, pavel@strw.leidenuniv.nl,
                                              stacy.mcgaugh@case.edu, asorgho@iaa.es, kristine.spekkens@queensu.ca




                                              © The Authors                                                                        https://skao.int/
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                          F. Lelli et al.


   Understanding the nature of dark matter (DM) is one of the most pressing questions
   of modern physics. The flat rotation curves of galaxies, especially the extended
   H I rotation curves from radio observations at 21 cm, played a key historical role to
   establish the DM problem and continue to be a major tool to test different galaxy
   formation models, particle DM models, and modified gravity theories.
   The SKA observatory will revolutionize the study of H I rotation curves thanks to
   its unprecedented angular resolution, sensitivity, and survey speed. In combina-
   tion with optical and near-infrared ancillary data, H I surveys with SKA-Mid AA4
   will allow us to (1) obtain H I data at spatial resolutions of 1′′ − 2′′, probing the
   inner galaxy dynamics with unprecedented details (e.g., the cusp-core problem);
   (2) move from representative samples of a few hundreds of objects to statistical
   samples of tens of thousands of objects, allowing us to study the dynamical scal-
   ing laws of galaxies and their DM properties with unprecedented statistical power
   across different cosmic environments; (3) move from galaxies at 𝑧 ≃ 0 to galaxies
   at 𝑧 ≃ 1, probing DM halos at earlier cosmic epochs and exploring the redshift
   evolution of the dynamical laws across about 8 Gyrs.
   The massive SKA data, however, will pose important technical challenges for the
   derivation of H I rotation curves with automated kinematic software. Developing
   such kinematic software in the SKA era will be crucial to reach major scientific
   goals, such as discriminating between different solutions to the DM problem.




                                               2
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                F. Lelli et al.


1   Introduction

The nature of dark matter (DM) is one of the biggest mysteries of the Universe. DM is invoked
to explain a variety of astrophysical phenomena, such as the internal dynamics of galaxies and
galaxy systems (groups and clusters), the strength of gravitational lensing, and the power spectrum
of the cosmic microwave background (CMB; see Sanders, 2010; Bertone and Hooper, 2018, for
historical perspectives). Nonbaryonic DM is a major ingredient of the Λ Cold Dark Matter (ΛCDM)
cosmological model and is essential to promote structure formation, starting from the tiny density
perturbations imprinted on the CMB up to present-day galaxies. DM is generally thought to be
a new elementary particle that has no electromagnetic interactions, beyond the standard model of
particle physics. For many years, the leading DM candidates have been weakly interacting massive
particles (WIMPs), but a plethora of alternative DM models exist, such as self-interacting DM made
of particles interacting with each other, and fuzzy DM made of ultra-light Axion-like particles (see
Workman et al., 2022, for a review). Despite four decades of dedicated searches and experiments,
particle DM has eluded clear detections so far (e.g., Billard et al., 2022). Alternatively, the DM
effect may indicate the need to revise Einstein’s theory of general relativity and its Newtonian
limit. In this context, Modified Newtonian Dynamics (MOND, Milgrom, 1983a) and its relativistic
extensions (Skordis and Złośnik, 2021; Blanchet and Skordis, 2024) appear to be most promising.
Without a doubt, understanding the nature of DM is one of the major challenges of modern physics.
The flat rotation curves of disk galaxies played a key historical role in the establishment of the DM
problem (Bosma, 1978; Rubin et al., 1978). A key complementary role was also played by optical
and near-infrared (NIR) surface photometry, providing the stellar gravitational contribution to the
rotation curve (Casertano, 1983). In fact, the proper computation of the baryonic gravitational field
of a disk-like system showed that H𝛼 rotation curves measured from optical spectroscopy were not
extended enough to unambiguously probe the DM effect (Kalnajs, 1983; Kent, 1986). The decisive
evidence came from radio observations of the 21-cm line of atomic hydrogen (H I). The H I disks
of galaxies are generally twice as extended as their stellar components (e.g., Swaters et al., 2002;
Lelli et al., 2016b, see Fig. 1), so they are uniquely suited to probe the outermost regions where the
DM effect is dominant (van Albada et al., 1985; van Albada and Sancisi, 1986; Kent, 1987).
Over the past 40 years, rotation curves have been derived for hundreds of nearby galaxies (e.g.,
Begeman, 1987; Persic et al., 1996; Verheijen and Sancisi, 2001; de Blok et al., 2008; Swaters
et al., 2009). Ideally, one combines H𝛼 and/or CO data at high angular resolutions (∼1′′ −2′′ ) in
the inner parts with H I data at lower angular resolutions (∼10′′ −30′′ ) in the outer regions (e.g.,
Bosma, 1978; de Blok and Bosma, 2002; Noordermeer et al., 2005; Lelli et al., 2016b; Shelest and
Lelli, 2020). In addition, NIR surface photometry provides the best possible tracer of the stellar
mass distribution (e.g., Verheijen, 2001; McGaugh and Schombert, 2014; Schombert et al., 2019),
so it can be used in concert with H I and CO surface density maps to construct full mass models,
separating the gravitational contributions of stars, gas, and DM (see Fig. 2 for an example).
The Spitzer Photometry and Accurate Rotation Curves (SPARC) database has been a major advance
in this effort, collecting H I+H𝛼 rotation curves from the literature (see Lelli et al., 2016b, for
references) and complementing them with NIR surface photometry (Schombert and McGaugh,
2014). The SPARC sample consists of 175 galaxies at 𝑧 ≃ 0 and has been used to test different


                                                  3
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                       F. Lelli et al.




Figure 1: Optical images (left panels) and H I maps (right panels) on the same physical scale for four typical
spirals: NGC 2403 (top left, Fraternali et al., 2002), NGC 6946 (top right, Boomsma et al., 2008), NGC 5055
(bottom left, Battaglia et al., 2006), and M31 (bottom right, Braun and Thilker, 2004). Considering standard
observations, the H I disk is generally more extended than the stellar component. Mass models of galaxies
are usually built using optical and/or NIR images to compute the stellar gravitational contribution, and H I
maps to compute the gas gravitational contribution (see Fig. 2). Images kindly provided by M. Verheijen.


ΛCDM models of galaxy formation (Katz et al., 2017; Li et al., 2020) as well as alternative particle
DM models, such as self-interacting DM (Ren et al., 2019), fuzzy DM (Bar et al., 2022), and
superfluid DM (Mistele et al., 2022). The SPARC data have also been used to test modified gravity
theories, such as MOND (Li et al., 2018), massive gravity (Panpanich and Burikham, 2018), f(𝑅)
gravity (Naik et al., 2019), conformal gravity (Li and Modesto, 2020), and others. However, the
SPARC sample is too small and heterogeneous to firmly distinguish between these different theories.
In addition, it lacks very low-mass galaxies (with baryonic masses smaller than ∼108 M⊙ ), which
are probed by smaller complementary samples, such as LITTLE-THINGS (Oh et al., 2015; Iorio
et al., 2017), SHIELD (McNichols et al., 2016), and the compilation of Mancera Piña et al. (2025).

To distinguish among different DM models and/or modified gravity theories, we need much larger
samples (tens of thousands of galaxies) with both H I and NIR data, probing galaxies in different
cosmic environments. The first steps in this direction are represented by the WALLABY survey
with the Australian SKA pathfinder (ASKAP; Westmeier et al., 2022; Deg et al., 2022; Murugeshan
et al., 2024), the AWES survey with APERTIF (Adams et al., 2022), and the upcoming BIG-
SPARC database (Haubner et al., 2026). These projects will provide spatially resolved H I data for
a few thousand galaxies at 𝑧 ≲ 0.05, increasing current samples by about one order of magnitude.
Another avenue to test different DM models and modified gravity theories is probing the cosmic
evolution of the baryon-DM connection by measuring H I kinematics at different 𝑧, possibly up
to 𝑧 ≃ 1. Pioneering H I observations at 𝑧 ≳ 0.05 are provided by the CHILES survey with the
Very Large Array (VLA; Hess et al., 2019), the DINGO survey with ASKAP (Rhee et al., 2023),
and the MIGHTEE-HI survey (Jarvis et al., 2025; Vărăşteanu et al., 2025) and LADUMA survey


                                                      4
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                         F. Lelli et al.




Figure 2: A classic evidence for the DM effect: the observed rotation curve of the spiral galaxy NGC 3521
differs from that expected from the baryonic distribution. The baryonic contribution (green line; Lelli et al.,
2016b) is computed solving the Poisson’s equation for the observed distribution of stars (trace by NIR
photometry) and gas (traced by H I interferometry). The H𝛼 rotation curve (red points; Daigle et al., 2006)
implies almost no mass discrepancy; the DM effect is evident only at the larger radii probed by the H I rotation
curve (cyan points; Begeman, 1987). The background image is from the SDSS-DR9 (Ahn et al., 2012).


(Kazemi-Moridani et al., 2025) with the SKA-Mid precursor telescope MeerKAT.
The Square Kilometre Array (SKA) observatory, especially SKA-Mid in South Africa, will revo-
lutionize the study of H I rotation curves due to its unprecedented angular resolution, sensitivity,
and survey speed. This chapter describes the main prospects expected from the SKA-Mid Array
Assembly 4 (AA4). We start with a description of the main open questions in galaxy dynamics,
namely the origin of the dynamical scaling laws (Sect. 2.1) and the long-standing ΛCDM problems
on small scales (Sect. 2.2). Next, we discuss the SKA prospects to obtain H I observations at un-
precedented angular resolutions of ∼1′′ −2′′ (Sect. 3.1), for statistical samples of tens of thousands
of spatially resolved galaxies (Sect. 3.2), and for galaxies at 𝑧 ≃ 1 that have been inaccessible in H I
emission so far (Sect. 3.3). Then, we discuss next-generation fitting tools and techniques to model
the H I kinematics in the SKA era (Sect. 4). We conclude with a brief summary (Sect. 5).


2     Open questions

2.1    The baryon-DM coupling and the dynamical laws of galaxies
A fundamental but somewhat underappreciated piece of evidence in the DM puzzle is that the
dark mass and the luminous mass of galaxies appear tightly coupled to each other. Empirically,
the observed dynamics, which is generally dominated by DM, is closely related to the distribution


                                                       5
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                                                                                                                                F. Lelli et al.


a                                 Baryonic Tully-Fisher Relation                   b                              Central Density Relation                  c                         Radial Acceleration Relation
                        3.0                                                                                                                                                  −7
                                                                                                          5
                        2.5                                                                                                                                                  −8




                                                                                       pc−2 ]
                                                                                                          4
log(Vflat ) [km s−1 ]




                                                                                                                                                       log(gobs ) [m s−2 ]
                        2.0                                                                                                                                                  −9
                                                                                                          3




                                                                                        log(Σdyn,0 ) [M
                        1.5                                                                                                                                                  −10
                                                                                                          2
                                                             Local Galaxies
                        1.0                                     Milky Way                                                                                                    −11
                                         HI Galaxy Samples      M31
                                                                                                          1
                                            SPARC spirals       M33
                        0.5                 SPARC dwarfs        LMC                                                                                                          −12
                                            LITTLE-THINGS       SMC                                                                    SPARC spirals                                                SPARC spirals (1949 points)
                                            SHIELD I            Leo P
                                                                                                          0                            SPARC dwarfs                                                 SPARC dwarfs (753 points)
                        0.0                                                                                                                                                  −13
                              6   7      8      9       10       11           12                              0   1      2      3      4        5                              −13   −12   −11    −10      −9        −8         −7
                                        log(Mbar ) [M ]                                                           log(Σbar,0 ) [M   pc−2 ]                                                 log(gbar ) [m s−2 ]



Figure 3: The dynamical scaling laws of galaxies (adapted from Lelli, 2022). Panel a: The baryonic Tully-
Fisher relation (BTFR). The dashed line shows the simplest ΛCDM prediction, with slope of 3 and intercept
set by the cosmological ratio Ωbar /ΩCDM (see, e.g., McGaugh, 2012). The solid line shows a one-parameter
fit fixing the slope to 4, as predicted by MOND. Panel b: The central density relation (CDR). The dashed
line corresponds to the 1:1 line. The solid line shows a one-parameter fit using the MOND interpolation
function. Panel c: The radial acceleration relation (RAR). The dashed line corresponds to the 1:1 line.
The solid line shows a one-parameter fit using the MOND interpolation function. In the BTFR and CDR,
each point represents a single galaxy. In the RAR, each point represents a spatially-resolved measurement at
different radii in 153 different galaxies. In all cases, the observed scatter is comparable to that expected from
observational uncertainties, leaving little room for intrinsic scatter. H I surveys with SKA-Mid will allow
studying these dynamical laws with large statistical samples as a function of environment and cosmic time.


of baryons (e.g., Swaters et al., 2012). One of the pioneers of H I kinematics in galaxies, Renzo
Sancisi, summarized the evidence with a concise statement, which is often referred to as Renzo’s
Rule or Sancisi’s Law: “For any feature in the luminosity profile there is a corresponding feature
in the rotation curve and vice versa” (Sancisi, 2004). An example of this phenomenon is the
correspondence in Fig. 2 between the “bump“ at 2 kpc in the observed rotation curve and that
in the baryonic contribution, pointing to a “maximum disk” scenario in which baryons entirely
dominate the inner galaxy regions (van Albada and Sancisi, 1986). Another important quote from
Sancisi (2004) is the following one: “The unavoidable conclusion from the observed correspondence
between the shapes of the rotation curves and those of the luminosity profiles is that the gravitational
potential is strongly correlated with the distribution of luminous matter”.

The empirical baryon-DM coupling can be quantified by a set of “dynamical laws” that connect a
baryonic property (inferred from the observed distribution of stars and gas) and a dynamical one
(inferred from the shape of the rotation curve), making no assumption about the nature of DM.
Figure 3 shows three of the main dynamical scaling laws of galaxies (see Lelli, 2022, for details):
(1) the baryonic Tully-Fisher relation (BTFR) that links the total baryonic mass to the “flat” rotation
velocity along the outer part of the rotation curve (McGaugh et al., 2000; Verheijen, 2001); (2)
the central density relation (CDR) that links the central baryonic surface density to the central
dynamical-mass surface density inferred from the inner rising part of the rotation curve (Lelli et al.,
2013, 2016c; Swaters et al., 2014); and (3) the radial acceleration relation (RAR) that links the
baryonic gravitational field measured from the baryonic distribution to the observed centripetal
acceleration at each radius (McGaugh et al., 2016; Lelli et al., 2017b). These dynamical laws are


                                                                                                                         6
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                 F. Lelli et al.


extremely tight by the usual standards of extragalactic astronomy: the observed scatter around the
mean relations is consistent with the observational uncertainties, implying that any intrinsic scatter
must be tiny (e.g., Lelli et al., 2016a, 2019; Li et al., 2018; Ponomareva et al., 2018, 2021; Desmond,
2023). The properties of these dynamical laws represent one of the major “small-scale challenges”
for ΛCDM models of galaxy formation (Bullock and Boylan-Kolchin, 2017).
The dynamical laws of galaxies raised a lively debate in the community because they can be
interpreted in drastically different ways. In a particle DM scenario (irrespectively of the nature of
the DM particle), the physical processes driving galaxy evolution inside DM halos must conspire
to produce these scaling relations at 𝑧 = 0, which would then represent an “attractor solution”
for baryonic physics (e.g., Di Cintio and Lelli, 2016; Ludlow et al., 2017). In a modified gravity
scenario, instead, these scaling relations would represent new “Laws of Nature” akin to Kepler’s
laws for planetary systems. Intriguingly, the existence and properties of these dynamical laws were
predicted in advance by MOND (Milgrom, 1983b), a paradigm in which the nonrelativistic laws
of gravity and/or inertia are modified below a characteristic acceleration scale 𝑎 0 (see Famaey and
McGaugh, 2012; Milgrom, 2014; Banik and Zhao, 2022, for reviews).
Interestingly, particle DM models and MOND theories make diametrically different predictions
about how the properties of the dynamical laws (slope, normalization, and scatter) should depend
on large-scale environment and cosmic time. In general, particle DM models predict that the
dynamical laws should (1) have measurable intrinsic scatter because they emerge from the chaotic
process of galaxy formation (Di Cintio and Lelli, 2016; Garaldi et al., 2018; Dutton et al., 2019),
(2) evolve with cosmic time (Keller and Wadsley, 2017; Pillepich et al., 2019; Mayer et al., 2023),
and (3) show “positive” residual correlations with large-scale environment (Paranjape and Sheth,
2022). Here, the term “environment” acquires the specific physical meaning of average gravitational
acceleration due to the large-scale structure in a given region of the Universe (Desmond et al., 2018).
In contrast, MOND predicts that the dynamical laws should (1) have zero or tiny intrinsic scatter
(Milgrom, 1983b, 1994), (2) hold at any cosmic epoch (Hossenfelder and Mistele, 2018), and (3)
show “negative” residual correlations with the environment (Chae et al., 2020, 2021, 2022). To
test these predictions, one needs high-quality rotation curves and mass models for statistical galaxy
samples in different environments and at different redshifts. In Sect. 3, we describe how the synergy
between H I data from SKA-Mid surveys and optical/NIR images from wide-field photometric
surveys (e.g., Euclid, Rubin) will provide the necessary data to test these predictions.

2.2   ΛCDM small-scale problems: cusp-core, rotation-curve diversity, and too-big-to-fail
According to DM-only cosmological simulations, CDM halos are singular (“cuspy”) at their centers
with volume densities scaling as 𝜌 ∝ 𝑟 −1 (Dubinski and Carlberg, 1991; Warren et al., 1992), and
can be described by a universal density profile, the NFW profile (Navarro et al., 1996). In contrast,
the rotation curves of galaxies – especially those of DM-dominated low-mass and low-surface-
brightness galaxies – often reveal much shallower density profiles or even constant density “cores”
(see de Blok, 2010, for a review). For a long time, this “cusp-core” discrepancy has been considered
a major challenge to the standard ΛCDM paradigm (see Bullock and Boylan-Kolchin, 2017, for
a review). Proposed solutions either advocate for fundamental changes in the physics of the
dark sector, or focus on the role of baryonic processes during galaxy formation and evolution.


                                                  7
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                F. Lelli et al.


The first type of solutions comprises alternatives to CDM such as warm DM (e.g., Colín et al.
2000 but see also Macciò et al. 2012), self-interacting DM (e.g., Spergel and Steinhardt, 2000),
and fuzzy DM (e.g., Goodman, 2000; Hu et al., 2000). The second type of solutions generally
invokes strong baryonic feedback from supernova explosions and/or active galactic nuclei (AGN) to
produce massive gas outflows, which lead to non-adiabatic oscillations in the gravitational potential,
eventually transforming DM cusps into DM cores (e.g., Governato et al., 2010, 2012; Pontzen and
Governato, 2012; El-Zant et al., 2016; Freundlich et al., 2020).

Some authors consider the cusp-core discrepancy “solved” in the ΛCDM context due to these ad-hoc
adjustments in the modeling of baryonic physics. However, different hydrodynamical simulations
disagree on both the intensity of baryonic feedback and its effect on the distribution of DM, with
some simulations predicting cores in a given mass range, while others not forming cores at all
(e.g., Bose et al., 2019). A general prediction of feedback-driven core-formation models is that
the presence of a DM core should correlate with the star formation history of a galaxy (e.g. Muni
et al., 2025). This prediction could be tested by combining DM density profiles inferred from high-
resolution H I rotation curves with, e.g., star formation histories inferred from color-magnitude
diagrams of resolved stellar populations (e.g., McQuinn et al., 2010) and/or multi-wavelength
integrated photometry (e.g., Schombert et al., 2019). On the other hand, self-interacting DM and
fuzzy DM appear rather insensitive to baryonic processes (Robles et al., 2017) and predict different
core-baryon relationships with respect to ΛCDM feedback models (Jiang et al., 2023), so there is
hope to distinguish between these two proposed solutions to the cusp-core problem.

A related issue in the ΛCDM context is the so-called “rotation-curve diversity” problem (Oman
et al., 2015; Ghari et al., 2019). At a fixed galaxy mass, observations show a diversity in the inner
rotation curve shapes − so in the DM density profiles − contrary to ΛCDM expectations if feedback
processes were the same for galaxies of similar mass. More generally, the observed diversity of
dwarf galaxies is not reproduced in current ΛCDM simulations, which may again be related to the
implementation of baryonic feedback and the resulting core-formation process. For example, the
NIHAO simulations produce both DM cores and a population of “ultra-diffuse” galaxies, but no
compact dwarfs (Jiang et al., 2019). Importantly, the observed diversity in the inner rotation-curve
shapes of dwarf galaxies corresponds to a diversity in their inner baryonic surface densities (see
Lelli et al., 2014a), as quantified by the CDR (Fig.3, middle panel). The true underlying problem,
therefore, is understanding the origin of the empirical baryon-DM coupling (Sect. 2.1). This issue
was pointed out by Sancisi (2004) more than 20 years ago: “why, in systems of comparable
luminosity, are some DM halos cuspy (like the light) and others (also like the light) are not?”.

Another related issue in the ΛCDM context is the “too-big-to-fail” problem, whereby there is a
mismatch between the predicted and observed number of satellite galaxies that have DM masses
(measured within the stellar effective radius) above a given threshold. This would lead to the
paradox of the most massive DM sub-halos not hosting a satellite galaxy and being completely
dark, unless their DM mass within the stellar effective radius is substantially reduced by baryonic
effects (e.g., Sales et al., 2022). To some extent, this problem is a combination of the “cusp-core”
and the “missing satellites” problems, extrapolated to the lowest mass galaxies (Bullock and Boylan-
Kolchin, 2017). Obtaining H I rotation curves for large samples of gas-rich satellite galaxies may


                                                  8
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                    F. Lelli et al.


clarify this problem and its relation to the “cusp-core” and “rotation-curve diversity” problems.

Finally, we point out that these various problems (“cusp-core”, “rotation curve diversity”, “too-big-
to-fail”) are specific to ΛCDM and do not apply in a modified gravity context. In general, modified
gravity theories are required to reproduce the observed rotation curves starting from the observed
baryonic distribution, so the diversity in the rotation curve shapes (e.g., steeply or slowing rising)
must naturally correspond to a diversity in the baryonic mass distribution (e.g., cuspy or cored).
The inner parts of galaxies remain very interesting in a MOND context because it is where the
predictions of different theories display the largest differences, albeit these are generally limited to a
small 10−20% effect (e.g., Brada and Milgrom, 1995; Lelli et al., 2017a; Petersen and Lelli, 2020;
Chae, 2022). Constructing a large sample of galaxies with high-resolution H I data (providing both
the rotation curve and the gas distribution) and ancillary optical/NIR photometry (providing the
stellar distribution) is crucial to distinguish between different modified-gravity theories.


3     Observational prospects with SKA-Mid

H I surveys with the SKA-Mid AA4 will allow us to address the open questions described in the
previous section. However, different questions require different survey strategies. For example, to
study the inner shapes of rotation curves in high detail, we need targeted H I observations of nearby
galaxies at resolutions of about 1′′ -2′′ and 3 km/s, reaching H I column densities of about 5-10 M⊙
pc−2 (typical of the innermost galaxy regions). Instead, to investigate the possible dependency of
the dynamical laws and DM properties on cosmic environment, we need a large statistical sample
(tens of thousands of galaxies) with “standard” medium-shallow H I data, for example reaching a
3𝜎 column density of 1 M⊙ pc−2 at resolutions of 5′′ − 10′′ and 5 − 10 km/s. Finally, to investigate
the possible evolution of the dynamical scaling laws with 𝑧, we need an ultra-deep pencil-beam H I
survey in a well-studied cosmological field. This section describes these potential H I surveys and
highlights the importance of SKA-Mid AA4 to achieve the requested resolutions and/or sensitivities.

3.1    Reaching higher spatial resolutions
For many years, the main limitation of H I rotation curves has been their low angular resolutions of
15′′ −30′′ from “standard” observations with historical radio interferometers, such as the Westerbork
Synthesis Radio Telescope (WSRT), the Very Large Array (VLA), and the Australia Telescope
Compact Array (ATCA). Such angular resolutions are significantly worse than those of 1′′ − 2′′
available for ancillary optical/NIR images (used to compute the stellar gravitational contribution),
optical spectroscopy (used to measure H𝛼 rotation curves), and mm/submm interferometry (used to
measure CO rotation curves). High-resolution H𝛼 and CO kinematic data have been instrumental in
establishing the presence of DM cores in low-mass galaxies (e.g., de Blok and Bosma, 2002; Simon
et al., 2003, 2005; Kuzio de Naray et al., 2006) because they allow minimizing beam-smearing
effects (see Sect. 4.2.1) and detecting potential noncircular motions (see Sect. 4.3.2). However, at
very low masses (𝑀bar ≲ 108 M⊙ ), H𝛼 and CO observations are not ideal to trace rotation curves
for several reasons: (1) both H𝛼 and CO emission are “clumpy” in dwarf galaxies, complicating
the construction of kinematic models (see Sect. 4.3.1); (2) the relatively high velocity dispersions
of H𝛼 gas (∼15−30 km s−1 , e.g., Barat et al. 2020) require large and uncertain asymmetric-drift


                                                    9
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                          F. Lelli et al.




Figure 4: H I data at 2′′ resolution from multi-configuration VLA data of the dwarf galaxy I Zw 18 (from
Lelli et al., 2012). Left Panel: Total intensity H I map, showing clumps and holes that are not visible at
lower resolutions of 5′′ (see Fig. 2 in Lelli et al. 2012). Contours are at 3 (dashed), 6, 9, 12, 15 × 1021 atoms
cm−2 . Middle panel: Total intensity H I map superimposed on an H𝛼 image (from Cannon et al., 2004),
showing that the spatial relation between ionized and atomic gas is complex. Right panel: H I velocity field
showing evidence for a rotating disk. SKA-Mid AA4 will allow us to obtain H I data with spatial resolutions
of 1′′ − 2′′ for significant samples of galaxies.


corrections to measure the circular velocity tracing the gravitational potential (see Sect. 4.1.2); and
(3) the low metallicites of dwarf galaxies make the CO emission very hard to detect, even with
the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA, e.g., Hunt et al., 2023). Obtaining
high-resolution H I data is needed to study the inner dynamics of dwarf galaxies in detail.

In this context, a major advance was represented by the THINGS survey (Walter et al., 2008), which
used the VLA in multiple configurations (B, C, D) to reach angular resolutions of ∼6′′ in 34 nearby
galaxies. Clearly, high-resolution and high-sensitivity H I observations do not automatically allow
for the derivation of accurate rotation curves because the H I disk needs to be reasonably regular
and properly inclined (see Sect. 4 for modeling details). In the case of THINGS, rotation curves
could be derived for 19 galaxies, after excluding low-inclination disks (de Blok et al., 2008). After
THINGS, several other H I surveys used the VLA with a similar strategy (e.g., Hunter et al., 2012;
Ott et al., 2012; Lelli et al., 2014a). To our knowledge, the highest angular resolution ever achieved
with H I observations to date is 2′′ using VLA observations in A, B, C, D configurations (see Fig. 4,
Lelli et al., 2012). These types of high-resolution H I observations have been quite successful, but
they are not very efficient because they require (1) long integration times due to the low sensitivity
to diffuse H I emission on long baselines, and (2) long observing campaigns spanning several years
so that the VLA antennas can be moved into different array configurations.

Due to its long baselines, SKA-Mid AA4 will completely change the game because it will allow us
to routinely obtain H I data at 1′′ − 2′′ resolution. An H I column density of ∼5 M⊙ pc−2 (typical
of the inner galaxy regions) over 16 km s−1 could be detected with spatial and spectral resolutions
of ∼1.3′′ and ∼3.1 km s−1 , respectively, with an integration of about 20 hours with SKA-Mid AA4
Band-2. For example, it would be conceivable to perform a legacy survey of 50 nearby galaxies in
about 1,000 hours of SKA-Mid to obtain H I data with similar angular resolutions of H𝛼 integral-
field spectroscopy (e.g., from MaNGA or SAMI), CO interferometry (e.g., from ALMA), and NIR


                                                       10
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                  F. Lelli et al.


imaging (e.g., from Spitzer). This type of high-resolution H I survey would have many scientific
goals, such as relating the distribution and kinematics of atomic gas with those of molecular and
ionized gas to understand the star-formation process and the related baryon cycling. In terms of
the DM problem, there will be two major advances. Firstly, we could measure the properties of
DM cores (sizes, volume densities) with unprecedented accuracy, even in the smallest H I-bearing
galaxies, providing major constraints to ΛCDM models of galaxy formation as well as to alternative
DM models (e.g., warm DM, self-interacting DM, fuzzy DM). Secondly, we could test different
modified-gravity theories in the inner galaxy regions, where they predict the largest differences
(e.g., Brada and Milgrom, 1995; Lelli et al., 2017a; Petersen and Lelli, 2020; Chae, 2022).

3.2     Building larger galaxy samples
A comprehensive understanding of the relationship between cosmic environment and galaxy dy-
namics (rotation-curve shapes, DM content, and so on) requires large, homogeneous, statistical
samples of spatially resolved galaxies across a full range of environmental densities, from rich
clusters, to loose groups, to truly isolated field galaxies. As we mentioned in Sect. 1, existing H I
samples of spatially resolved galaxies have limited statistics. In addition, they do not capture the
full environmental diversity necessary to study the possible relations between the DM content of
galaxies and their location in the large-scale structure of the Universe.

With SKA-Mid AA4, it will be possible to spatially resolve the H I kinematics of large galaxy
samples in a time-efficient way. To reach this goal, there are two possible survey strategies:

      1. An untargeted medium-shallow H I survey of a large fraction of the sky, similarly to APERTIF
         (Adams et al., 2022) and WALLABY (Westmeier et al., 2022), but reaching higher angular
         resolutions (∼5′′ versus ∼ 15′′ − 30′′ ) at similar 3𝜎 column density sensitivities (∼1 M⊙ pc−2
         over 20 km s−1 ), so that a much larger number of H I disks will be spatially resolved.

      2. A “snapshot” targeted survey of ∼20,000 galaxies with known optical/NIR properties (e.g.,
         galaxies with Euclid images), so that the integration time can be individually set according
         to the desired sensitivity and angular resolution to resolve the H I disk. The target sample of
         20,000 galaxies is about two orders of magnitudes larger than SPARC and about one order of
         magnitude larger than what we expect from WALLABY, APERTIF, and BIG-SPARC.

Given that SKA-Mid will have standard single-pixel receivers, the field of view (FoV) at 21 cm
remains rather limited, so it is not immediately obvious which of the two survey strategies is more
effective, also taking into account commensal science goals.

In the case of an untargeted wide-field medium-shallow H I survey with Band 2 of SKA-Mid AA4,
we make a rough estimate considering the H I mass function of Jones et al. (2018) and the H I
mass-size relation of Wang et al. (2016). If we set a 3𝜎 column density sensitivity of 1 M⊙ pc−2 for
a synthesized beam of 4.3′′ (Briggs’ Robust parameter of 1) and spectral channels of 3.1 km s−1 , we
expect that we will spatially resolve about 20,000 galaxies by covering 150 square degrees in about
900 hours of SKA-Mid AA4. Importantly, a spatial resolution of 4.3′′ will allow us to spatially
resolve galaxies with a H I mass of ∼107 M⊙ within a distance of about 20 Mpc, pushing down in
terms of the BTFR and other dynamical scaling laws. However, the drawback is that the sample


                                                    11
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                    F. Lelli et al.


will be heavily dominated by giant galaxies with H I masses of a few 1010 M⊙ (near the “knee” of
the H I mass function), while low-mass galaxies with H I masses below 109 M⊙ will be severely
under-represented (less than 10% of the full sample). Thus, the dynamical scaling laws will not be
sampled in a uniform way across their dynamic ranges, limiting our accuracy in determining their
slope and/or intrinsic scatter as a function of mass, rotation velocity, surface density, and so on.

A pointed H I survey may be more time-expensive than a wide-field H I survey to spatially resolve
20,000 galaxies. For example, if we consider a mean integration of 15 minutes per galaxy, it
will take 5000 hours to observe 20,000 galaxies. This time estimate is quite conservative: the
exact numbers will depend on the exact definition of the galaxy sample and may be substantially
smaller because a single SKA-Mid pointing may simultaneously probe multiple galaxies in clusters
and/or groups, maximizing the survey efficiency. A lower survey efficiency, instead, will occur
when targeting truly isolated galaxies in voids, albeit several background and foreground galaxies
may be detected and spatially resolved along the line of sight. A pointed H I survey will have the
main advantage of obtaining − by construction − a galaxy sample that uniformly covers the widest
possible range in baryonic mass, surface brightness, star-formation rates, environmental properties,
and so on. In addition, a pointed H I survey may maximize the synergy with other existing multi-
wavelength data, such as (1) imaging from Euclid, HST, JWST, Spitzer, Rubin, and so on, (2)
precise distances from Cepheids, the tip of the red giant branch method, supernovae Ia, surface
brightness fluctuations, and so on, and (3) complementary kinematic data from H𝛼 integral-field
spectroscopy and/or interferometric CO observations.

Thinking farther ahead in the future, installing phased-array feeds on SKA-Mid antennas (similarly
to ASKAP and APERTIF) will substantially enlarge the instantaneous FoV of the telescope. In this
way, wide-field untargetted surveys will be the obvious operational mode to increase the number of
galaxies with spatially resolved H I kinematics by another 1-2 orders of magnitudes.

3.3   Moving towards higher redshifts
The intrinsic faintness of the H I emission line, combined with the limited spectral bandpasses
and radio frequency interference (RFI) in the L-band, have historically limited H I detections of
individual galaxies to the local universe. This paradigm is beginning to shift with a new generation of
H I surveys with SKA pathfinders (Hess et al., 2019; Ponomareva et al., 2021; Xi et al., 2024; Jarvis
et al., 2025), but the existing facilities do not have the requested sensitivity and angular resolution
to map galaxies beyond 𝑧 ≳ 0.1, enabling detailed kinematic modeling. To our knowledge, the
current record for the highest 𝑧, well-measured (≳4 independent points) H I rotation curve is held
by the giant galaxy Malin 1 at 𝑧 ≃ 0.0826 (Pickering et al., 1997; Lelli et al., 2010).

At intermediate redshifts (𝑧 ≃ 0.3 − 1) and cosmic noon (𝑧 ≃ 1 − 3), rotation-curve studies
currently rely on other kinematic tracers, such as molecular gas using mm/submm interferometric
observations of CO and [C I] lines (Lelli et al., 2023; Rizzo et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2025), or ionized
gas using integral-field spectroscopy of the H𝛼, [O II], and [O III] lines (e.g., Di Teodoro et al., 2016,
2018; Price et al., 2021; Puglisi et al., 2023). Interferometric mm/submm observations with ALMA
and/or NOEMA are relatively time-costly, so galaxy samples with resolved CO or [C I] kinematics
remain limited to a few tens of objects. Integral-field observations with the ESO Very Large


                                                   12
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                         F. Lelli et al.




Figure 5: Comparison between the dynamical properties of SPARC galaxies at 𝑧 ≃ 0 with those of two
best-studied galaxies at cosmic noon, having top-quality H𝛼 data from VLT/SINFONI and multi-line CO
data from ALMA (adapted from Lelli et al., 2023). Left panel: The rotation curves of cosmic-noon galaxies
(red circles and orange stars) are much less extended than those of local galaxies of comparable mass and
rotation velocity (solid lines color-coded by stellar surface density) due to the lack of H I data. Right panel:
The location of cosmic-noon galaxies on the radial acceleration relation at 𝑧 ≃ 0 shows that their H𝛼+CO
rotation curves are probing only the inner, high-acceleration, baryon-dominated regions. To firmly probe the
DM effect, we need extended H I rotation curves probing the outer, low-acceleration, DM-dominated regions.


Telescope (VLT), instead, are more time efficient, so they allowed probing ionized gas kinematics
in several hundreds of galaxies (e.g., Tiley et al., 2019; Nestor Shachar et al., 2023). In physical
terms, however, ionized gas has some intrinsic complications: (1) it probes a hotter ISM phase than
molecular or atomic gas, so the pressure support to the gravitational potential becomes important
to properly model (see Sect. 4.1.2), and (2) non-circular motions (inflows, outflows) may affect the
ionized gas kinematics in more complex ways than for the neutral gas (e.g., Lelli et al., 2018). Most
importantly, both ionized and molecular gas tracers have an intrinsic physical limitation: the ionized
and molecular gas disks of galaxies generally do not extend beyond their stellar components, so one
can only trace rotation curves with a limited radial extent (see Fig. 5).

In relatively massive galaxies (𝑀★ > 1010 M⊙ ), the inner high-acceleration regions are generally
baryon dominated. This fact prevents a firm detection of the DM effect in massive high-𝑧 galaxies
due to the disk-halo degeneracy: mass models with only baryons and mass models with a DM halo
can fit the observed rotation curves with similar accuracy, given the significant uncertainties on
stellar and gas masses (Lelli et al., 2023). The current observational situation at cosmic noon is
similar to that at 𝑧 ≃ 0 in the 1980’s: one needs extended H I rotation curves to firmly probe the
DM effect in the outer parts (Kalnajs, 1983; van Albada et al., 1985; Kent, 1986, 1987).

In lower mass galaxies (𝑀★ < 1010 M⊙ ), the inner rotation curves may potentially probe the DM
effect, similarly to DM-dominated low-mass galaxies at 𝑧 ≃ 0 (see Lelli, 2022, for a review).
However, molecular lines (CO and [C I]) are hard to detect in such low-mass galaxies, even with
ALMA. Regarding ionized gas kinematics, the typical spatial resolution of integral-field spectro-
graphs (0.5 − 1 arcsec) becomes a major limitation in low-mass galaxies, together with the limited


                                                      13
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                    F. Lelli et al.




Figure 6: Prospects for measuring H I rotation curves at 𝑧 > 0 with SKA-Mid. A mock-observed simulated
cone of the Universe is shown up to 𝑧 ≃ 1 (adapted from Obreschkow et al., 2009). The dots represent
simulated galaxies with detectable H I emission. To date, H I rotation curves are limited to galaxies with
𝐷 ≲ 350 Mpc (𝑧 ≲ 0.08). A pencil-beam survey of about 10,000-hours with Band 1 of SKA-Mid AA4
could spatially resolve galaxies with H I masses of about 1010 M⊙ out to 𝑧 ≃ 1.


spectral resolution of 𝑅 = 𝜆/Δ𝜆 ≃ 3500 − 4000 that corresponds to 𝜎 ≃ 40 km/s for the H𝛼 line at
𝑧 ≈ 1 (Stott et al., 2016; Wisnioski et al., 2019). All these facts preclude the study of the dynamical
scaling laws over cosmic time down to low masses, low surface densities, and low accelerations,
which provide the strongest tests of ΛCDM models and alternative theories (see Sect. 2.1).

SKA-Mid AA4 will revolutionize our view of the H I kinematics in galaxies at 𝑧 > 0.1 thanks to its
unique combination of angular resolution and sensitivity. To trace reliable H I rotation curves out
to the DM-dominated regime, a column density sensitivity of ∼ 1 M⊙ /pc2 is required. In addition,
to constrain the geometric parameters of the H I disk (see Section 4), the disk major axis should
be sampled with at least 5 resolution elements. If we (1) adopt this combination of sensitivity and
resolution as a metric for measuring H I rotation curves, (2) assume the local H I mass-size relation
(e.g., Wang et al., 2016) to predict the size of the H I disk, and (3) account for cosmological redshift
broadening and dimming (Meyer et al., 2017), we find that a deep SKA-Mid AA4 integration of
about 10,000 hours is capable of mapping galaxies with 𝑀H I ≃ 1010 M⊙ out to 𝑧 ≃ 1. According to
H I stacking analyses (Chowdhury et al., 2020, 2022a,b; Bera et al., 2023; Bianchetti et al., 2025),
the 𝑀★ − 𝑀HI relation evolves with 𝑧, so an H I mass of 1010 M⊙ at 𝑧 ≃ 1 corresponds to galaxies
with a similar stellar mass. SKA-Mid AA4, therefore, may probe the H I content of galaxies with
baryonic masses of a few 1010 M⊙ , lower than the present-day mass of the Milky Way. In addition
to providing extended rotation curves up to 𝑧 ≃ 1, a deep H I survey with SKA-Mid AA4 will also
allow us to estimate the gravitational contribution of atomic gas, which may dominate over that of
stars and molecular gas at large radii (Chowdhury et al., 2022b).

Figure 6 illustrates the dramatic leap in our ability to study H I kinematics across more than half of
the Universe’s lifetime. A deep Band-2 survey with SKA-Mid AA∗ could spatially resolve H I disks
in the redshift range 0 ≲ 𝑧 ≲ 0.5, considering that the maximum achievable angular resolution
of ∼3′′ corresponds to ∼20 kpc at 𝑧 ≃ 0.5. A very deep (∼10,000 hours) Band-1 survey with
SKA-Mid AA4 is needed to spatially resolve massive (𝑀H I ≃ 1010 M⊙ ) disks at 𝑧 ≃ 1, given the
better angular resolution of ∼1′′ achievable with AA4. However, parts of the redshift range in Fig. 6
may be severely impacted by RFI, prohibiting the detection of the H I line. For example, the range
0.1 ≲ 𝑧 ≲ 0.2 is known to be strongly affected by RFI from satellites and ground-based radar (Hess
et al., 2019). The overall RFI situation needs to be reassessed for the long baselines of SKA-Mid


                                                   14
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                              F. Lelli et al.




Figure 7: Geometrical parameters of a rotating disk model (adapted from Di Teodoro and Fraternali, 2015).
A thick disk in the physical coordinate system (𝑥 ′ , 𝑦 ′ , 𝑧 ′ ) is projected into an ellipse in the plane of the sky
(𝑥, 𝑦). The inclination angle 𝑖 is taken with respect to the line of sight (the 𝑧 axis). The position angle 𝜙
identifies the position of the major axis on the receding half of the galaxy and it is taken counterclockwise
from the North direction (along the 𝑦 axis). For a symmetric disk with purely circular orbits, the systemic
velocity 𝑉sys (the galaxy redshift) corresponds to the projected velocities along the minor axis.


AA4. In general, the SKA observatory is the only facility under construction or being planned that
will enable dynamical studies of H I disks across cosmic time, for the first time.

4     Modeling prospects with next-generation software

4.1    State-of-the-art on kinematic fitting tools
The H I component of galaxies can be described by a rotating disk with nearly circular orbits. In
this approximation, the projected line-of-sight velocity 𝑉l.o.s. at a sky position (𝑥, 𝑦) is given by

                                  𝑉l.o.s. (𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝑉sys + 𝑉rot (𝑅) sin(𝑖) cos(𝜃),                                 (1)

where 𝑉sys is the systemic velocity (due to the Hubble expansion and peculiar motions), 𝑉rot is the
rotational velocity at radius 𝑅 in the disk plane (𝑥 ′ , 𝑦 ′ ), 𝑖 is the inclination angle between the normal
𝑧 ′ to the disk plane and the line of sight 𝑧, and 𝜃 is the azimuthal angle in the disk plane (see Fig. 7),
given by the following equation:
                                           −(𝑥 − 𝑥0 ) sin(𝜙) + (𝑦 − 𝑦 0 ) cos(𝜙)
                               cos(𝜃) =                                          ,                                (2)
                                                            𝑅

                                                         15
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                     F. Lelli et al.


where (𝑥 0 , 𝑦 0 ) are the sky coordinates of the disk center and 𝜙 is the position angle taken in
the anti-clockwise direction between the North direction and the receding half of the major axis
of the projected disk. Thus, the rotation curve 𝑉rot (𝑅) can be measured knowing five geometric
parameters: 𝑉sys , 𝑥0 , 𝑦 0 , 𝜙, and 𝑖. In the following, we describe standard methods to measure 𝑉rot (𝑅)
from emission-line data: tilted-ring and parametric modeling implemented via two dimensional
(2D) or three dimensional (3D) approaches. In full 3D approaches, in addition to the parameters in
Eq. 1 and Eq. 2, it is possible to fit also for the intrinsic gas velocity dispersion 𝜎V (𝑅), the intrinsic
gas surface density Σ(𝑅), and the disk thickness 𝑧 0 .

4.1.1   Basic techniques: tilted-ring and parametric modeling
The tilted-ring modeling approach (Rogstad et al., 1974; Begeman, 1989) divides the gas disk into
a number of rings (usually set by the spatial resolution of the observations). In principle, the
parameters in Eq. 1 and 2 can be fitted independently in each ring. However, ring-by-ring fits are
often under-determined and/or degenerate, so the best-fit parameters may unrealistically jump from
one ring to another. One approach is that, after a first preliminary fit, (𝑥0 , 𝑦 0 ) and 𝑉sys are measured
as the mean (or median) values across the rings and kept fixed in subsequent iterations. The angles
𝜙 and 𝑖 can be estimated in the same way unless the gas disk is warped: in such cases, 𝜙(𝑅) and 𝑖(𝑅)
vary from ring to ring and their radial trend can be appropriately modeled with a smooth function
to obtain a reliable 𝑉rot (𝑅) without unrealistic jumps. Another approach is to perform a global fit
to the disk by grouping various parameters (such as 𝑥 0 , 𝑦 0 , and 𝑉sys ) to have a single value across
all rings. The details of these implementations depend on the specific tilted-ring fitting software.
The parametric modeling approach uses parametric functions to describe 𝑉rot (𝑅), such as an arctan
function (Epinat et al., 2010), and fits a global model to the whole disk. In several circumstances,
parametric modeling can require fewer free parameters to describe 𝑉rot (𝑅) than typical tilted-ring
models. This eases the use of Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms (e.g., Bouché et al.,
2015; Davis et al., 2017b; Lee et al., 2025) and neural networks (Dawson et al., 2021) in a Bayesian
framework (see Sect. 4.4.1 and 4.4.2). On the other hand, parametric modeling cannot account for
disk warps in an automated way because specific functions for the radial variation in 𝜙 and 𝑖 need
to be defined a-priori. Parametric modeling may also neglect possible real features in the rotation
curve because a smooth shape is imposed on 𝑉rot (𝑅). While tilted-ring models provide the most
empirical derivation of the rotation curve itself, some modeling tools allow for hybrid approaches,
mixing tilted-ring-style approaches for some parameters and parametric functions for others.
Special types of parametric models are those in which 𝑉rot (𝑅) is described by constraining the
gravitational potential of different components (stars, gas, and DM halo), so the fitting involves
physical parameters (such as masses and characteristic radii) together with geometric ones. Ide-
ally, this approach permits to build dynamically self-consistent models (for instance, by assuming
hydrostatic equilibrium) because the properties of the gravitational potential and those of the gas
tracer are constrained at the same time. In addition, this approach bypasses issues in the mass mod-
eling of rotation curves due to correlations between 𝑉rot (𝑅) measurements (Posti, 2022). The main
drawback of this approach is its reliance on pre-implemented (cosmologically-motivated) models
for the DM distribution, which may not capture the observational reality and/or the full complexity
of galaxy dynamics. In addition, these parametric models have relatively heavy computational


                                                    16
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                  F. Lelli et al.


costs when dynamical self-consistency is requested, and they require refitting the full data (in 2D
or 3D) several times for testing different DM halos or modified-gravity theory. On the contrary, it
is computationally fast and conceptually straightforward to fit different DM halos and/or modified
gravity theories to the empirical 1D rotation curve from a titled-ring model. Although promising,
H I modeling tools in a dynamically self-consistent framework have not yet been implemented.

4.1.2   From rotation velocity to circular velocity
When modeling the mass distribution of galaxies, we are interested in the circular velocity of a test
particle (𝑉c2 = −𝑅 ∇Φ) tracing the total gravitational potential Φ. In general, at a given radius 𝑅,
an ensemble of particles (stars or gas clouds) rotates with a velocity 𝑉rot that is lower than 𝑉c due to
the additional outwards acceleration provided by the pressure (𝜌𝜎V2 ) gradient. Contrary to the case
of stars and/or ionized gas, pressure support is often negligible in the H I disks of spiral galaxies
because the velocity dispersion is typically between 5 − 15 km s−1 , so effectively 𝑉c ≃ 𝑉rot .

For galaxies in which 𝑉rot /𝜎V ≃ 1 − 4 (e.g., dwarf galaxies), pressure support can be taken into
account using the so-called asymmetric-drift correction. Assuming that (i) Φ is axisymmetric
depending only on the cylindrical coordinates (𝑅, 𝑧), and (ii) the velocity dispersion 𝜎V is isotropic
as expected for collisional gas, the circular velocity is given by (Binney and Tremaine, 1994)
                                       v
                                       u                            !
                                                    𝜕 ln 𝜌 𝜕 ln 𝜎V2
                                       t
                                𝑉c =      2 − 𝜎2
                                        𝑉rot               +          ,                              (3)
                                               V    𝜕 ln 𝑅   𝜕 ln 𝑅

where 𝜌(𝑅, 𝑧) is the gas volume density, which is not directly observable.

A common approach (Meurer et al., 1996; Lelli et al., 2014b) is to assume that the vertical density
distribution does not depend on radius, so 𝜕 ln 𝜌/𝜕 ln 𝑅 = 𝜕 ln Σ/𝜕 ln 𝑅, where the gas surface
density Σ(𝑅) can be traced from emission-line maps. Then, one may either fit the product Σ𝜎V2
with a smooth functional form (Iorio et al., 2017) or treat Σ(𝑅) and 𝜎V (𝑅) independently. The main
caveat with this approach is that the thickness of the gas disk is expected to increase with radius from
theoretical considerations based on vertical hydrostatic equilibrium (Romeo, 1992; Olling, 1995;
Bacchini et al., 2020), so 𝜕 ln 𝜌/𝜕 ln 𝑅 > 𝜕 ln Σ/𝜕 ln 𝑅 and the correction may be underestimated.

Another approach (Burkert et al., 2010) is to use the Spitzer’s solution for a self-gravitating
disk in vertical equilibrium (Spitzer, 1942), so 𝜌(𝑅, 𝑧) = 𝜌0 (𝑅) sech2 (𝑧/𝑧 d ) where 𝜌0 (𝑅) =
𝜋𝐺Σ(𝑅) 2 /2𝜎V (𝑅) is the gas volume density at 𝑧 = 0. The gaseous disks of galaxies, however, are
not self-gravitating in any realistic case. A self-consistent asymmetric-drift correction should use
an iterative approach to (i) obtain Φ(𝑅, 𝑧) fitting 𝑉c (𝑅) with a mass model for a given DM halo
shape, and (ii) measure the variation of the disk thickness with radius by solving the vertical hydro-
static equation for the given Φ(𝑅, 𝑧) (Bacchini et al., 2020). This approach may be implemented
in future tools and initial efforts are underway (e.g., Mancera Piña et al., 2025). It may also be
possible to calibrate the asymmetric-drift correction using numerical simulations, for example to
obtain prescriptions informed by galaxy morphology (Kretschmer et al., 2021). Parametric models
built in the dynamically self-consistent framework can potentially account for the flaring of the disk,
providing direct computation of pressure support via Eq. 3.


                                                   17
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                     F. Lelli et al.


At any rate, the dominant uncertainty in the asymmetric-drift correction is driven by 𝜎V (𝑅), not
by the vertical density distribution. In fact, one often has to assume that 𝜎V is constant with radius
because the velocity dispersion profile cannot be accurately measured in the lowest mass galaxies.
Then, for an exponential gaseous disk with scale length 𝑅d , Eq. 3 simplifies to
                                             √︃
                                       𝑉𝑐 = 𝑉rot 2 + 𝜎 2 (𝑅/𝑅 ).                                   (4)
                                                       V       d


Eq. 4 can be used as a rough first-order approximation in poorly resolved galaxies, which are the
focus of the next section.

4.2     Modeling of poorly resolved disks
H I surveys with SKA-Mid may provide tens or even hundreds of thousands of galaxies that are
just barely resolved. Unsurprisingly, preliminary results from the WALLABY survey indicate that
barely resolved systems will dominate any wide-field H I survey: only ∼10% of the H I detections
in WALLABY are sufficiently resolved for detailed kinematic modeling (Westmeier et al., 2022;
Murugeshan et al., 2024). H I modeling in the barely resolved regime demands specific techniques,
such as the full treatment of beam smearing in 3D (Sec 4.2.1) and algorithms for the automated
acceptence/rejection of kinematic fits (Sec. 4.2.2). At low spatial resolutions and signal-to-noise
ratio, measuring the intrinsic gas velocity dispersion is particularly difficult and often impossible;
uncertainties in 𝜎V (𝑅) do not materially affect the measured rotation curve 𝑉rot (𝑅) (Deg et al.,
2022), but can have an impact on the circular velocity 𝑉c (𝑅) via the asymmetric-drift correction,
especially for low-mass galaxies (see Sec. 4.1.2). In addition, in the regime of barely resolved
galaxies, disk warps and other complexities (see Sect. 4.3) cannot be easily identified, so they are
generally neglected in the kinematic modeling. This decreases the number of free parameters,
which is an advantage in modeling large samples of galaxies, but possible systematic effects need
to be carefully investigated (e.g., Deg et al., 2022; Gasser, 2023).

4.2.1    Beam-smearing effects: 2D and 3D approaches
Tilted-ring and parametric modeling can be applied either to 2D velocity maps (𝑉l.o.s. at each
sky position) or directly to the 3D emission-line cubes. The 2D approach is robust for well-
resolved galaxies with tens or hundreds of resolution elements (Begeman, 1987, 1989), but becomes
unreliable in less resolved galaxies as is often the case for dwarf galaxies (Swaters et al., 2009). In
this situation, the derivation of velocity maps is ambiguous due to beam-smearing effects, altering
the intrinsic shape of the line profiles. Gas emission with intrinsically different 𝑉l.o.s is flux-averaged
within the resolution element, so the line profiles tend to become broad and non-Gaussian with
long tails of emission towards the galaxy systemic velocity (e.g., de Blok et al., 2008). In such
cases, if one estimates 𝑉l.o.s as the moment-one along the profile or as the central velocity of a
Gaussian fit, the rotational velocity will be underestimated, especially in the central parts (e.g.,
Swaters et al., 2009; Lelli et al., 2010). Moreover, if one estimates the gas velocity dispersion
𝜎V as the moment-two along the profile or as the width of a Gaussian fit, the intrinsic velocity
dispersion will be severely overestimated (Di Teodoro and Fraternali, 2015). For galaxies with
high inclinations, the minor axis is always poorly resolved due to the disk projection along the line
of sight. Therefore, similar effects occur when analyzing edge-on galaxies, limiting 2D methods


                                                    18
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                 F. Lelli et al.


to galaxies with inclinations < 75◦ . There is no simple way to fully correct for beam smearing
using a 2D approach because it depends on the interplay between intrinsic rotation-curve shape, gas
distribution, disk thickness, and disk inclination (Begeman, 1989).
The 3D approach builds model cubes using Eq. 1 together with the gas surface density profile, the
gas vertical structure, and the intrinsic 𝜎V profile (Corbelli and Schneider, 1997; Sicking, 1997).
The model cubes are then smoothed to the same spectral and spatial resolution of the observations
(reproducing beam smearing effects) and compared with the observed one until a best-fit is found.
The 3D approach can then recover the intrinsic 𝑉rot (𝑅) and 𝜎V (𝑅) profiles (Józsa et al., 2007;
Swaters et al., 2009; Di Teodoro and Fraternali, 2015). Over the past years, several 3D parametric
fitting tools have been developed, such as KinMS (Davis et al., 2013), GalPak-3D (Bouché et al.,
2015), DysmalPy (Price et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2025) and Geko (Danhaive and Tacchella, 2025).
Importantly, 3D parameteric modeling may not always capture the correct beam-smearing effects
because it imposes a specific rotation-curve shape. For example, an intrinsically flat rotation curve
leads to more severe beam-smearing effects than an intrinsically solid-body one. A 3D tilted-ring
modeling is often the best solution, but requires good sensitivity in each ring. Several titled-ring 3D
fitting tools are now available, such as TiRiFiC (Józsa et al., 2007) and its automated version FAT
(Kamphuis et al., 2015), 3D Barolo (Di Teodoro and Fraternali, 2015), and a new version of KinMS
(Davis et al., 2020). These 3D kinematic modeling tools allows for the derivation of rotation curves
even for poorly resolved galaxies (with only ∼ 3 − 4 independent elements along the major axis),
which cannot be reliably modeled in 2D. However, even these packages may still be affected by
beam-smearing, making the innermost rings still somewhat uncertain (see, e.g., Deg et al. 2022).
In principle, the best way to remove many of the uncertainties discussed above would be to model
the emission of the kinematic tracer in the 𝑢𝑣-plane, as we discuss in Section 4.4.3.

4.2.2   Automated acceptance/rejection criteria
A key use of large H I surveys is the comparison with cosmological simulations. These comparisons
require that the same modeling approach and the same software are applied to both mock and real
observations. A significant challenge in this context is understanding the “selection function”, that
is, how to select simulated galaxies that could have been observed and modeled in the same way as
a given survey. The traditional approach of accepting models based on visual inspection (e.g., Deg
et al., 2022) introduces an hard-to-quantify effect to the selection function. Moreover, even if this
effect could be quantified and/or repeated, visual inspection may simply be unfeasible for the large
galaxy samples expected from SKA-Mid surveys. However, visual inspection by expert users could
still play an important role in the SKA era; for example, we may train machine-learning algorithms
using the assessments from visual inspection as a robust training set.
An automated approach based on a suite of observations and/or test models must be adopted for
large H I surveys with SKA-Mid. This approach must take into account the limits of modeling
software in terms of resolution, sensitivity, inclination, and even galaxy mass or rotation velocity.
In fact, the reliability of kinematic models strongly depends on disk inclination and galaxy mass,
being progressively worse for low-inclination, low-mass galaxies. For example, Deg et al. (2025)
demonstrated that, at velocities below ∼50 km s−1 , kinematic models for galaxies resolved by 5
beams were reliable only for inclinations larger than 40◦ (see also Rhee et al., 2004; Kuzio de Naray


                                                  19
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                  F. Lelli et al.


et al., 2006; Read et al., 2016). A critical assessment in terms of data quality and disk inclination is
crucial to study the dynamical laws of galaxies (Sect. 2.1) and potential outliers (e.g., Lelli, 2024).
A major challenge in any automated approach is the presence in the final catalog of “contaminants”:
rotation curves that do not represent the underlying gravitational potential of the galaxy because of
technical issues (e.g., the choice of the wrong geometric parameters) and/or intrinsic physical issues
(e.g., disks out of equilibrium due to interactions, mergers, asymmetries, etc.). These contaminants
can be found in large catalogs generated by both visual inspection (see, e.g., some of the low-velocity
WALLABY models of Deg et al. 2022) and automated approaches. Automated accept/reject rules
can be tuned to increase the number of total rotation curves at the cost of an increased contaminant
fraction, so one needs to find the best compromise to minimize the contaminant fraction while
maximizing the total number of acceptable rotation curves. Despite the numerous challenges of
modeling large numbers of marginally resolved galaxies with low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), the
scientific benefits are well worth the effort. They will provide statistically significant samples of
kinematic models across a wide range of environments and, in the SKA era, a range of redshifts.

4.3     Modeling of highly resolved disks
SKA-Mid AA4 will allow for H I observations at 1′′ -2′′ resolution (see Sect. 3.1). In nearby galaxies,
these high spatial resolutions will likely uncover details in the gas distribution and kinematics that
require more complex modeling approaches than a simple, axisymmetric, rotating disk. These
complexities may include highly asymmetric gas distributions (clumps, shells, holes, and so on),
non-circular motions (bar-driven flows, inflows, outflows, and so on), and complex vertical structures
(extraplanar gas and disk flares). We discuss potential ideas to tackle these challenges.

4.3.1    Asymmetric gas distributions
Where gas distributions are clumpy and/or strongly asymmetric, traditional approaches (which
impose axisymmetry) will fail to reproduce the observed gas distribution. The impact of this effect
on the resulting rotation curve can vary wildly. In systems that are clumpy, but in which the gas
emission fills much of the radial ring, axisymetric models generally perform well (e.g., Davis,
2014). However, in extreme cases, the best-fit model may create artificial spikes in the rotation
curve. Various techniques can be used to avoid such issues, but they all have some drawbacks.
Three main techniques have been used to deal with clumpy distributions. The simplest one is to
normalize a-posteriori the flux in a given spatial pixel of the 3D model to match the observed
intensity (moment-zero) map (Lelli et al., 2012). The main drawback of this method is that
it does not fully account for beam-smearing effects from the intrinsic variations in the surface
density distribution within the beam. The second technique mitigates this issue by using the “clean
components” determined during the imaging of the 𝑢𝑣 data to determine the flux distribution, and
fitting the kinematics of these components (Smith et al., 2019). The “trusted” flux in the model
is then reproduced by definition. The third technique adopts a more drastic solution: it allows the
kinematics and positions of a cloud of point sources to be fitted to the data. While very powerful, this
technique could have millions of free parameters and is thus extremely computationally expensive.
In addition, all these methods lose nearly all the constraining power on the disk inclination because
they are forced to reproduce the observed gas distribution. The best strategy, therefore, is a two-step


                                                  20
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                   F. Lelli et al.


approach: first fitting a model that is axisymmetric in both the gas distribution and kinematics to
constrain the disk geometry (especially the inclination), then fitting a model that is not axisymmetric
in the gas distribution to constrain the rotation curve (e.g., Lelli et al., 2012).
In the future, new machine learning-based techniques, such as diffusion models, may be used to
determine the gas distribution, although such efforts are in their early stages at the present time.
Another way to account for clumpy gas distribution may be to do kinematic modeling directly in
the 𝑢𝑣 plane, modeling all the recoverable scales at the same time, as we discuss in Sect. 4.4.3.

4.3.2   Non-circular motions in the disk plane
The simplest form of non-circular motion is a radial flow (𝑉rad ) in the disk plane, giving an additional
term 𝑉rad (𝑅) sin(𝑖) sin(𝜃) in the right part of Eq. 1. More generally, 𝑉rot and 𝑉rad are the first-order
terms of a harmonic expansion of the line-of-sight velocity (Schoenmakers et al., 1997):
                                            ∑︁
                    𝑉l.o.s. (𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝑉sys +    [𝑐 𝑚 (𝑅) cos(𝑚𝜃) + 𝑠 𝑚 (𝑅) sin(𝑚𝜃)] ,                  (5)
                                         𝑚=1

where the harmonic order 𝑚 = 1 gives 𝑐 1 = 𝑉rot sin(𝑖) and 𝑠1 = 𝑉rad sin(𝑖). A perturbation of
the gravitational potential of order 𝑚 causes harmonics of order 𝑚 − 1 and 𝑚 + 1 in projection
(Schoenmakers et al., 1997). For example, bar-like and oval distortions with 𝑚 = 2 give 𝑚 = 1 and
𝑚 = 3 terms in 𝑉l.o.s (Spekkens and Sellwood, 2007). The harmonic decomposition increases the
number of free parameters, which are often degenerate, so it can be applied only to high-quality
observations. This method has been implemented with 2D approaches (Gentile et al., 2005, 2007;
Trachternach et al., 2008; Marasco et al., 2018), but further progress can be made with a 3D
approach (Hogarth et al., 2024). In particular, it will be important to investigate strategies to tackle
the various degeneracies between the free parameters of the harmonic expansion, for example by
using a Bayesian approach with physically motivated priors, as those discussed in Sect. 4.4.1.

4.3.3   Vertical structure: extraplanar gas and flares
A non-negligible fraction (≃ 15%) of H I in star-forming galaxies resides in a thick structure that
surrounds the thin disk, extending typically a few kpc above and below the midplane. The presence
of “extraplanar” gas clearly emerges in deep H I observations, reaching column densities of 0.1
M⊙ pc−2 or less (Fraternali et al., 2002; Oosterloo et al., 2007), which will be routinely reached
by SKA-Mid. The extraplanar H I gas is often characterized by peculiar kinematics, showing a
slower rotation than the H I in the thin disk and a global inflow motion with typical speeds of a
few tens km s−1 (e.g., Fraternali et al., 2002; Oosterloo et al., 2007; Marasco et al., 2019). These
peculiar properties are broadly consistent with a galactic fountain triggered by stellar feedback
(Fraternali, 2017). To date, the peculiar kinematics of the extraplanar H I gas has been modeled
in 3D with substantial human intervention, given the increased number of free parameters and
overall complexity. In the SKA era, we may need to explore automated approaches to account for
extraplanar H I gas in large galaxy samples. Substantial work needs to be done in this context.
As discussed in Sect. (4.1.2), H I disks are naturally flared, with a scale-height that is expected
to reach up to ∼1 kpc in the outskirts (O’Brien et al., 2010; Bacchini et al., 2020; Mancera Piña
et al., 2022). High-resolution observations should be able to distinguish between extraplanar gas


                                                   21
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                F. Lelli et al.


and flaring of the H I disk because these features occur in distinct regions (inner versus outer disk,
respectively) and have different kinematics. In fact, extraplanar gas is often visible as residual
emission after the subtraction of the best-fit kinematic model, including potential disk flaring
(e.g., Oosterloo et al., 2007). However, in marginally resolved galaxies, the contamination from
extraplanar gas might be inevitable, leading to a systematic underestimate of 𝑉rot (𝑅). Although there
is no obvious way to circumvent this issue, tests using mock degraded data of nearby galaxies will
be valuable to quantify the magnitude of this effect and to elaborate effective correction strategies.

4.4     Next-generation modeling techniques
4.4.1    Bayesian techniques: improvements and optimization
Both parametric and non-parametric fitting methods make use of a substantial number of free
parameters, which are often degenerate. The most important degeneracy is between 𝑉rot and
inclination, but additional degeneracies arise when one goes beyond a standard, thin, rotating disk
model, for example by adding non-circular motions (Sect. 4.3.2) and/or extraplanar gas (Sect. 4.3.3).
Degeneracies can be a concern even for high-resolution data with high SNR, and becomes a very
severe problem for barely resolved, low-SNR data. Ideally, next-generation modeling tools must be
able not only to infer a particular galaxy property, but also to determine a realistic observational
uncertainty. A robust assessment of the uncertainties, including potential covariances, is key to test
DM models and modified-gravity theories.

In principle, the use of Bayesian inference to fully explore the parameter space should automati-
cally account for all possible degeneracies, providing realistic uncertainties for all the parameters
depending on their intrinsic correlation and on the quality of the data themselves. Therefore, it is
natural to expect that Bayesian techniques will be adopted in the modeling of SKA-Mid H I data
(but see below for a possible alternative). However, these techniques have two important drawbacks
that we must overcome before considering them as the “golden standard”.

The first drawback is that, by construction, Bayesian inference is based on the likelihood function,
which fully shapes the inferred posterior distributions, thus our measurements and associated
uncertainties. The definition of this function is somewhat arbitrary and complicated by intrinsic
difference between the model, which is smooth and typically axisymmetric, and the data, which
show a higher degree of complexity especially at high resolutions, as well as by the presence of
correlated noise in the datacube (e.g., Davis et al., 2017a).

The second drawback is the high computational cost needed for Bayesian analysis, which generally
uses Monte Carlo methods and requires building 105 − 106 models to robustly sample the parameter
space. One way to optimize the existing algorithms is mapping the underlying probability distribu-
tion function and strategically sample it to improve both efficiency and accuracy. Possible avenues
to do so include importance sampling, adaptive sampling, variance reduction techniques, optimal
weighting, and multiphase Monte Carlo. Another, complementary way to optimize the process is
to resort to GPU-acceleration, both for the creation of individual models and for the exploration of
the parameter space. Libraries that simplify GPU-accelerated programming are now available in
several programming languages (e.g., the JAX library in python, Bradbury et al., 2018), and can
substantially boost the performances. Preliminary tests using KinMS (Davis et al., 2013, 2020)


                                                 22
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                 F. Lelli et al.


indicate a factor ∼ 20 speed-up in the model creation.

4.4.2   Machine learning: artificial and Bayesian neural networks
An alternative approach to Bayesian fitting is to directly infer the desired quantities (e.g., flat
rotation velocity, or DM density profile) directly from the 2D or 3D data using machine learning
techniques, such artificial neural networks (ANN). Neural networks have been shown to be able to
detect and characterize sources from 2D or 3D H I data, notably as part of the first two SKA data
challenges (Bonaldi et al., 2021; Hartley et al., 2023; Cornu et al., 2024, 2026). This approach
would require generating mock data sampling different galaxy and DM parameters to create a
large and representative training set. Once the ANN is trained, it should in principle provide
fast predictions and hence be applicable to large datasets. However, the high dimensionality of
the parameter space may induce degeneracies such that not all information may be recovered. In
addition, ANNs generally lack explicit uncertainty quantification. By incorporating principles of
Bayesian inference in a neural network, Bayesian neural networks (BNN) may constitute a promising
way to device the new generation of dynamical modeling tools. In fact, BNNs provide full posterior
distributions over the model parameters, offering a way to quantify uncertainty. Furthermore, they
may provide a more physically-tractable way to emulate current forward-modeling tools. Self-
supervised, physics-aware, BNNs have been developed to fit gas kinematics in 2D (Dawson et al.,
2021) and show significant promise when extended to 3D.

It may also be possible to adopt hybrid approaches, such as using an ANN for a fast initial
parameter estimation, then a more computationally intensive Bayesian method to refine the results
and quantify uncertainties. Both classical and Bayesian machine learning methods have been
developed to yield dynamical masses (e.g. Ntampaka et al., 2015; Calderon and Berlind, 2019;
Villanueva-Domingo et al., 2022; Chu et al., 2024; Hahn et al., 2024), although not specifically
from H I data so far. Finally, since evaluating a rotation curve or a DM density profile from 2D or
3D data involves deconvolution steps, attention-based neural networks are likely to be well-suited
to the task. Indeed, such neural network dynamically weigh the relevance of the different input
elements, directly correlate all parts of the input, and provide increased interpretability through the
attention weights. Furthermore, architectures such as transformers enable parallelization and hence
faster training on modern hardware.

4.4.3   Kinematic modeling in the uv plane
Interferometric observations consist in a sparse sampling of the Fourier angular space (or uv-
plane), providing the so-called visibilities. Conversion to the real space (the sky plane) requires
a manipulation of the visibilities (e.g., gridding, weighting, deconvolution, and cleaning) that is
not unique, and that inevitably alters the intrinsic properties of the original dataset. The ideal
approach to circumvent these issues is to model the data directly in the uv-plane. This allows
using the data in their original space, which provides two main advantages for modeling purposes.
First, the uncertainties in the visibilities are well defined. Second, convolution with the synthesized
beam (which is often the computational bottleneck in the model generation) is bypassed: the model
and the data will probe exactly the same angular scales, by construction. This makes this method
especially promising when dealing with barely resolved observations.


                                                  23
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                                F. Lelli et al.


Several kinematic studies have explored this method (e.g., Dye et al., 2018; Rizzo et al., 2020;
Powell et al., 2021; Amvrosiadis et al., 2025), but the publicly available modeling packages have yet
to implement it. Although promising, this method needs to be robustly implemented and carefully
tested in order to assess its applicability to the unprecedented data volume that SKA-Mid will
provide. Importantly, while the mathematical approach of a direct modeling of the visibilities is the
most accurate one, it has two practical drawbacks: (1) the computational costs, and (2) the storage
capacity costs. Regarding the first drawback, the computational cost can be large because, in a
typical application, the disk model is first conceived in the real-space and only later transported to
the 𝑢𝑣 plane with a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to be compared with the observed visibilities (e.g.,
Amvrosiadis et al., 2025). In this case, the original model must be created with sufficient resolution
to account for the full range of possible scales probed by the data, which might be unpractical.
This problem has been mitigated by applying a non-uniform FFT (Rizzo et al., 2020; Powell et al.,
2021). The second drawback is a logistic one: the SKA observatory should store and provide the
(raw or gridded) visibilities rather than more practical sub-cubes with the individual H I detections.
An approach that would not require a storage of the visibilities, but only the dirty data cubes and
the dirty beams, would be to work on the gridded visibilities instead of the measured ones. The fit
quality would then be calculated in the Fourier domain by comparing a FFT of the dirty cube (done
once in the complete process) with the FFT of the model multiplied with the gridded sampling
function, i.e., the FFT of the dirty beam. This method has not been tested yet, but is theoretically
even less computationally expensive than the 3D fitting method in the image domain, which requires
two FFTs (back and forth) for the convolution with the clean beam. However, it would require the
storage of the dirty cube and the dirty beam.


5   Conclusions

Understanding the nature of DM is one of the most outstanding challenges of modern physics. A
prime way to test − and possibly rule out − different DM models and/or modified gravity theories is
to study the gravitational potential of galaxies using extended H I rotation curves (Sect. 1). During
the past four decades, the systematic construction of mass models of galaxies revealed a surprising
coupling between baryons and dynamics (Sect. 2.1), and raised several outstanding problems for the
ΛCDM cosmological model (Sect. 2.2). Many questions remain unanswered and could be tackled
with a synergy between the SKA observatory and state-of-the-art optical/NIR facilities.

SKA-Mid AA4 will revolutionize the study of H I rotation curves in several ways because it will
give us (1) a sharper view of nearby galaxies, probing the H I kinematics at exceptional resolutions
of 1′′ − 2′′ (Sect. 3.1), (2) a broader view of the nearby Universe, providing statistical samples of
tens of thousands of galaxies in different cosmic environments (Sect. 3.2), and (3) a deeper view of
the distant Universe, probing the H I kinematics of galaxies across cosmic time, possibly up to 𝑧 ≃ 1
for the first time (Sect. 3.3). These observational advances will allow us to test DM models and
modified gravity theories in new regimes, in which different theories make different predictions.

The unprecedented volume and quality of the SKA data will pose important technical challenges in
the modeling of the H I kinematics of galaxies. Substantial work has already been done, but many
technical aspects remain to be investigated in the coming years (Sect. 4).


                                                 24
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                               F. Lelli et al.


The extended H I rotation curves of galaxies provided one of the first unambiguous observations of
the DM effect (see Sanders, 2010; Bertone and Hooper, 2018, for such history). Future H I legacy
surveys with SKA-Mid may “close the loop”, providing key evidence on what DM is and is not.


References
E. A. K. Adams et al. A&A, 667:A38, Nov. 2022. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202244007.
C. P. Ahn et al. ApJSS, 203(2):21, Dec. 2012. doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/203/2/21.
A. Amvrosiadis et al. MNRAS, 536(4):3757–3783, Feb. 2025. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae2760.
C. Bacchini, F. Fraternali, G. Pezzulli, and A. Marasco. Astron. Astrophys., 644:A125, Dec. 2020.
   doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038962.
I. Banik and H. Zhao. Symmetry, 14(7):1331, June 2022. doi: 10.3390/sym14071331.
N. Bar, K. Blum, and C. Sun. Phys. Rev. D, 105(8):083015, Apr. 2022. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.
   105.083015.
D. Barat et al. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 498(4):5885–5903, Nov. 2020. doi: 10.1093/Mon.Not.R.
   Astron.Soc./staa2716.
G. Battaglia, F. Fraternali, T. Oosterloo, and R. Sancisi. Astron. Astrophys., 447:49–62, Feb. 2006.
   doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20053210.
K. Begeman. HI Rotation Curves of Spiral Galaxies. PhD thesis, University of Groningen, NL,
   1987.
K. G. Begeman. Astron. Astrophys., 223:47–60, Oct. 1989.
A. Bera, N. Kanekar, J. N. Chengalur, and J. S. Bagla. ApJL, 950(2):L18, June 2023. doi:
   10.3847/2041-8213/acd0b3.
G. Bertone and D. Hooper. Reviews of Modern Physics, 90(4):045002, Oct. 2018. doi: 10.1103/
   RevModPhys.90.045002.
A. Bianchetti et al. ApJ, 982(2):82, Apr. 2025. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adb1b8.
J. Billard et al. Reports on Progress in Physics, 85(5):056201, May 2022. doi: 10.1088/1361-6633/
   ac5754.
J. Binney and S. Tremaine. Galactic Dynamics. Princeton University Press, Princeton, USA, first
   edition, 1994.
L. Blanchet and C. Skordis. JCAP, 2024(11):040, Nov. 2024. doi: 10.1088/1475-7516/2024/11/040.
A. Bonaldi et al. MNRAS, 500(3):3821–3837, Jan. 2021. doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa3023.
R. Boomsma et al. A&A, 490(2):555–570, Nov. 2008. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:200810120.
S. Bose et al. MNRAS, 486(4):4790–4804, July 2019. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz1168.
A. Bosma. The distribution and kinematics of neutral hydrogen in spiral galaxies of various
   morphological types. PhD thesis, University of Groningen, 1978.
N. Bouché et al. Astron. J., 150(3):92, Sept. 2015. doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/150/3/92.
R. Brada and M. Milgrom. MNRAS, 276(2):453–459, Sept. 1995. doi: 10.1093/mnras/276.2.453.
J. Bradbury et al. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL
   http://github.com/google/jax.
R. Braun and D. A. Thilker. A&A, 417:421–435, Apr. 2004. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20034423.
J. S. Bullock and M. Boylan-Kolchin. Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys., 55(1):343–387, Aug. 2017.
   doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-091916-055313.


                                                25
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                             F. Lelli et al.


A. Burkert et al. Astrophys. J., 725(2):2324–2332, Dec. 2010. doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/725/2/2324.
V. F. Calderon and A. A. Berlind. MNRAS, 490(2):2367–2379, Dec. 2019. doi: 10.1093/mnras/
   stz2775.
J. M. Cannon, N. M. McClure-Griffiths, E. D. Skillman, and S. Côté. Astrophys. J., 607:274–284,
   May 2004. doi: 10.1086/383408.
S. Casertano. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 203:735–747, May 1983.
K.-H. Chae. ApJ, 941(1):55, Dec. 2022. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac93fc.
K.-H. Chae et al. Astrophys. J., 904(1):51, Nov. 2020. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abbb96.
K.-H. Chae et al. ApJ, 921(2):104, Nov. 2021. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac1bba.
K.-H. Chae et al. Phys. Rev. D, 106(10):103025, Nov. 2022. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.106.103025.
A. Chowdhury et al. Nature, 586(7829):369–372, Oct. 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2794-7.
A. Chowdhury, N. Kanekar, and J. N. Chengalur. ApJ, 937(2):103, Oct. 2022a. doi: 10.3847/
   1538-4357/ac7d52.
A. Chowdhury, N. Kanekar, and J. N. Chengalur. ApJL, 935(1):L5, Aug. 2022b. doi: 10.3847/
   2041-8213/ac8150.
J. Chu et al. MNRAS, 528(4):6354–6369, Mar. 2024. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae406.
P. Colín, V. Avila-Reese, and O. Valenzuela. ApJ, 542(2):622–630, Oct. 2000. doi: 10.1086/317057.
E. Corbelli and S. E. Schneider. Astrophys. J., 479(1):244–257, Apr. 1997. doi: 10.1086/303849.
D. Cornu et al. A&A, 690:A211, Oct. 2024. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202449548.
D. Cornu et al. A&A, 707:A203, Mar. 2026. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202557257.
O. Daigle et al. MNRAS, 367(2):469–512, Apr. 2006. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2006.10002.x.
A. L. Danhaive and S. Tacchella. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2510.07369, Oct. 2025. doi: 10.48550/
   arXiv.2510.07369.
T. A. Davis. MNRAS, 443(1):911–918, Sept. 2014. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu1163.
T. A. Davis et al. MNRAS, 429(1):534–555, Feb. 2013. doi: 10.1093/mnras/sts353.
T. A. Davis et al. MNRAS, 468(4):4675–4690, July 2017a. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw3217.
T. A. Davis et al. MNRAS, 468(4):4675–4690, July 2017b. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw3217.
T. A. Davis, N. Zabel, and J. M. Dawson. KinMS: Three-dimensional kinematic modeling of
   arbitrary gas distributions. Astrophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:2006.003, June 2020.
J. M. Dawson, T. A. Davis, E. L. Gomez, and J. Schock. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 503(1):574–585,
   May 2021. doi: 10.1093/Mon.Not.R.Astron.Soc./stab427.
W. J. G. de Blok. Advances in Astronomy, 2010:789293, Jan. 2010. doi: 10.1155/2010/789293.
W. J. G. de Blok and A. Bosma. A&A, 385:816–846, Apr. 2002. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20020080.
W. J. G. de Blok et al. Astron. J., 136(6):2648–2719, Dec. 2008. doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/136/6/
   2648.
N. Deg et al. PASA, 39:e059, Nov. 2022. doi: 10.1017/pasa.2022.43.
N. Deg et al. ApJ, 994(2):232, Dec. 2025. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae1003.
H. Desmond. MNRAS, 526(3):3342–3351, Dec. 2023. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad2762.
H. Desmond, P. G. Ferreira, G. Lavaux, and J. Jasche. MNRAS, 474(3):3152–3161, Mar. 2018. doi:
   10.1093/mnras/stx3062.
A. Di Cintio and F. Lelli. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 456(1):L127–L131, Feb. 2016. doi: 10.1093/
   Mon.Not.R.Astron.Soc.l/slv185.
E. M. Di Teodoro and F. Fraternali. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 451(3):3021–3033, Aug. 2015. doi:


                                               26
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                             F. Lelli et al.


   10.1093/Mon.Not.R.Astron.Soc./stv1213.
E. M. Di Teodoro, F. Fraternali, and S. H. Miller. A&A, 594:A77, Oct. 2016. doi: 10.1051/
   0004-6361/201628315.
E. M. Di Teodoro et al. MNRAS, 476(1):804–813, May 2018. doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty175.
J. Dubinski and R. G. Carlberg. Astrophys. J., 378:496, Sept. 1991. doi: 10.1086/170451.
A. A. Dutton, A. V. Macciò, A. Obreja, and T. Buck. MNRAS, 485(2):1886–1899, May 2019. doi:
   10.1093/mnras/stz531.
S. Dye et al. MNRAS, 476(4):4383–4394, June 2018. doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty513.
A. A. El-Zant, J. Freundlich, and F. Combes. MNRAS, 461(2):1745–1759, Sept. 2016. doi:
   10.1093/mnras/stw1398.
B. Epinat, P. Amram, C. Balkowski, and M. Marcelin. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 401(4):2113–2147,
   Feb. 2010. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15688.x.
B. Famaey and S. S. McGaugh. Living Reviews in Relativity, 15:10, Sept. 2012. doi: 10.12942/
   lrr-2012-10.
F. Fraternali. In A. Fox and R. Davé, editors, Gas Accretion onto Galaxies, volume 430 of
   Astrophysics and Space Science Library, page 323, Jan. 2017. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-52512-9_
   14.
F. Fraternali, G. van Moorsel, R. Sancisi, and T. Oosterloo. AJ, 123(6):3124–3140, June 2002. doi:
   10.1086/340358.
J. Freundlich et al. MNRAS, 491(3):4523–4542, Jan. 2020. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz3306.
E. Garaldi, E. Romano-Díaz, C. Porciani, and M. S. Pawlowski. Phys. Rev. Lett., 120(26):261301,
   June 2018. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.120.261301.
A. Gasser. Modelling Rotation Curves in Marginally Resolved Warped Galaxies. Master’s thesis,
   Royal Military College of Canada, May 2023. URL https://espace.rmc-cmr.ca/jspui/
   handle/11264/1287?mode=full.
G. Gentile et al. Astrophys. J., 634(2):L145–L148, Dec. 2005. doi: 10.1086/498939.
G. Gentile, P. Salucci, U. Klein, and G. L. Granato. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 375(1):199–212,
   Feb. 2007. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2006.11283.x.
A. Ghari, B. Famaey, C. Laporte, and H. Haghi. A&A, 623:A123, Mar. 2019. doi: 10.1051/
   0004-6361/201834661.
J. Goodman. New Astron., 5(2):103–107, Apr. 2000. doi: 10.1016/S1384-1076(00)00015-4.
F. Governato et al. Nature, 463:203–206, Jan. 2010. doi: 10.1038/nature08640.
F. Governato et al. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 422:1231–1240, May 2012. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.
   2012.20696.x.
C. Hahn, C. Bottrell, and K.-G. Lee. ApJ, 968(2):90, June 2024. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad4344.
P. Hartley et al. MNRAS, 523(2):1967–1993, Aug. 2023. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad1375.
K. Haubner et al. In D. J. Pisano, K. M. Mogotsi, J. Healy, and S. Blyth, editors, IAU Symposium,
   volume 20 of IAU Symposium, pages 119–125, July 2026. doi: 10.1017/S1743921324002886.
K. M. Hess et al. MNRAS, 484(2):2234–2256, Apr. 2019. doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty3421.
L. M. Hogarth et al. MNRAS, 528(4):6768–6785, Mar. 2024. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae377.
S. Hossenfelder and T. Mistele. International Journal of Modern Physics D, 27(14):1847010, Jan.
   2018. doi: 10.1142/S0218271818470107.
W. Hu, R. Barkana, and A. Gruzinov. Phys. Rev. Let., 85(6):1158–1161, Aug. 2000. doi: 10.1103/


                                               27
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                              F. Lelli et al.


   PhysRevLett.85.1158.
L. K. Hunt et al. A&A, 675:A64, July 2023. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202245805.
D. A. Hunter et al. Astron. J., 144:134, Nov. 2012. doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/144/5/134.
G. Iorio et al. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 466(4):4159–4192, Apr. 2017. doi: 10.1093/Mon.Not.R.
   Astron.Soc./stw3285.
M. J. Jarvis et al. MNRAS, Oct. 2025. doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf1702.
F. Jiang et al. MNRAS, 487(4):5272–5290, Aug. 2019. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz1499.
F. Jiang et al. MNRAS, 521(3):4630–4644, May 2023. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad705.
M. G. Jones et al. A&A, 609:17, 1 2018. ISSN 14320746. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/
   201731448. URL https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018A%26A...609A..17J/
   abstracthttp://cdsarc.u-strasbg.fr/viz-bin/qcat?J/A+A/609/A17.
G. I. G. Józsa, F. Kenn, U. Klein, and T. A. Oosterloo. Astron. Astrophys., 468(2):731–774, June
   2007. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20066164.
A. Kalnajs. In Internal Kinematics and Dynamics of Galaxies, volume 100 of IAU Symposia, pages
   87–88, Jan. 1983.
P. Kamphuis et al. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 452(3):3139–3158, Sept. 2015. doi: 10.1093/Mon.
   Not.R.Astron.Soc./stv1480.
H. Katz et al. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 466(2):1648–1668, Apr. 2017. doi: 10.1093/Mon.Not.R.
   Astron.Soc./stw3101.
A. Kazemi-Moridani et al. ApJ, 981(2):208, Mar. 2025. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad9f3f.
B. W. Keller and J. W. Wadsley. Astrophys. J., 835(1):L17, Jan. 2017. doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/
   835/1/L17.
S. M. Kent. Astron. J., 91:1301–1327, June 1986. doi: 10.1086/114106.
S. M. Kent. Astron. J., 93:816–832, Apr. 1987. doi: 10.1086/114366.
M. Kretschmer et al. MNRAS, 503(4):5238–5253, June 2021. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab833.
R. Kuzio de Naray, S. S. McGaugh, W. J. G. de Blok, and A. Bosma. ApJSS, 165(2):461–479, Aug.
   2006. doi: 10.1086/505345.
L. L. Lee et al. ApJ, 978(1):14, Jan. 2025. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad90b5.
F. Lelli. Nature Astronomy, 6:35–47, Jan. 2022. doi: 10.1038/s41550-021-01562-2.
F. Lelli. A&A, 689:L3, Sept. 2024. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202451289.
F. Lelli, F. Fraternali, and R. Sancisi. Astron. Astrophys., 516:A11, June 2010. doi: 10.1051/
   0004-6361/200913808.
F. Lelli, M. Verheijen, F. Fraternali, and R. Sancisi. Astron. Astrophys., 537:A72, Jan. 2012. doi:
   10.1051/0004-6361/201117867.
F. Lelli, F. Fraternali, and M. Verheijen. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 433:L30–L34, June 2013. doi:
   10.1093/Mon.Not.R.Astron.Soc.l/slt053.
F. Lelli, F. Fraternali, and M. Verheijen. Astron. Astrophys., 563:A27, Mar. 2014a. doi: 10.1051/
   0004-6361/201322658.
F. Lelli, M. Verheijen, and F. Fraternali. Astron. Astrophys., 566:A71, June 2014b. doi: 10.1051/
   0004-6361/201322657.
F. Lelli, S. S. McGaugh, and J. M. Schombert. Astron. J., 152(6):157, Dec. 2016a. doi: 10.3847/
   0004-6256/152/6/157.
F. Lelli, S. S. McGaugh, and J. M. Schombert. Astrophys. J., 816(1):L14, Jan. 2016b. doi:


                                                28
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                           F. Lelli et al.


   10.3847/2041-8205/816/1/L14.
F. Lelli, S. S. McGaugh, J. M. Schombert, and M. S. Pawlowski. Astrophys. J., 827(1):L19, Aug.
   2016c. doi: 10.3847/2041-8205/827/1/L19.
F. Lelli, S. S. McGaugh, and J. M. Schombert. MNRAS, 468(1):L68–L71, June 2017a. doi:
   10.1093/mnrasl/slx031.
F. Lelli, S. S. McGaugh, J. M. Schombert, and M. S. Pawlowski. Astrophys. J., 836(2):152, Feb.
   2017b. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/836/2/152.
F. Lelli et al. MNRAS, 479(4):5440–5447, Oct. 2018. doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty1795.
F. Lelli et al. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 484(3):3267–3278, Apr. 2019. doi: 10.1093/Mon.Not.R.
   Astron.Soc./stz205.
F. Lelli et al. A&A, 672:A106, Apr. 2023. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202245105.
P. Li, F. Lelli, S. McGaugh, and J. Schombert. Astron. Astrophys., 615:A3, July 2018. doi:
   10.1051/0004-6361/201732547.
P. Li, F. Lelli, S. McGaugh, and J. Schombert. Astrophys. J.S, 247(1):31, Mar. 2020. doi:
   10.3847/1538-4365/ab700e.
Q. Li and L. Modesto. Gravitation and Cosmology, 26(2):99–117, Aug. 2020. doi: 10.1134/
   S0202289320020085.
L. Lin et al. A&A, 693:A91, Jan. 2025. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202450814.
A. D. Ludlow et al. Phys. Rev. Lett., 118(16):161103, Apr. 2017. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.118.
   161103.
A. V. Macciò et al. MNRAS, 424(2):1105–1112, Aug. 2012. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.21284.
   x.
P. E. Mancera Piña et al. MNRAS, 514(3):3329–3348, Aug. 2022. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1508.
P. E. Mancera Piña et al. A&A, 699:A311, July 2025. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202554381.
A. Marasco et al. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 476(2):2168–2176, May 2018. doi: 10.1093/Mon.
   Not.R.Astron.Soc./sty354.
A. Marasco et al. Astron. Astrophys., 631:A50, Nov. 2019. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201936338.
A. C. Mayer, A. F. Teklu, K. Dolag, and R.-S. Remus. MNRAS, 518(1):257–269, Jan. 2023. doi:
   10.1093/mnras/stac3017.
S. S. McGaugh. Astron. J., 143:40, Feb. 2012. doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/143/2/40.
S. S. McGaugh and J. M. Schombert. AJ, 148(5):77, Nov. 2014. doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/148/5/77.
S. S. McGaugh, J. M. Schombert, G. D. Bothun, and W. J. G. de Blok. Astrophys. J., 533:L99–L102,
   Apr. 2000. doi: 10.1086/312628.
S. S. McGaugh, F. Lelli, and J. M. Schombert. Phys. Rev. Lett., 117(20):201101, Nov. 2016. doi:
   10.1103/PhysRevLett.117.201101.
A. T. McNichols et al. Astrophys. J., 832(1):89, Nov. 2016. doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/832/1/89.
K. B. W. McQuinn et al. Astrophys. J., 721:297–317, Sept. 2010. doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/721/1/
   297.
G. R. Meurer, C. Carignan, S. F. Beaulieu, and K. C. Freeman. Astron. J., 111:1551–+, Apr. 1996.
   doi: 10.1086/117895.
M. Meyer et al. PASA, 34:52, Nov. 2017. doi: 10.1017/pasa.2017.31.
M. Milgrom. Astrophys. J., 270:365–370, July 1983a. doi: 10.1086/161130.
M. Milgrom. Astrophys. J., 270:371–389, July 1983b. doi: 10.1086/161131.


                                               29
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                           F. Lelli et al.


M. Milgrom. Annals of Physics, 229(2):384–415, Feb. 1994. doi: 10.1006/aphy.1994.1012.
M. Milgrom. Scholarpedia, 9(6):31410, 2014. doi: 10.4249/scholarpedia.31410. revision #196839.
T. Mistele, S. McGaugh, and S. Hossenfelder. A&A, 664:A40, Aug. 2022. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/
   202243216.
C. Muni et al. MNRAS, 536(1):314–323, Jan. 2025. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae2748.
C. Murugeshan et al. PASA, 41:e088, Nov. 2024. doi: 10.1017/pasa.2024.91.
A. P. Naik et al. MNRAS, 489(1):771–787, Oct. 2019. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2131.
J. F. Navarro, C. S. Frenk, and S. D. M. White. Astrophys. J., 462:563, May 1996. doi: 10.1086/
   177173.
A. Nestor Shachar et al. ApJ, 944(1):78, Feb. 2023. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aca9cf.
E. Noordermeer et al. Astron. Astrophys., 442:137–157, Oct. 2005. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:
   20053172.
M. Ntampaka et al. ApJ, 803(2):50, Apr. 2015. doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/803/2/50.
D. Obreschkow et al. ApJ, 703(2):1890–1903, Oct. 2009. doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/703/2/1890.
J. C. O’Brien, K. C. Freeman, and P. C. van der Kruit. Astron. Astrophys., 515:A62, June 2010.
   doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200912567.
S.-H. Oh et al. Astron. J., 149(6):180, June 2015. doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/149/6/180.
R. P. Olling. AJ, 110:591, Aug. 1995. doi: 10.1086/117545.
K. A. Oman et al. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 452(4):3650–3665, Oct. 2015. doi: 10.1093/Mon.
   Not.R.Astron.Soc./stv1504.
T. Oosterloo, F. Fraternali, and R. Sancisi. AJ, 134(3):1019, Sept. 2007. doi: 10.1086/520332.
J. Ott et al. Astron. J., 144:123, Oct. 2012. doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/144/4/123.
S. Panpanich and P. Burikham. Phys. Rev. D, 98(6):064008, Sept. 2018. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.
   98.064008.
A. Paranjape and R. K. Sheth. MNRAS, 517(1):130–139, Nov. 2022. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac2689.
M. Persic, P. Salucci, and F. Stel. MNRAS, 281(1):27–47, July 1996. doi: 10.1093/mnras/278.1.27.
J. Petersen and F. Lelli. A&A, 636:A56, Apr. 2020. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201936964.
T. E. Pickering, C. D. Impey, J. H. van Gorkom, and G. D. Bothun. AJ, 114:1858, Nov. 1997. doi:
   10.1086/118611.
A. Pillepich et al. MNRAS, 490(3):3196–3233, Dec. 2019. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2338.
A. A. Ponomareva et al. MNRAS, 474(4):4366–4384, Mar. 2018. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx3066.
A. A. Ponomareva et al. MNRAS, 508(1):1195–1205, Nov. 2021. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab2654.
A. Pontzen and F. Governato. MNRAS, 421(4):3464–3471, Apr. 2012. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.
   2012.20571.x.
L. Posti. Research Notes of the American Astronomical Society, 6(11):233, Nov. 2022. doi:
   10.3847/2515-5172/aca0df.
D. Powell et al. MNRAS, 501(1):515–530, Feb. 2021. doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa2740.
S. H. Price et al. ApJ, 922(2):143, Dec. 2021. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac22ad.
A. Puglisi et al. MNRAS, 524(2):2814–2835, Sept. 2023. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad1966.
J. I. Read, G. Iorio, O. Agertz, and F. Fraternali. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 462(4):3628–3645,
   Nov. 2016. doi: 10.1093/Mon.Not.R.Astron.Soc./stw1876.
T. Ren, A. Kwa, M. Kaplinghat, and H.-B. Yu. Physical Review X, 9(3):031020, July 2019. doi:
   10.1103/PhysRevX.9.031020.


                                               30
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                             F. Lelli et al.


G. Rhee et al. ApJ, 617(2):1059–1076, Dec. 2004. doi: 10.1086/425565.
J. Rhee et al. MNRAS, 518(3):4646–4671, Jan. 2023. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac3065.
F. Rizzo et al. Nature, 584(7820):201–204, Aug. 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2572-6.
F. Rizzo et al. A&A, 679:A129, Nov. 2023. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202346444.
V. H. Robles et al. MNRAS, 472(3):2945–2954, Dec. 2017. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx2253.
D. H. Rogstad, I. A. Lockhart, and M. C. H. Wright. Astrophys. J., 193:309–319, Oct. 1974. doi:
   10.1086/153164.
A. B. Romeo. MNRAS, 256(2):307–320, May 1992. doi: 10.1093/mnras/256.2.307.
V. C. Rubin, W. K. Ford, Jr., and N. Thonnard. Astrophys. J., 225:L107–L111, Nov. 1978. doi:
   10.1086/182804.
L. V. Sales, A. Wetzel, and A. Fattahi. Nature Astronomy, 6:897–910, June 2022. doi: 10.1038/
   s41550-022-01689-w.
R. Sancisi. In Dark Matter in Galaxies, volume 220 of IAU Symposia, page 233, July 2004.
R. H. Sanders. The Dark Matter Problem: A Historical Perspective, 2010.
R. H. M. Schoenmakers, M. Franx, and P. T. de Zeeuw. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 292(2):349–364,
   Dec. 1997. doi: 10.1093/Mon.Not.R.Astron.Soc./292.2.349.
J. Schombert and S. McGaugh. Pub. Astron. Soc. Austr., 31:e036, Sept. 2014. doi: 10.1017/Pub.
   Astron.Soc.Austr..2014.32.
J. Schombert, S. McGaugh, and F. Lelli. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 483(2):1496–1512, Feb. 2019.
   doi: 10.1093/Mon.Not.R.Astron.Soc./sty3223.
A. Shelest and F. Lelli. A&A, 641:A31, Sept. 2020. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038184.
F. J. Sicking. The thickness of the HI gas layer in spiral galaxies. PhD thesis, -, Dec. 1997.
J. D. Simon, A. D. Bolatto, A. Leroy, and L. Blitz. Astrophys. J., 596(2):957–981, Oct. 2003. doi:
   10.1086/378200.
J. D. Simon et al. Astrophys. J., 621(2):757–776, Mar. 2005. doi: 10.1086/427684.
C. Skordis and T. Złośnik. Phys. Rev. Lett., 127:161302, Oct 2021. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.
   161302.
M. D. Smith et al. MNRAS, 485(3):4359–4374, May 2019. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz625.
K. Spekkens and J. A. Sellwood. Astrophys. J., 664(1):204–214, July 2007. doi: 10.1086/518471.
D. N. Spergel and P. J. Steinhardt. Phys. Rev. Let., 84(17):3760–3763, Apr. 2000. doi: 10.1103/
   PhysRevLett.84.3760.
J. Spitzer, Lyman. Astrophys. J., 95:329, May 1942. doi: 10.1086/144407.
J. P. Stott et al. MNRAS, 457(2):1888–1904, Apr. 2016. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw129.
R. A. Swaters, T. S. van Albada, J. M. van der Hulst, and R. Sancisi. Astron. Astrophys., 390:
   829–861, Aug. 2002. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20011755.
R. A. Swaters, R. Sancisi, T. S. van Albada, and J. M. van der Hulst. Astron. Astrophys., 493:
   871–892, Jan. 2009. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:200810516.
R. A. Swaters, R. Sancisi, J. M. van der Hulst, and T. S. van Albada. MNRAS, 425(3):2299–2308,
   Sept. 2012. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.21599.x.
R. A. Swaters et al. Astrophys. J., 797(2):L28, Dec. 2014. doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/797/2/L28.
A. L. Tiley et al. MNRAS, 485(1):934–960, May 2019. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz428.
C. Trachternach et al. Astron. J., 136(6):2720–2760, Dec. 2008. doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/136/6/
   2720.


                                               31
Testing dark matter models and modified gravity theories                         F. Lelli et al.


T. S. van Albada and R. Sancisi. Royal Society of London Philosophical Transactions Series A,
   320:447–464, Dec. 1986.
T. S. van Albada, J. N. Bahcall, K. Begeman, and R. Sancisi. Astrophys. J., 295:305–313, Aug.
   1985. doi: 10.1086/163375.
M. A. W. Verheijen. Astrophys. J., 563:694–715, Dec. 2001. doi: 10.1086/323887.
M. A. W. Verheijen and R. Sancisi. Astron. Astrophys., 370:765–867, May 2001. doi: 10.1051/
   0004-6361:20010090.
P. Villanueva-Domingo et al. ApJ, 935(1):30, Aug. 2022. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac7aa3.
A. A. Vărăşteanu et al. MNRAS, 541(3):2366–2392, Aug. 2025. doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf1079.
F. Walter et al. Astron. J., 136:2563, Dec. 2008. doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/136/6/2563.
J. Wang et al. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 460(2):2143–2151, Aug. 2016. doi: 10.1093/Mon.Not.R.
   Astron.Soc./stw1099.
M. S. Warren, P. J. Quinn, J. K. Salmon, and W. H. Zurek. ApJ, 399:405, Nov. 1992. doi:
   10.1086/171937.
T. Westmeier et al. PASA, 39:e058, Nov. 2022. doi: 10.1017/pasa.2022.50.
E. Wisnioski et al. ApJ, 886(2):124, Dec. 2019. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab4db8.
R. L. Workman et al. Progress of Theoretical and Experimental Physics, 2022(8):083C01, Aug.
   2022. doi: 10.1093/ptep/ptac097.
H. Xi et al. ApJL, 966(2):L36, May 2024. doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad4357.




                                               32
