                                           3-DIMENSIONAL TQFTS FROM DERIVED CATEGORIES OF
                                                   QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS


                                                                                CRIS NEGRON




                                                 Abstract. For any finite modular tensor category A, we show that the asso-
                                                 ciated derived ∞-category D(A) supports a topological quantum field theory
                                                 in dimension 3. This TQFT takes the form of a symmetric monoidal functor
arXiv:2608.10285v1 [math.QA] 10 Aug 2026




                                                 from an ∞-category of surfaces with markings by objects in D(A), and appro-
                                                 priately decorated bordisms, to the ∞-category of dg vector spaces. We show
                                                 that the state spaces in this theory are naturally identified with linearized
                                                 mapping spaces for D(A).
                                                     Though our TQFT requires markings from the derived ∞-category, we show
                                                 that all markings can be removed after taking a homotopy truncation. The
                                                 resulting unmarked TQFT produces projective mapping class group actions
                                                 on cohomology in dimension 2, and in particular a projective SL2 (Z)-action
                                                 on Hochschild cohomology. We expect these mapping class group actions to
                                                 recover those of Lentner et al. [51] and Schweigert-Woike [72]. In dimension 3
                                                 we obtain power-series valued knot invariants, and power-series valued invari-
                                                 ants for modular tensor categories. We also obtain power-series invariants for
                                                 closed 3-manifold, though these can already be calculated at the abelian level.
                                                     Our derived field theories are proposed as mathematical formalizations
                                                 for topological A-twists of certain N = 4 supersymmetric QFTs, in dimen-
                                                 sion 3. Following physical principles, we discuss the possibility of deforming
                                                 our TQFTs along local systems via an analogous (conjectural) deformation of
                                                 quantum group representations along the Langlands dual group.


                                                                                 Contents
                                           1. Introduction                                                                          2
                                           2. Remarks on marked bordisms                                                           11
                                           3. (∞-)Categories                                                                       13
                                           4. Symmetric monoidal ∞-categories                                                      23
                                           5. ∞-Categories of disk embeddings                                                      32
                                           6. f rDisk-monoidal ∞-categories                                                        37
                                           7. Disk categories from ribbon tensor categories                                        43
                                           8. Anomalous bordisms with topology                                                     51
                                           9. An ∞-category of marked bordisms                                                     56
                                           10. Discrete Lyubashenko-Reshetikhin-Turaev theories                                    59
                                           11. Deriving LRT at the 1-categorical level                                             67
                                           12. Localization for monoidal ∞-categories                                              70
                                           13. Homotopy LRT theories                                                               77
                                           14. Adjoints and Kan extension over a base                                              83
                                           15. Deriving LRT at the ∞-categorical level                                             91
                                           16. Derived theories with universal skeins                                              98
                                           Date: August 10, 2026.
                                                                                       1
2                                  CRIS NEGRON


    17. Emergent (unmarked) field theories                                      107
    18. Conjectures                                                             114
    19. Post-credit scenes in 3 dimension                                       119
    Appendix A. About f rE2                                                     124
    Appendix B. Framed pairs from balanced categories                           131
    Appendix C. Module categories and inner-Homs                                139
    References                                                                  150



                                1. Introduction
   This paper concerns 3-dimensional topological field theories obtained from de-
rived modular tensor categories. Our favorite examples to consider are categories
of small quantum group representations (Repq G)small , for a semisimple algebraic
group G at an even order parameter q [33, 64], and categories of modules over rigid
C2 -cofinite vertex operator algebras [60]. New exotic examples of finite modular
tensor categories also appear in work of Ostrik and Utiralova [66].
   In short, we show that the derived category Df in = Db (Af in ) of finite length
complexes over a finite modular tensor category A supports a 3-dimensional topo-
logical field theory
                             LDf in : Bordnc
                                          3,2 → D(Vect)
which is valued in the derived category of linear cochains. Here the superscript nc
indicates that our theory is non-compact, i.e. is only defined on 3-manifolds with
non-trivial outgoing boundary. For the value on a connected genus g surface, we
exhibit a natural identification with the derived Homs
                                     ∼
                          LDf in (Σ) → RHomA (C ⊗g , 1),
where C is the so-called canonical coend. Thus, for example, the value on the torus
recovers Hochschild cohomology for A, and the value on the sphere recovers exten-
sions of the unit. Furthermore, in the case where the input category A is semisimple
the theory LDf in collapses to the non-compact part of classical Reshetikhin-Turaev
theory, and the full Reshetikhin-Turaev theory is the unique extension of LDf in to
the full bordism category.
Remark 1.1. The state spaces for LDf in are allowed to be infinite dimensional
precisely because of the omission of closed 3-manifolds in the non-compact bordism
category.
   Our TQFT LDf in is a projection of an analogous theory LDf in which is defined
at the level of ∞-categories, and which includes markings from the derived ∞-
category. Before continuing with an enumeration of our findings, however, let us
explain the appropriate context for our study. We return to a discussion of the
technical aspects of the text in Section 1.3 below.
1.1. Mathematics of non-semisimple TQFTs. Over the past 10 years or so
there have been a number of works on “non-semisimple” TQFTs in mathematics.
Arguably, the first results in this direction concern homology-dependent TQFTs
constructed from the unrolled quantum group [6, 24]. These TQFTs are not only
anomalous, but depend on the choice of a generic homology class over each surface
and bordism.
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                        3


   Such homology dependent theories were originally constructed in work of Blanchet,
Costantino, Geer, and Patureau-Mirand, specifically for sl2 , and were later gener-
alized to arbitrary semisimple g and also some super groups as well [24, 36, 38].
Though we won’t elaborate further on the nature of these TQFTs, for practical rea-
sons, let us only say that the genericity condition on the homology class translates
to a kind of projectivity constraint on representations for the unrolled quantum
group, and that projectivity plays a key role in the construction of the correspond-
ing theories.
   Following the homology dependent contributions from [6, 24], it was shown in
work of De Renzi, Gainutdinov, Geer, Patureau-Mirand, and Runkel that any finite
(non-semisimple) modular tensor category can be used to produce a 3-dimensional
Reshetikhin-Turaev type theory
                          Labelian
                           A       : Borddecorated
                                         3,2       → Vect .
The theory Labelian
               A       depends not on the choice of a homology class, but on the
presence of projectives in various strategic positions [22]. These projectives are
technically only required in order to generate closed 3-manifold invariants, via the
use of a modified trace, but should arguably also be present in dimension 2 [21, 37].
   It was subsequently shown in work of Costantino, Geer, Haı̈oun, and Patureau-
Mirand [14] that any finite modular tensor category determines, additionally, an
invertible 4-dimensional theory (see also [7, 5]), and that one can recover the 3-d
theory of De Renzi et al. as a boundary to its 4-d counterpart [39]. In 4-dimensions,
projectives are required in dimensions 4 and 3, and even 2 [10], via the implemen-
tation of modified traces and the required use of “admissible” skeins.
   What we’ll highlight here is the apparent asymmetry in the treatment of ob-
jects, so that each non-semisimple TQFT is arguably associated to the pairing of
a modular tensor category A with its Karoubian ideal of projectives, rather than
to A itself. (This distinction is most pronounced in De Renzi’s presentation of the
singly extended non-semisimple Reshetikhin-Turaev theory [21]. See alternatively
[50].) This suggests, to us at least, that there may be some derived component
which is being truncated when we choose to approach non-semisimple topological
theories directly at the abelian level.
Remark 1.2. Though we’ve focused on Reshetikhin-Turaev type TQFTs, there are
also non-semisimple Turaev-Viro type theories which similarly leverage projectives
in an essential manner [23, 15].
1.2. Derived topological theories from twisted QFTs. Alongside the math-
ematical developments discussed above, a parallel story emerged in mathematical
physics. In the physical setting, the derived nature of TQFTs is seemingly com-
monplace.
   The clearest presentation of our case of interest, from a strict mathematical
perspective, appears in work of Creutzig, Dimofte, Garner, and Geer [17]. However,
the main physical principles used in [17] are adapted from a general theory of
twisting for supersymmetric QFTs which was developed in work of Witten from
the early 90’s [80]. For any N = 4 supersymmetric theory–whatever such a thing
might be–we have two distinguished topological twists, an A-twist and a B-twist
[46, 35]. Both twists are interesting to consider, and are presumably connected by
a type of Langlands duality. However, in the present text we are interested in the
A-side of this story.
4                                    CRIS NEGRON


   Having A-twisted our favorite N = 4 supersymmetric theory, the resulting topo-
logical theory is very exotic from the perspectives of, say, Reshetikhin-Turaev or
the cobordism hypothesis. It is not only derived in nature, but the state spaces
appear as sheaves on a stack of local systems. See for example [59, 34, 35].
   In Creutzig et al. the authors posit that the A-twist for a particular supersym-
metric N = 4 theory associated to SLn , in 3-dimensions, recovers a derived variant
of the unrolled non-semisimple TQFT produced by Blanchet, Costantino, Geer,
Patureau-Mirand, and De Renzi [6, 24]. Here the presence of local systems has to
do with the unrolled-ness of the quantum group, and after taking fibers at trivial
local systems we reduce to a derived variant of the non-semisimple Reshetikhin-
Turaev theory from De Renzi, Gainutdinov, Geer, Patureau-Mirand, and Runkel
[22].
   Thus, from [17] and the surrounding physics literature, we anticipate the follow-
ing: (a) There are derived topological field theories which are, at the very least,
associated to derived categories of small quantum group representations. (b) These
derived theories should recover pre-existing mathematical theories after a homo-
logical truncation. (c) They should also deform naturally along local systems to
produce topological field theories which “couple” to flat connections, again at least
in the quantum group setting.
   In the present study we realize points (a) and (b), or more precisely versions of
points (a) and (b), via explicit mathematical construction. Conjectural approaches
to point (c) are also discussed in Section 18.
   Let us now turn our attention to the contents of this text.

1.3. TQFTs from derived ∞-categories. Let A be a finite ribbon tensor cate-
gory which is defined over an algebraically closed field k, and let Df in = D b (Af in )
be its associated derived ∞-category of bounded, finite length complexes.
Remark 1.3. For us, all tensor categories are presentable (cocomplete), compactly
generated, and abelian. Taking the compacts, or rigid objects A ⇝ Af in recovers
a tensor category in the usual sense of, say, [2] or [26]. See Section 3.1.
   From such A and Df in we produce corresponding symmetric monoidal ∞-categories
of labeled, anomalous, non-compact 3-dimensional bordisms
              Bordnc      nc              nc          nc
                  A = Bord3,2 (A) and BordDf in = Bord3,2 (Df in ).

In the case of A, for example, the objects in this bordism category are surfaces
Σx with markings by objects x1 , . . . , xn in A. Morphisms Mα : Σx → Σ′y are
bordism between the underlying surfaces M : Σ → Σ′ which are equipped with,
loosely speaking, embedded cylinders which travel from the markings on Σ to the
markings on Σ′ . The terminal ends of these cylinders, on the outgoing boundary,
are furthermore marked by morphisms αj : mj (x) → yj between specified products
of the incoming labels to the outgoing labels (see Sections 2 and 9.2).
   To say things simply, the surfaces are decorated by objects in A and bordisms
are decorated by morphisms in A. The ∞-ness comes in as we allow the embed-
ded cylinders in bordisms to move within the ambient space M under homotopy.
This movement institutes certain universal skein relations into the bordism cate-
gory which acknowledge the ribbon structure on A. In the case of Df in , one has
homotopical contributions both from the geometry of the bordisms and from the
higher structure on Df in itself.
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                         5


  More generally, for any “sufficiently ribbon-like monoidal ∞-category” E we
construct a bordism ∞-category BordncE of surfaces with markings by objects in E ,
and 3-dimensional cobordisms with markings by morphisms in E (Proposition 9.3).
The bordism categories BordncE are non-compact in two regards: In top dimension
we disallow 3-manifolds without boundary, and in dimension 2 we require that each
component of a surface is equipped with at least one marking from E (cf. [21] and
Section 9.4).
Theorem (15.1, 15.5). For any finite modular tensor category A, with finite derived
∞-category Df in = D b (Af in ), there is a symmetric monoidal functor
                                            Df in → V ect
                               LDf in : Bordnc                                    (1)
to the ∞-category of dg vector spaces. Furthermore, for any connected genus g
surface Σ, we have a natural identification of the state spaces
                                   ∼
                                                C ⊗g , mI (x) .
                                                             
                      LDf in (Σx ) → MapsD                                (2)
                                                   f in


   To explain the notation in the expression (2), the object C in Af in ⊆ Df in
is the coadjoint object, which we define generally as the value C = mR(1) for
m : A ⊗k A → A the product and R : A → A ⊗k A its right adjoint. This object
is more commonly referred to as the canonical coend. Additionally, for D = D(A)
the full unbounded derived ∞-category, the bifunctor
                              MapsD : D op × D → V ect
is the inner-Hom functor for the natural action of V ect on D. These are, more
colloquially, the derived Homs for D as a linear ∞-category, and we recover the
Ext groups via cohomology
                            H ∗ MapsD (u, v) = Ext∗A (u, v).
By MapsD         we simply mean the restriction of this bifunctor the full subcategory
            f in
of finite complexes. Taking finally I to be the underlying marking set for our surface
Σx , mI : DfIin → Df in is the iterated product functor.
Remark 1.4. A version of Theorem 15.1 can also be proved at the 1-categorical
level. We emphasize the homotopical setting due to our interest in an expanded
analysis of TQFTs for modular ∞-categories, in both dimensions 3 and 4. See
Theorem 11.1, and Section 11.4 for further elaboration.
   Though our non-compactness assumption requires the appearance of non-trivial
markings on surfaces in Bordnc
                            Df in , we show that all markings can be removed after
a homotopy truncation.
Theorem (17.10). Consider a finite modular tensor category A. After adopting
unit labels and applying a homotopy truncation, the theory (1) specifies a unique
symmetric monoidal functor LDf in : Bordnc3,2 → D(Vect) from the unmarked 3-
dimensional bordism category which completes a diagram
                                            h LDf in |Units
                   h Bordnc                                      / D(Vect)        (3)
                         Units(Df in )                              9

                                  f orget
                                                 '
                                                              LDf in

                                                 Bordnc
                                                     3,2               .
6                                    CRIS NEGRON


The state spaces in the unmarked TQFT, for any connected genus g surfaces Σ, are
identified with the derived Homs
                                       ∼
                           LDf in (Σ) → RHomA (C ⊗g , 1).
   From our description of the state spaces, we understand that the unmarked the-
ory LDf in is valued specifically in the category of coconnnective cochains D≥0 (Vect).
Similarly, the restriction of the theory LDf in along the inclusion Bordnc        nc
                                                                        A → BordDf in
produces a theory which takes values in the ∞-category V ect≥0 .
   Since taking cohomology in the coconnective setting H 0 : V ect≥0 → Vect is
symmetric monoidal, we can reasonably speak of the cohomologies
                           H 0 LDf in and H 0 LDf in |Bordnc
                                                          A

as topological field theories. These cohomologies are shown to recover the abelian
non-semisimple TQFTs from De Renzi et al. [22] which we discussed above.
Proposition (15.8). Let A be a finite modular tensor category. The 0-th cohomol-
ogy of the theory (1) is naturally identified with the marked, non-compact part of
the Vect-valued TQFT from De Renzi-Gainutdinov-Geer-Patureau-Mirand-Runkel
                                            ∼
                         H 0 LDf in |Bordnc
                                         A
                                            → Labelian
                                               A       |Bordnc
                                                            A
                                                               .
Furthermore, the 0-th cohomology of the unmarked theory LDf in from (3) recovers
the unmarked, non-compact part of Labelian
                                    A      ,
                                        ∼
                            H 0 LDf in → Labelian
                                          A       |Bordnc
                                                       3,2
                                                           .
Remark 1.5. The TQFT from [22] is arguably already non-compact, as it only
allows for closed 3-manifold which come equipped with certain embedded algebraic
decorations. In particular, its unmarked part is explicitly non-compact.
Remark 1.6. The “L” in LDf in is in reference to Lyubashenko, and we refer to
LDf in as the derived Lyubashenko-Reshetikhin-Turaev (LRT) theory.
Remark 1.7. We conjecture that the unmarked theory from Theorem 17.10 lifts
to a TQFT at the ∞-categorical level LDf in : Bordnc  3,2 → V ect, and furthermore
that the marked and unmarked theories can be integrated into a single object. The
removal of markings at the ∞-categorical level is a highly substantive point from
our perspective, and we hope to iterate on these constructions in future works. (See
Sections 2, 11.4, 18.)
  As a final mathematical point for the introduction, let us highlight some of the
outputs of our work in dimensions 2 and 3.

1.4. Phenomena in 2-dimensions. To gain some kind of understanding of, say,
the unmarked TQFT LDf in , one can consider its behaviors one surfaces and (punc-
tured) 3-manifolds. In dimension 2 we obtain a projective action of the mapping
class group MCG(Σ) on each state space LDf in (Σ).
   To elaborate, we have the subgroup MCG(Σ) of the non-anomalous autobordisms
of Σ which is generated by the mapping cylinders of oriented self-diffeomorphisms
Diff(Σ)+ → MCG(Σ) ⊆ Autnon-anom (Σ). Pulling back along the forgetful functor
from the anomalous bordism category, we obtain a central extension
                  ˜
         1 → Z → MCG(Σ)                ˜
                        → MCG(Σ) → 1, MCG(Σ) ⊆ AutBordnc  (Σ).
                                                      3,2
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                        7


This central extension acts on Σ in Bordnc
                                         3,2 , and hence acts on the state space L(Σ)
for any field theory L : Bordnc
                             3,2 → S.
   In our case, we recall that the state spaces for LDf in are identified with coho-
mology for the input category A. So we obtain the following.
Corollary (17.13). Let A be a finite modular tensor category. For any connected
genus g surface Σ, the derived maps RHomA (C ⊗g , 1) carry the natural structure of
                                                             ˜
a dg representation for the projective mapping class group MCG(Σ).
   In genus 0 nothing interesting happens, as the mapping class group is trivial.
In genus 1, the mapping class group of the torus is SL2 (Z), and there is a canon-
ical identification of RHomA (C, 1) with the derived lift of Hochschild cohomology
RHomEndVect (A) (idA , idA ). Hence we obtain, after taking cohomology, a projective
action of SL2 (Z) on Hochschild cohomology HH ∗ (A).
   These kinds of projective mapping class group actions on cohomology were al-
ready observed in works of Lentner, Mierach, Schweigert, and Sommerhäuser [51],
and of Schweigert and Woike [72]. So, from the perspective of those texts, we
are saying that the mapping class group actions from [51, 72] arise naturally as
2-dimensional projection of a full 3-dimensional derived field theory for finite non-
semisimple modular tensor categories.
Remark 1.8. We have not checked explicitly that our mapping class group rep-
resentations reproduce those of [51, 72], though we certainly expect this to be the
case.
1.5. Phenomena in 3-dimensions. We continue our investigation of the theory
LDf in in dimension 3. For a connected closed 3-manifold M , we do not consider M
directly, but fix a surface Σ and excise the interiors of two chosen embeddings

                                 Σ                    Σ̄                         (4)
                                          &       x
                                              M
to obtain a bordism M̌ : Σ → Σ. (Here we assume that the embeddings from
Σ extend to some filling Σ of the surface.) The resulting bordism is uniquely
determined by M when Σ = S 2 for example, though this is not the case in higher
genus.
   The bordism M̌ obtained from such an arrangement (4) determines an endo-
morphism LDf in (M̌ ) : LDf in (Σ) → LDf in (Σ) and, to wash out some cochain-level
ambiguities, we take cohomology to get an endomorphism
                   H ∗ LDf in (M̌ ) : H ∗ LDf in (Σ) → H ∗ LDf in (Σ).
To wash out further ambiguities in the definition of LDf in itself, we also take a
determinant to obtain a power-series valued invariant
                      X
        Inv(A|M̌ ) :=    det(H n LDf in (M̌ ) − X · idH n ) · tn ∈ O(A1k )[[t]], (5)
                       n≥0

where X is a formal parameter and we’ve adopted the notation O(A1k ) = k[X].
   The invariant Inv(A|M̌ ) simply records the eigenvalues of the endomorphism
H n LDf in (M̌ ) in each degree. One can use this construction to obtain 3-manifold
invariants and also invariants of framed knots.
8                                   CRIS NEGRON


Proposition (19.4, 19.6). Let A be a modular tensor category. In genus 0, i.e.
when Σ = S 2 , the above construction produces power-series valued invariants of
3-manifolds Inv(A|M ) := Inv(A|M̌ ).
   In genus 1, taking M = S 3 , the above construction produces power-series valued
invariants of framed knots ν : S 1 → R3 ⊆ S 3 , Inv(A|ν) := Inv(A|Š 3 ).
   Though the construction Inv(A|M ) for 3-manifolds is clearly “derived”, and
also a natural output for any V ect-valued TQFT, we show that these invariants
are actually determined by their constant term in t, Inv(A|M ) = c0 (X) + O(t).
The constant term is furthermore a scalar which is already obtainable from the
corresponding abelian theory Labelian
                                   A      from [22]. So we do not truly access any
derived information in this case. (See Sections 19.2 and 19.3 below.)
   In genus 1 however, the resulting knot invariants do involve the higher Hochschild
cohomologies HH >0 (A), at least in principle. We discuss the situation for A =
(Repq SL2 )small in detail in Section 19.4, where a number of interesting points arise.

1.6. A world of homotopical TQFTs. From a strict mathematical perspective,
we have a generic interested in TQFTs for “modular” ∞-categories–a notion which
we’ll leave somewhat ambiguous for the moment. For any modular ∞-category A ,
we conjecture the existence of a 3-dimensional TQFT from marked and unmarked
bordism categories

                           A → V ect and LA : Bord3,2 → V ect
                  LA : Bordnc                     nc


which we furthermore conjecture extend down to closed curves, and recovers A as
the value on S 1 . We are also interested in homotopical field theories in dimension
4, skein modules for modular ∞-categories, and their connections to phenomena in
dimension 3. Examples of modular ∞-categories should include derived categories
of finite modular 1-categories, and presumably (quantized) derived categories of
sheaves on compact symplectic varieties.
   If we take this broader point of view, the conclusions of the present text verify
one explicit claim in this direction, or maybe a first such claim. We elaborate on
the topics proposed above, and also the integration of local systems, in Sections
11.4 and 18 below.

1.7. Some metacommentary. This paper is, to some extent, a re-articulation of
non-semisimple TQFT through the lense of ∞-categories. We understand, however,
that this perspective lies outside of the realm of expertise for many intended readers.
For this reason we have taken a number of steps to make the text more legible for
the homotopical non-expert.
   First, we provide specific referencing to the literature on ∞-categories through-
out. In our ideal moments, all homotopical arguments are directly supported by a
concrete simplicial analysis or an explicit reference. Second, we provide an exten-
sive review of basic principles for simplicial categories and ∞-categories–specifically
in the guise of weak Kan complexes–in Section 3. Cocartesian fibrations and the
un/straightening equivalence are given special attention. For the ambitious reader,
we hope that the paper is more-or-less self-contained.

1.8. Outline. Throughout the text A♡ generally denotes a ribbon (or modular)
tensor category, rather than the fraktur notation A employed above. We swap over
to our standard notation A♡ from this point on.
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                        9


   The theory LDf in is obtained from the corresponding abelian theory Labelian
                                                                           A♡     via
a somewhat subtle derivation process, the zeroth step of which already occurred in
preceding work with Agustina Czenky [20]. The first point for us is the construction
of a bordism category which is sufficiently responsive to basic manipulations within
the theory of higher algebra. We then apply a “vertical” localization to move from
the discrete setting to the homotopical setting, followed by a relative Kan extension
to move from bordisms over the homotopy ∞-category to the derived setting. The
subsequent removal of markings is a rather idiosyncratic process which has to do
with further localization along a class of rather poorly behaved morphisms. The
paper proceeds as follows:
     • Background. We discuss the efficacy of markings in topological field the-
       ories in Section 2, just to clarify some confusion around these issues before
       we begin our study in earnest. In Section 3 we discuss basic categorical
       backgrounds, and provide a brisk overview of ∞-categories. In Section
       4 we recall basic notions for symmetric monoidal ∞-categories, then in
       Sections 5 and 6 we introduce a symmetric monoidal ∞-category f rDisk
       of framed disks which classifies “compatible pairs” of “homotopically bal-
       anced monoidal” ∞-categories. In Section 7 we show that any ribbon tensor
       category A♡ , in the 1-categorical sense of the term, naturally determines
       f rDisk-categories (A♡ )⊗ → f rDisk⊗ and A⊗ = Ch(A♡ )⊗ → f rDisk⊗ .
     • Bordism and discrete topological theories. We construct the triv-
       ially marked, 3-dimensional, non-compact, anomalous bordism ∞-category
       Bordnc∗ in Section 8. We subsequently construct the symmetric monoidal
       ∞-category Bordnc E of E -marked 3-dimensional bordisms in Section 9, where
       the markings come from any f rDisk-monoidal ∞-category E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ .
       We explicitly describe the A = Ch(A♡ )-marked bordism category associ-
       ated to any ribbon tensor category A♡ , then explain how results from
       [22, 20] provide a TQFT

                             LA : Bordnc
                                      A → Ch(Vect)                               (6)

        in Section 10. We derive the TQFT LA at the 1-categorical level, to pro-
        duce a symmetric monoidal functor from the bordism category Bordnc   D with
        labels from the discrete derived category D(A♡ ), in Section 11. We subse-
        quently discuss the process, and rationalle, for lifting to the ∞-categorical
        level.
     • Localization and homotopical theories. In Section 12 we present a
       robust method of localization for monoidal ∞-categories, and more gener-
       ally for cocartesian fibrations, along well-behaved classes of maps. Here we
       follow work of Hinich [43] in an essential way. We apply this general theory
       of localization to obtain from (6) a symmetric monoidal functor

                                        K → V ect
                               LK : Bordnc

        for the 3-dimensional bordism category with labels in the homotopy ∞-
        category K = K (A♡ ). As before, the target V ect is the derived ∞-
        category of linear cochains.
10                                 CRIS NEGRON


     • Kan extension and derived theories. We provide an analysis of Kan ex-
       tensions over a base in Section 14. Then, in Section 15, we apply Kan exten-
       sion along the natural functor Bordnc           nc
                                            K → BordD to obtain a 3-dimensional
       field theory
                                          D → V ect
                                LD : Bordnc
        for the derived ∞-category D = D(A♡ ). We furthermore calculate the
        state spaces for LD via the linear mapping spaces in D, and identify the
        cohomology of the theory LD with the abelian theory Labelian
                                                                A♡     from De
        Renzi et al. [22].
     • Un-marking and inspection. In Section 16 we explain how the functor
       LD localizes along a special class ΘD of bordisms in order to produce a
       TQFT from an ∞-category BordD [Θ−1    D ] of 3-dimensional bordisms with
       embedded “universal skeins” labeled by D. After restricting to unit labels,
       we obtain a canonical symmetric monoidal inclusion Bordnc           nc
                                                                ∗ → BordD and
       hence a symmetric monoidal functor Bord∗ → V ect by pulling back along
                                                 nc

       this inclusion. We then localize at the corresponding class Θ∗ in Bordnc
                                                                              ∗ ,
       and take a homotopy truncation to get a map of symmetric monoidal 1-
       categories
                                             −1
                      pre-LDf in : h Bordnc
                                         ∗ [Θ∗ ] → D(Vect).

          It is shown in Section 17 that the forgetful functor h Bordnc    −1
                                                                      ∗ [Θ∗ ] →
            nc
        Bord3,2 is in fact an equivalence, so that the above map pre-LDf in deter-
        mines an unmarked topological field theory
                           LDf in : Bordnc
                                        3,2 → D(Vect).

        We conclude Section 17 with an analysis of the theory LDf in in dimension
        2, and Section 19 is dedicated to a discussion of phenomena in dimension
        3.
     • Conjectures. In Section 18, we present a number of fundamental conjec-
       tures which concern extensions of our analysis to “modular” ∞-categories
       which are not constructed from modular tensor categories at the abelian
       level, and also extensions of our theory LD down to S 1 . Following the
       physics literature on the subject, we further discuss couplings of derived
       field theories to moduli of local systems.
     • Appendices. We have three appendices. The first, Appendix A, cov-
       ers various minutiae for the operad of framed colored disks and the sec-
       ond, Appendix B, explains how maps between balanced monoidal cate-
       gories produce f rDisk-monoidal ∞-categories. The third, Appendix C,
       discusses module ∞-categories over symmetric monoidal ∞-categories and
       their inner-Homs.

1.9. Suggested reading. The astute reader may notice the extraordinary length
of this paper. While we hope each (Sub)section serves a clear purpose, one needn’t
read the paper line-by-line in order to understand either the results or the argu-
ments. We suggest a particular reading of the paper, where one might skim certain
materials and read others more thoroughly, in recognition of the relative importance
of the details:
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                          11


  Section 2 (skim) → Section 3 (reference as needed ) → Section 4 (skim) −· · ·
               → Sections 5 & 6 (skim) → Section 7 (read-ish) −· · ·
            → Section 8 (read Subsection 8.1) → Section 9 (read ) −· · ·
       → Section 10 (read ) → Section 11 (read ) → Section 12 (skim) −· · ·
       → Section 13 (read ) → Section 14 (read ) → Section 15 (read ) −· · ·
 → Section 16 (see only definitions, Lemma 16.5, Theorem 16.8, Corollary 16.9,
                           and Subsection 16.4) −· · ·
            → Section 17 (read ) → Sections 18 & 19 (reader’s choice)

1.10. Acknowledgements. Thanks to John Francis, David Jordan, and Kevin
Walker for very early discussions on TQFTs in the derived setting. Thanks to Marco
De Renzi, Nathan Geer, and Matt Young for many discussions on non-semisimple
TQFTs. Thanks to Simon Lentner for discussions of–and sporadic writings on–
crossed braided categories in the (algebro)geometric context. Thanks to Melissa
Zhang and Jernej Grlj for discussions of skein lasagna modules, and possibilities for
derived skein modules. Thanks to Benjamin Haı̈oun, Patrick Kinnear, and Pavel
Safronov for discussions of many things, including topological theories and local
systems. Thanks to Qi You for sharing insights on Hochschild cohomology for
quantum groups. Thanks to Tudor Dimofte and Nathan Benjamin for discussions
concerning (T)QFT and topological twisting in physics. Thanks finally to my local
colleagues at USC, Aravind Asok, Julian Chaidez, Peter Haine, and Sheel Ganatra,
for answering a very large numer of questions regarding topology and homotopy
theory. The author was supported by NSF CAREER Grant No. DMS-2239698 and
Simons Collaboration Grant No. 999367.

                        2. Remarks on marked bordisms
   Before beginning, let us make some preliminary remarks on marked surfaces,
decorated bordisms, and skein relations in general. This topic is not necessarily
introductory, but we hope it will preempt some confusion around the issue.

2.1. Why marked surfaces? We’ll list here three perspectives through which one
might conceptualize marked surfaces. The first is through the lense of conformal
field theory. Here we understand that a Reshetikhin-Turaev type theory (generally)
admits a conformal boundary. The state spaces in the topological bulk are then
identified with the conformal blocks for the boundary conformal theory. See for
example [32, 69].
    The conformal blocks in a conformal field theory naturally depend on insertions
of VOA modules at points on a given surface. These insertion points are furthermore
equipped with local coordinates. This is to say, we expect the state spaces in a
Reshetikhin-Turaev theory to accept markings by objects in the defining category,
and we expect the marking points to be equipped with such local coordinates. These
local coordinates can be thought of as specifying a collection of disk embeddings,
rather than embeddings of points.
    Alternatively, we can think of a Reshetikhin-Turaev theory itself as a boundary
theory to a once extended topological theory in dimensiona 4. This 4-dimensional
theory should be skein theoretic (cf. [10, 14, 39]), and objects in any surface category
12                                 CRIS NEGRON


for the 4-dimensional theory should, in particular, consist of choices of markings
on the given surface (see [10]). To say that the Reshetikhin-Turaev type theory
is defined for marked surface is then to say that we have well-defined values for
arbitrary choices of maps from the unit Vect to the factorization homology on sur-
faces. (In short, markings appear in Reshetikhin-Turaev theories because markings
appear in factorization homology.)
   For a final perspective, we note that any extended topological field theory Z :
Bord⋆3,2,1 → Prk , valued in presentable ∞-categories say, determines and is de-
termined by an associated fibration Bord⋆Z → Bord⋆3,2,1 . For Z = Z(S 1 ), the
(∞, 2)-category Bord⋆Z is already explicitly constructible as an (∞, 2)-category of
Z -marked bordisms (cf. Section B.2). This (∞, 2)-category restricts, in various
ways, to define ∞-categories of surfaces with embedded Z -labeled disks and 3-
manifolds which are labeled–in one way or another–by morphisms in Z . Hence a
TQFT from a sufficiently robust bordism category for marked surfaces is closely
related to the existence of an extended topological field theory.

2.2. Extending into 3-manifolds. Having decided that we accept marked sur-
faces, one has some decisions to make regarding bordisms between such marked
surfaces Mα : Σx → Σ′y . Specifically, what kinds of decorations should we have in
M which connect the markings on the incoming boundary Σ to the markings on
the outgoing boundary Σ′ ?
   In this text we take a fairly minimalist approach to this question, and employ
a minimalist solution. In particular, we construct (in Section 9) a category of
bordisms Bordnc E with embedded cylinders which travel from the markings on the
incoming boundary to markings on the outgoing boundary. We later localize to
obtain a coarse approximation to bordisms with embedded skein diagrams (see
Section 16). The minimal skein relations which appear in this process are sufficient
to facilitate an unmarking procedure in Section 17, which leads to an unmarked
TQFT LDf in : Bordnc3,2 → D(Vect) in Theorem 17.10.
   A maximalist approach to this question would seek a truly skein theoretic real-
ization of bordisms. A “perfect” notion of skeins should facilitate a calculation of
factorization homology over surfaces for ribbon ∞-categories, as in the 1-categorical
setting [10].

2.3. Skein modules? The production of true skeins, or “perfect skeins”, for ribbon
∞-categories is, from our perspective, a deep question which warrants independent
consideration. One might define a ribbon ∞-category efficiently as an (anomalous)
2-dimensional topological field theory A valued in linear presentable ∞-categories
Prk [62, 73]. Here we would work specifically with the straightened fibration over
a 2-dimensional bordism category.
   While the author would state, somewhat emphatically, that they do not know
how to construct skein modules for ribbon ∞-categories, the proposed definition of
ribbon ∞-categories itself suggests certain constraints which one might attend to.
For example, rather than considering skeins as embedded graphs in a 3-manifold,
we might think of skeins as embedded anomalous surfaces in a manifold. Here
by an anomalous surface we specifically mean a surface with a chosen bounding
3-manifold, and we should assume that the bounding 3-manifold is “trivial” (e.g. a
ball in the case of S 2 and a doughnut in the case of the torus). One considers such
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                         13


an embedded surface skein, let us call it, along with its vector space obtained by
evaluating under the given field theory for our modular ∞-category A .
   Skein relations in this surface approach may then be facilitated by embedded
bordisms between such embedded surfaces, and so leverage some aspects of a
3-dimensional field theory for A . So, practically speaking, a perfect theory of
skeins and skein relations for a modular ∞-category may be contingent on the
pre-existence of a 3-d field theory from a somewhat restrictive marked bordism cat-
egory. In any case, this topic is completely open, and we encourage the interested
reader to consider this line of inquiry, even returning to the 1-categorical setting if
necessary.
Remark 2.1. See Section 18 for additional discussions of skeins and 4-dimensional
TQFTs, in the derived setting.
Remark 2.2. In this text we model ribbon tensor categories in the ∞-categorical
context by coupled pairs of framed E2 -categories, rather than by 2-dimensional
category valued TQFTs. This choice is purely practical, or even superficial, and
can be altered in accordance with what’s available at the 1-categorical level. (See
Section 9.4.)

                                3. (∞-)Categories
   To begin our study, we provide a brisk overview of tensor categories, simplicial
categories, ∞-categories, Kan complexes, and cocartesian fibrations. This is mostly
to set notations, and also to provide a coarse reference for the non-expert. For a
detailed account we suggest Kerodon [58].

3.1. Tensor categories. We follow the conventions of [64]. So, for us, a tensor
category is a linear presentable, compactly generated abelian monoidal category
for which the subcategories of compact and rigid objects agree, and for which the
compacts form a tensor category in the sense of [26]. So, all compact objects are of
finite length, have finite-dimensional Homs, and the unit is simple. We also require
that the product commutes with small colimits in each factor, and assume that the
base field k is algebraically closed. Via Ind-completion, and taking the compacts,
one can go back and forth between our tensor categories and those of [26].
   For a tensor category B we let Bf in denote the full subcategory of finite length
= rigid objects. We call a tensor category finite if it admits a compact projective
generator, in which case B is equivalent to the category of modules over a finite-
dimensional algebra. We have the standard notions of braided and ribbon tensor
categories (see [26]).
Definition 3.1. A tensor category B is called ribbon if it comes equipped with a
braiding c and balancing transformation θ [26, Definition 8.10.1] for which θx∗ = θx∗
whenever x is rigid. We call a finite ribbon tensor category modular if, in addition,
any object x with trivial double braiding
                                 c−,x ◦ cx,− = idx⊗−
is isomorphic to an additive power of the unit x ∼
                                                 = 1⊕Λ .
  Throughout all “modular” tensor categories are assumed to be finite.
14                                  CRIS NEGRON


3.2. Simplicial sets and simplicial categories. For ∆ the category of finite
linearly ordered sets and (weakly) order preserving morphisms, we let Set∆ denote
the category of functors Fun(∆op , Set). This is the category of simplicial sets.
For any finite linearly ordered set I we let ∆I denote the standard simplex ∆I =
Hom∆ (−, I). For each n ∈ Z≥0 we take [n] = {0, 1, . . . , n} and also ∆n = ∆[n] . For
any simplicial set K we let K[n] denote the value K([n]), and we note that there
is a bijection
                                              ∼
               {maps σ : ∆n → K in Set∆ } → K[n], σ 7→ σ(id[n] ),
by Yoneda.
   The symmetric monoidal structure on Set, under the cartesian product, induces a
symmetric monoidal structure on the category Set∆ of simplicial sets. The category
Set∆ is also complete and cocomplete, with (co)limits calculated via (co)limits in
the target category Set.
   Each object S in Set becomes a simplicial set via the constant functor S : ∆op →
Set and this gives a fully faithful, symmetric monoidal embedding
                                    Set ,→ Set∆ .
In this way our discussions of simplicial sets, and simplicial categories, specialize
to discussions of sets and plain old categories.
Definition 3.2. A simplicial category C is a category enriched in Set∆ and a
simplicial functor is a functor between Set∆ -enriched categories.
  For each n and index 0 ≤ i ≤ n we let Λni ⊆ ∆n denote the simplicial subset
whose simplices ∆m → Λni are precisely those simplices in ∆n which factor through
some face ∆I ⊆ ∆n with I ⊆ [n] and [n] − {i} ⊈ I. We call Λni the i-th horn in ∆n .
Definition 3.3. A map of simplicial sets X → S is called a Kan fibration if each
lifting problem
                                 Λni      /X                                 (7)
                                           =

                                               
                                    ∆n       / S,
with n arbitrary and 0 ≤ i ≤ n, admits a solution. We call a simplicial set X
a Kan complex if the unique map X → ∗ to the terminal simplicial set is a Kan
fibration. A morphism between Kan complexes is just a map of simplicial sets.
   To clarify our language, X → S is a Kan fibration if and only if each commuting
square as in (7) admits a map ∆n → X which split the diagram into two commuting
triangles. The terminal simplicial set ∗ is, as our notation suggests, the constant
simplicial set associated to the (or rather, any) singleton.
Remark 3.4. The singular complex functor Sing : Top → Kan provides a (Quillen)
equivalence between compactly generated, locally Hausdorff topological spaces and
Kan complexes. The inverse is given by geometric realization. For this reason
people often refer to Kan complexes as Spaces.
Definition 3.5. A simplicial category C is called fibrant if, for each pair of objects
x and y in C, the Hom complex HomC (x, y) is a Kan complex.
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                        15


  We note that any simplicial category C has an underlying plain old category C
whose morphisms are the 0-simplices
                     HomC (x, y) := HomSet∆ (∆0 , HomC (x, y)).

3.3. ∞-Categories.
Definition 3.6. A map of simplicial sets F : C → T is called an inner fibration if
any lifting problem
                                Λni        /C                                 (8)
                                           =
                                                   F
                                                  
                                     ∆n          /T,
with n arbitrary and 0 < i < n, admits a solution. We call C an ∞-category if the
map C → ∗ to the terminal simplicial set is an inner fibration. A functor between
∞-categories is just a map of simplicial sets.
   Note that the lifting problems here (8) only involve inner horns, i.e. the horns
Λni → ∆n with i between 1 and n − 1. For an ∞-category C , an object in C is a
0-simplex x : ∆0 → C , a morphism is a 1-simplex α : ∆1 → C , and for any two
maps α01 : x0 → x1 and α12 : x1 → x2 a composite is any third map α02 : x0 → x2
which fits into a 2-simplex

                                          = x1
                                    α01           α12


                               x0                      / x! 2 .
                                          α02

We note that the composite is not uniquely determined in a strict sense, but it
is determined up to a contractible space of choices [58, 01BW]. So, whenever such
ambiguities are acceptable, we might speak of “the” composite α02 and write simply
α02 = α12 α01 .
Definition 3.7. Given an object x in an ∞-category C , the identity map idx :
x → x is the unique degnerate 1-simplex idx : ∆1 → C with idx |{0} = idx |{1} = x.
An isomorphism in C is a map α : x → y which admits another map β : x → y for
which we have composites αβ = idy and βα = idx .
    An (∞-)subcategory in an ∞-category C is a simplicial subset C ′ ⊆ C in which a
given n-simplex σ : ∆n → C lies in C ′ if and only if each object σ|{i} and each edge
σ|∆{i,j} lies in C ′ . We assume additionally that each composable pair or maps in
C ′ [1] admits a composition in C ′ [1]. A subcategory is called full if each morphism
∆1 → C between objects in C ′ is also in C ′ .
Definition 3.8. Given a collection of objects X0 in an ∞-category C , the full
subcategory spanned by X0 in C is the unique full subcategory C ′ ⊆ C with
C ′ [0] = X0 . Given a collection of objects X0 in C and morphisms X1 between
objects in X0 which are stable under composition, the subcategory spanned by the
Xi in C is the unique subcategory C ′ ⊆ C with C ′ [0] = X0 and C ′ [1] = X1 .
  One checks directly that any subcategory C ′ in an ∞-category C is itself an
∞-category.
16                                  CRIS NEGRON


Proposition 3.9 ([58, 01H1]). For any ∞-category C the subcategory C Kan spanned
by all objects, but only isomorphisms between objects, is a Kan complex.
    The simplicial set C Kan is usually called the core of C , though we will just call
it the associated Kan complex.

3.4. Functor categories and mapping spaces. For any ∞-category C and sim-
plicial set K the complex of simplicial maps
                Fun(K, C ), Fun(K, C )[n] = HomSet∆ (∆n × K, C ),
is an ∞-category, and for any map of simplicial sets L → K the restriction functor
                              Fun(K, C ) → Fun(L, C )
is an inner fibration [58, 01BT]. For objects x, y : ∗ → C we obtain the standard
mapping complex via pullback

                          MapsC (x, y)          / Fun(∆1 , C )

                                                        restrict
                                                     
                              ∗⨿∗              / Fun(∂∆1 , C ).
                                       [x y]

As the pullback of any kind of “fibration” is again a fibration of the same type, we
understand that MapsC (x, y) is an ∞-category at all x and y. Since all morphisms
in MapsC (x, y) are isomorphisms [58, 01DK], this ∞-category is furthermore a Kan
complex.
Definition 3.10. For objects in an ∞-category x, y : ∗ → C , the associated
mapping space MapsC (x, y) is the Kan complex constructed as above.
   We note that, in general, the mapping spaces do not admit strict composition
functors. We do however have composition functors
               ◦ : MapsC (x1 , x2 ) × MapsC (x0 , x1 ) → MapsC (x0 , x2 )
which are well-defined up to homotopy [58, 01PQ].

3.5. Isofibrations.
Definition 3.11. An isofibration between ∞-categories is an inner fibration F :
C → D which satisfies either of the following (equivalent) lifting conditions:
     • For each isomorphism ᾱ : x̄ → ȳ in D, and object x in C with F (x) = x̄,
       there is an isomorphism α : x → y in C with F (α) = ᾱ.
     • For each isomorphism ᾱ : x̄ → ȳ in D, and object y in C with F (y) = ȳ,
       there is an isomorphism α : x → y in C with F (α) = ᾱ.
   Isofibrations are the “good” maps between ∞-categories, especially when one
wants to take limits of ∞-categories in a homotopically responsible manner. See
for example [58, 03GF, 03H3, 033P].
Remark 3.12. Isofibrations are also referred to as categorical fibrations in the
literature. Compare for example [56] to [11, 58].
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                       17


Remark 3.13. We’ve obviously chosen to work with “quasi-categories”, or “weak
Kan complexes” as our preferred model for ∞-categories. Though we are not con-
cerned with the sinful nature of such choices, there are practical points to consider
here. In particular, if we want to embed our analysis of 3-d TQFTs within a
larger study of extended field theories, complete Segal spaces are likely preferable
to quasi-categories as a model for ∞-categories.

3.6. Homotopy coherent nerves. From any simplicial category C one has an
associated simplicial set N(C) which is produced via a construction called the ho-
motopy coherent nerve. Simplices in the nerve are given by functors

                         N(C )[n] = FunCat∆ (Path ∆n , C)

from a certain path category construction [58, 00KN, 00KS]. We have Path ∆0 the
one point category and Path ∆1 the category with two objects, trivial endomor-
phisms, and a single map between them. Thus the 0 and 1-simplices in the nerve
consist of objects and maps in the underlying plain category C for C. A 2-simplex
in the nerve consists of a noncommuting diagram

                                        = x1
                                    f          g


                               x0                  / !x2
                                         h


in the plain category C, along with a choice of a 1-simplex ζ : ∆1 → HomC (x0 , x2 )
for which ζ|{0} = gf and ζ|{1} = h.
   The nerve construction is functorial in the sense that any simplicial functor
F : C → D determines a map of simplicial sets N(F ) : N(C) → N(D), and for any
composite of simplicial functors we have N(G) ◦ N(F ) = N(G ◦ F )

Theorem 3.14 ([13]). If C is a fibrant simplicial category (i.e. is enriched in Kan
complexes) then the homotopy coherent nerve N(C) is an ∞-category.

   Recall that we have the symmetric embedding Set ,→ Set∆ so that plain cat-
egories embed fully faithfully into simplicial categories. In the case where C
is a plain category the nerve N(C) has n-simplices specified by tuples of maps
{fij : 0 ≤ i < j ≤ n}, fij : xi → xj , with fjk fij = fik whenever i ≤ j ≤ k. The
∞-category C = N(C) has the property that any inner horn Λni → C admits a
unique filling to an n-simplex ∆n → C , and any ∞-category C with such unique
horn fillings is of the form C = N(C) for uniquely determined C.

Definition 3.15. We call an ∞-category C discrete if, for each n and 0 < i < n,
the restriction functor Fun(∆n , C ) → Fun(Λni , C ) is an isomorphism of simplicial
sets.

Example 3.16 (Kan complexes). For Kan complexes X and Y the functor com-
plexes Fun(X , Y ) are all Kan complexes [58, 00TN]. We therefore obtain a corre-
sponding fibrant simplicial category Kan of Kan complexes. We take the homotopy
coherent nerve to obtain the ∞-category of K an = N(Kan) of Kan complexes.
18                                  CRIS NEGRON


  As we explained above in the generic setting, objects in K an are Kan complexes
and morphisms are maps of Kan complexes, i.e. maps of simplicial sets. A 2-simplex

                                         = X1
                                   f01          f12

                                                   !
                              X0                  / X2
                                         f02

in K an consists of choices of maps between Kan complexes and an additional
homotopy ζ : ∆1 × X0 → X2 from f12 f01 to f02 . A map between Kan complexes
f : X → Y is an isomorphism in K an if and only if it is a homotopy equivalence,
in the expected sense [58, 00U1].
Definition 3.17. A Kan complex X is called contractible if the unique map X →
∗ is a homotopy equivalence.
Example 3.18 (∞-categories). For ∞-categories the functor complex Fun(C , D) is
not a Kan complex in general. However, we can take the associated Kan complexes
                                                         ∞ . The nerve Cat∞ =
Fun(C , D)Kan to obtain a fibrant simplicial category Cat+
N(Cat+∞ ) is the ∞-category of ∞-categories.

    Let C and D be ∞-categories. A transformation ζ : ∆1 × C → D between func-
tors F0 and F1 is a natural isomorphism in Cat∞ , and hence lies in Fun(C , D)Kan ,
if and only if it evaluates to an isomorphism ζx : F0 (x) → F1 (x) at each 0-simplex
x in C [58, 01DK]. So again, 0, 1, and 2-simplices in Cat∞ can be understood in
concrete terms.
Example 3.19 (Plain categories). For plain categories, the functor category of
the nerves Fun(N(C), N(D)) is just the nerve of the usual category N(Fun(C, D)) of
functors and natural transformations. The associated Kan complex N(Fun(C, D))Kan
is the nerve N(Fun(C, D)nat.isom ) of the groupoid of functors and natural isomor-
phisms. In any case, we take the associated Kan complexes of the functor categories
to get a fibrant simplicial category Cat+ of plain categories, and take the homotopy
coherent nerve to get the ∞-category Cat = N(Cat) of plain categories.
   Note that Cat sits in Cat∞ as the full subcategory spanned by discrete ∞-
categories, and K an sits in Cat∞ as the full subcategory spanned by Kan com-
plexes. Also, we can consider the underlying plain categories Kan and Cat∞ , of
Kan complexes and ∞-categories in Kan and Cat∞ respectively. Applying the
homotopy coherent nerve, we obtain inclusions of ∞-categories
                    N(Kan) ,→ K an and N(Cat∞ ) ,→ Cat∞ .
Remark 3.20. We have ignored all size constraints in the above examples. For-
mally, we fix a sequence of universes
                       Small ⊆ Medium ⊆ Large ⊆ Huge
in order to speak of small, medium sized, large, and huge simplicial sets. We
therefore have small, medium sized, large, and huge ∞-categories which are all
weak Kan complexes in their respective universes. The above examples are all
large ∞-categories. Your run-of-the-mill ∞-category is assumed to be of a medium
size.
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                        19


Definition 3.21. A functor between ∞-categories F : C → D is an equivalence
if it is an isomorphism in Cat∞ . More directly, F is an equivalence if there exists
                                                                 ∼                ∼
a functor F ′ : D → C which admits natural isomorphisms F ′ F → idC and idD →
     ′
FF .
   The following result is fundamental, and is used ad nauseam throughout the
text.
Lemma 3.22. Given an equivalence of ∞-categories p : S → T and a pullback
diagram
                              C
                                   F  /D
                                                       q
                                                  
                                    S            /T
                                             p

in Cat∞ , the map F is an equivalence provided one of p or q is an isofibration.
   We note that, for any pair of maps pi : Ci → T in Cat∞ , the pullback of
simplicial sets C0 ×T C1 is automatically an ∞-category whenever one of the pi
is an inner fibration. So, in almost-all situations, pullbacks in the plain category
Cat∞ are just pullbacks in Set∆ .
Proof of Lemma 3.22. If one of p of q is an isofibration then the pullback diagram is
a categorical pullback diagram, in the sense of [58, 032Y]. Hence the result follows
by [58, 033M].                                                                     □
3.7. Language: Discrete (∞−)categories. From this point on we don’t distin-
guish between a plain category and its nerve. A functor F : C → D from an
∞-category to a plain category, or vise-versa, is always understood to be a functor
from C to the nerve of D, or vise-versa. By a discrete category we either mean a
discrete ∞-category, or just a plain category, depending on the context.
Notation 3.23. A diagram in an ∞-category C is a map d : K → C from a
simplicial set K. When C is the nerve of a fibrant simplicial category C = N(C),
and C is the underling discrete/plain category for C, a diagram d : K → C is said
to strictly commute if d factors through the simplicial inclusion C → C ,

                                K
                                             d             /8 C
                                    ∃!   &
                                             C               .
   When we speak of diagrams in an ∞-category K → C we usually assume K is
a discrete category, so that a diagram in C is exactly what one expects intuitively.
We most often speak of strict commutativity in the cases where C = Cat∞ or K an.
3.8. Nerves of strict 2-categories. In the case of a plain category C, we saw that
there is no interesting information in an n-simplex ∆n → N(C) above dimension
1. One similarly finds that, for a 2-category, an n-simplex in the nerve is nothing
more than a compatible collection of 2-simplices. Let us elaborate.
   By a strict 2-category we mean a category enriched in plain categories. Taking
the nerves on morphisms, we can view strict 2-categories as precisely those simplicial
categories whose Hom complexes are all discrete ∞-categories. A strict 2-category
C is fibrant, when considered as a simplicial category, if and only if C is enriched
in groupoids.
20                                    CRIS NEGRON


Lemma 3.24. Let C be a strict 2-category. An n-simplex in the nerve σ : ∆n →
N(C) consists of the following data:
     • A choice of an object xi for each index i = 1, . . . , n.
     • For each pair of indices 0 ≤ i < j ≤ n, a choice of map αij : xi → xj in
       the underlying discrete category C.
     • For each triple 0 ≤ i < j < k ≤ n, the choice of a 2-morphism ζijk :
       αjk αij → αik .
These data are (only) required to satisfy the constraint
               ζikl (idαkl ◦ ζijk ) = ζijl (ζjkl ◦ idαij ) : αkl αjk αij → αil
for each quadruple 0 ≤ i < j < k < l ≤ n.
Proof. The above data specify an n-simplex in the Duskin nerve [58, 009T], and the
Duskin nerve is identified with the homotopy coherent nerve in the strict setting
[58, 00KY].                                                                     □

3.9. The homotopy category of an ∞-category. Given an ∞-category C , the
homotopy category h C is the discrete category with the same objects as C and
morphisms given by equivalence classes [α] : x → y of maps in C . Here α is
equivalent to α′ whenever there is a diagram of the form
                                                α′   /y
                                           x
                                     idx                      idy
                                                    /  y
                                           x    α

in C . This relation is stable under composition [58, 0048], so that h C is in fact a
discrete category.
   Equivalently, the homotopy category h C is defined by taking the same objects
as C and morphisms given by the connected components
                                                         
                          Homh C (x, y) = π0 MapsC (x, y) .
The homotopy category construction is functorial, and provides a left adjoint to
the inclusion Cat → Cat∞ .

3.10. Cocartesian fibrations and straightening.
Definition 3.25. Let q : C → T be a functor between ∞-categories. A morphism
α : x → y in C is called q-cocartesian if any lifting problem of the form

                                      Λn0
                                                σ̄    /C
                                                      =
                                                               q
                                                      
                                      ∆n             /T,

with n > 1 and specified initial edge σ̄|∆{0,1} = α, admits a solution. An inner
fibration q : C → T is called a cocartesian fibration if, for any map ᾱ : x̄ → ȳ in
T and any x in C with q(x) = x̄, there is a q-cocartesian morphism α : x → y in
C with q(α) = ᾱ.
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                                    21


   One can argue directly that cocartesian lifts of morphisms are unique up to
isomorphism in Fun(∆1 , C ). In particular, for a fixed functor q : C → T , any two
q-cocartesian lifts α : x → y and α′ : x → y ′ of a given map ᾱ : x̄ → ȳ in the base
T fit into a diagram

                         @y                                                  @ ȳ
                     α              β                                   ᾱ          id
                                                       over
                                                                                        
                 x                          / y′                   x̄                    / ȳ
                             ′                                                ᾱ
                         α


in which β is an isomorphism. In fact, such lifts are unique up to a contractible
space of choices [58, 01VK].

Definition 3.26. A map of cocartesian fibrations is a strictly commuting diagram

                                     C
                                                       F           /D

                                                   q           p
                                                           ~
                                                       T

in which q and p are cocartesian, and in which F sends q-cocartesian edges in C
to p-cocartesian edges in D. We call such a map F an equivalence of cocartesian
fibrations if, after forgetting the base T , it is an equivalence of ∞-categories.

Remark 3.27. Any equivalence between cocartesian fibrations does admit an in-
verse over the base [58, 0285, 028B]. Furthermore, there is an ∞-category of cocarte-
sian fibrations over T in which the isomorphisms are precisely the equivalences, as
defined above (see Section C.1).

   Cocartesian fibrations serve, arguably, as the leverage point through which the
theory of ∞-categories functions. Essentially, every “thing” in Cat∞ is a cocartesian
(or cartesian) fibration over a specified base. We take a moment to discuss these
structures in more detail.

Notation 3.28. Given an inner fibration q : C → T and an object t : ∗ → T , we
let Ct denote the associated fiber Ct = {t} ×T C .

   We note that the fibers along any inner fibration are all ∞-categories, since inner
fibrations are stable under pullback. Of course, at the moment we are especially
interested in the case where the given map is a cocartesian fibration.
   For any cocartesian fibration q : C → T and any simplicial set K, the induced
functor
                                 q∗ : Fun(K, C ) → Fun(K, T )

is a cocartesian fibration as well. The q∗ -cocartesian edges in Fun(K, C ) are pre-
cisely those transformations ζ : ∆1 ×K → C which evaluate to a q-cocartesian edge
ζx : ∆1 → C at each 0-simplex x in K [58, 01VG]. Hence, for any map f : s → t in
T and corresponding functor f˜ = f p1 : ∆1 ×Cs → T , there is a unique cocartesian
22                                  CRIS NEGRON


transformation Tf : ∆1 × Cs → C which solves the lifting problem

                          Cs = {0} × Cs
                                                include                /6 C

                                                                              q
                                                                        
                             ∆1 × Cs                                   /T.
                                                  f˜


Evaluating this transformation at 1 in ∆1 , we “travel along f ” to obtain a transport
functor between the fibers f! : Cs → Ct . One sees, via uniqueness of cocartesian
lifts, that any sequence of maps gf : s → t → u in the base produces a diagram

                                         > Ct
                                    f!                     g!


                               Cs                               / Cu
                                         (gf )!


in Cat∞ .
   Taking this concept to its extreme, we find that any cocartesian fibration q :
C → T determines an associated functor St(q) : T → Cat∞ with Stq (s) = Cs ,
Stq (f ) = f! , etc. It turns out that the fibration q : C → T is also reconstructible
from its associated functor. Indeed, Grothendieck straightening tells us that the
assignment q 7→ St(q) extends to an equivalence
                                           ∼
                         St : Cocart(T ) → Fun(T , Cat∞ )

from an ∞-category of cocartesian fibrations over a given base T (see Section C.1)
to the ∞-category of Cat∞ -valued functors from T [56, 42, 12]. The inverse
                                                       ∼
                         Un : Fun(T , Cat∞ ) → Cocart(T )

is provided by pulling back along the universal fibration quniv : PCat∞ → Cat∞ of
pointed ∞-categories [58, 0205, 028K].
   Now, when we think of a “structured” (∞-)category C , like a monoidal (∞-
)category for example, we are usually thinking about a functor FC : T → Cat∞
from some specific category T which universally encodes a collection of functors and
transformations which constitute the given structure. Hence, from the perspective
of Grothendieck straightening and unstraightening, we now have two options: We
can think of such structured ∞-categories as a distinguished class of cocartesian
fibrations over T , or as a class of functors to Cat∞ .
   Though there is some utility in working on both sides of the straightening-
unstraightening equivalence, it is often preferable to work with cocartesian fibra-
tions rather than Cat∞ -valued functors. The reason is, arguably, that a cocartesian
fibration C → T contains less erroneous information than its associated functor to
Cat∞ .

Remark 3.29. There are some size constraints to consider here, all of which we’ve
ignored. For example, the total space C in a cocartesian fibrations C → T is
allowed to be large, but all of the fibers Ct are assumed to be of a medium size.
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                       23


3.11. Functor categories for cocartesian fibrations. Consider inner fibrations
q : C → T and p : D → T . The structure map on D induces an inner fibration
p∗ : Fun(C , D) → Fun(C , T ) [58, 01BV] and we take the fiber along q to obtain
an ∞-category
                   FunT (C , D) := {q} ×Fun(C ,T ) Fun(C , D).
Objects in this ∞-category are functors over T , morphisms are transformations
over T , and general n-simplices are strictly commuting diagrams

                             ∆n × C
                                           σ               /D

                                    qp2                p
                                           $       ~
                                               T            .
Definition 3.30. For cocartesian fibrations as above, we take

                              T (C , D) ⊆ FunT (C , D)
                           Funcc
the full subcategory spanned by those functors which send q-cocartesian edges in
C to p-cocartesian edges in D.

                    4. Symmetric monoidal ∞-categories
   We recall basic information regarding symmetric monoidal ∞-categories. We
are especially interested in the transition from symmetric monoidal simplicial cate-
gories to symmetric monoidal ∞-categories. We also discuss equifibered symmetric
monoidal ∞-categories which, to a large extent, replace ∞-operads in our study
[41, 3].

4.1. Finite pointed sets.
Definition 4.1. The category of finite pointed sets Fin∗ is the category of finite
sets, along with morphisms f¯ : I → J given by the choice of a subset If¯ ⊆ I and
a set map If¯ → J. Given such a map f¯ : I → J in Fin∗ , we let Ij denote the
preimage f¯−1 (j) ⊆ I of an element j ∈ J.
    By a slight abuse of notation we let f¯ : If¯ → J denote the set map underlying
a map of finite pointed sets f¯ : I → J. The composition of maps f¯ : I → J and
ḡ : J → K in Fin∗ is defined by taking the subset Iḡf¯ = f¯−1 (Jḡ ) along with the
underlying set map
                               ḡ f¯|Iḡf¯ : Iḡf¯ → Jḡ → K.

Definition 4.2. A map of finite pointed sets f¯ : I → J is called active if If¯ = I,
and called inert if each preimage Ij = f¯−1 (j) is a singleton. For any index i in I
we let ρ̄i : I → {0} denote the unique inert morphism with preimage ρ̄−1i (0) = {i}.

   Fibrations over Fin∗ play a prominent role in higher algebra. We note that any
functor to Fin∗ is automatically an inner fibration, since Fin∗ is discrete.
Definition 4.3. Given a functor q : C → Fin∗ , a morphism f : x → y in C is
called inert if it is q-cocartesian and the image q(f ) is inert in Fin∗ . We call f
active if it has active image in Fin∗ .
24                                     CRIS NEGRON


4.2. Symmetric monoidal ∞-categories.
Definition 4.4. A symmetric monoidal ∞-category is a cocartesian fibration E ⊗ →
Fin∗ for which transport along the inert projections ρ̄i : I → {0} induce an equiv-
alence
                                          ∼
                                 ρ! : EI⊗ → E I .                               (9)
A map of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories is a map of cocartesian fibrations

                               E⊗
                                            F           / D⊗


                                          "   |
                                          Fin∗                ,
i.e. a functor over Fin∗ which preserves cocartesian edges.
  In the expression (9) I is an arbitrary finite set, E is the fiber over the singleton
      ⊗
E = E{0} , and E I is the exponent E I = Fun(I, E ).
Remark 4.5. We employ no special notation for ∞-categories of symmetric monoidal
functors, as the generic cocartesian functor category
                                        Fin∗ (E , D )
                                               ⊗   ⊗
                                     Funcc
from Section 3.11 already parametrizes maps of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories.
Remark 4.6. Given any symmetric monoidal ∞-category E ⊗ → Fin∗ , we note
that the fiber over the empty set E∅⊗ is a contractible Kan complex. This follows
by terminality of the empty product in Cat∞ and the requisite equivalence (9).
Hence the transport functor along the unique active map m̄ : {1, 2} → {0} provides
a homotopically associative, and homotopically commutative product functor
                          mE = m̄! : E × E ∼= E⊗ → E  {1,2}

and transport along the initial map ū : ∅ → {0} provides a unit for this product
                              uE = ū! : ∗ ∼
                                           = E⊗ → E.
                                                  ∅
  For any map of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories F ⊗ : E ⊗ → D ⊗ , compatibility
between transport functors ensures the existence of homotopy commuting diagrams

               E ×E
                         F2   / D ×D                              ∗
                                                           uE         uD
               mE                   mD     and
                                                                      
                    E          /D                      E               / D.
                         F                                        F

The existence of higher compatibilities, up to arbitrary depth, is articulated by
the corresponding transformation between the functors FE ⊗ , FD ⊗ : Fin∗ → Cat∞
under straightening.
  As one expects, the homotopy truncation of any symmetric monoidal ∞-category
remains symmetric monoidal.
Lemma 4.7. For any symmetric monoidal ∞-category p : E ⊗ → Fin∗ , the induced
map from the homotopy category h p : h E ⊗ → Fin∗ is also a symmetric monoidal
∞-category. We have the fibers (h E ⊗ )I = h(EI⊗ ), and the transport functors f¯! :
h EI⊗ → h EJ⊗ are induced by the transport functors for E ⊗ .
             TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                         25


Proof. It is immediate to see that every p-cocartesian edge in E ⊗ is h p-cocartesian
in h E ⊗ . Hence the fibration h E ⊗ → Fin∗ is cocartesian and the claim about
                                                                               ∼
transport follows as well. Since transport provides an equivalence ρ̄! : EI⊗ → E I
for each finite set I, by assumption, the induced map on homotopy categories
h EI⊗ → h E I is also an equivalence.                                               □
  One obtains examples of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories immediately from
both the discrete and simplicial settings. We provide details below.
4.3. Symmetric monoidal simplicial categories. A monoidal simplicial cate-
gory is a simplicial category E equipped with a simplicial functor
                                      ⊗:E×E →E
along with a unit 1, unit isomorphisms, and associativity. A symmetric structure
                                                                            ∼
on a simplicial monoidal category is a choice of a natural isomorphism ⊗ → ⊗op
which is an involution and satisfies the appropriate compatibilities with the unit
and associator.
Definition 4.8. For a symmetric monoidal simplicial category E we define a sim-
plicial category E ⊗ whose objects are given by pairs of a finite set I equipped with a
linear ordering and an object x in the product E I . The mapping complex between
objects x and y over finite sets I and J, with specified orderings, is the disjoint
union of the complexes
                                          Y
                        HomE ⊗ (x, y)f¯ =     HomE (xIj , yj )                     (10)
                                                j∈J

over all f¯ : I → J in Fun∗ .
  Here each xIj denotes the product
                 xi1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ xir := xi1 ⊗ (xi2 ⊗ · · · (xir−1 ⊗ xir ) · · · ),
where Ij = {i1 , . . . , ir } is ordered according to the ambient ordering on I. In the
case when Ij is empty we take xIj = 1E . We note that the map of pointed sets
f¯ : I → J underlying a map in E ⊗ is not required to respect the given orderings,
even though the sets which parametrize objects in E ⊗ are ordered.
    Composition is defined in the expected way, though it is a slightly delicate thing
to write down. Consider n-simplices
              σ : ∆n → HomE ⊗ (x, y)f¯ and σ ′ : ∆n → HomE ⊗ (y, z)ḡ
over maps f¯ : I → J and ḡ : J → K in Fin∗ . These simplices separate into tuples
σ = {σj : j ∈ J} and σ ′ = {σk′ : k ∈ K} relative to the product decompositions
(10). Then, for each k in K, we have the corresponding simplices
                                                          sym∗
             (σ ′ σ)k : ∆n → HomE ⊗ (⊗j∈Jk xIj , zk ) −→ HomE ⊗ (xIk , zk )        (11)
where the first map above is the composite simplex
                          O
                    σk′ (   σj ) : ∆n → HomE ⊗ (⊗j∈Jk xIj , zk )
                           j∈Jk
         ∗                                                                    ∼
and sym is precomposition with the symmetry isomorphism xIk → ⊗j∈Jk xIj . The
composite simplex σ ′ σ is, finally, the map in HomE ⊗ (x, z)ḡf¯ specified by the given
tuple {(σ ′ σ)k : k ∈ K}.
  The following is apparent.
26                                     CRIS NEGRON


Lemma 4.9. If E is a fibrant symmetric monoidal simplicial category, then the
associated simplicial category E ⊗ is also fibrant.
   By construction the simplicial category E ⊗ comes equipped with a forgetful
functor p : E ⊗ → Fin∗ which sends each object (x, I) to I, and collapses each
component in the mapping complex HomE ⊗ (x, y)f¯ to f¯.
Lemma 4.10. Given a finite set I, any choice of a linear ordering on I provides
                             ∼
an injective equivalence E I → (E ⊗ )I to the fiber of p : E ⊗ → Fin∗ over I.
  Here by an equivalence we mean a simplicial functor which is essentially surjective
on the underlying plain categories, say, and which induces homotopy equivalences
on the mapping complexes.
Proof. The inclusion just takes a tuple x in E I to the object (x, I), where I is given
its specified ordering. The induced map on Hom complexes
                                 Y
                 HomE I (x, y) =   HomE (xi , yi ) → HomE ⊗ (x, y)idI
                                 i∈I

is simply an equality. Hence the functor E I → (E ⊗ )I is fully faithful. The identi-
ties on both I and x provide isomorphisms between (x, I) and x paired with any
alternate ordering on I. So the inclusion is essentially surjective as well.       □
   We note that the fibers of the nerve are the nerve of the fibers, N((E ⊗ )I ) =
N(E ⊗ )I . Hence, taking the nerve of the simplicial equivalence from Lemma 4.10
                                            ∼
provides an equivalence of ∞-categories E I → (E ⊗ )I .
Proposition 4.11. For a fibrant symmetric monoidal simplicial category E, and
E ⊗ = N(E ⊗ ), the functor N(p) : E ⊗ → Fin∗ is a cocartesian fibration. Further-
more, given any map of finite pointed sets f¯ : I → J, choice of object x in (E ⊗ )I ,
and xf¯ = (xIj : j ∈ J) in (E ⊗ )J , the morphism
                                                Y
                    ix,f¯ ∈ HomE ⊗ (x, xf¯)f¯ =   HomE 1 (xIj , xIj )
                                                  j∈J

specified by the identities idxIj is a N(p)-cocartesian edge over f¯.

Proof. Here x is, precisely, an object in E I along with a choice of ordering on I.
The products xIj are all taken with respect to this ordering, exactly as above.
    It suffices to prove that, for any map of finite pointed sets f¯ : I → J and x in
E I , the proposed edge ix,f¯ : x → xf¯ is cocartesian over f¯. For this it suffices to
show that, given any z ∈ E ⊗ and K = p(z), the diagram
                                          −◦ix,f¯
                    MapsE ⊗ (xf¯, z)                    / MapsE ⊗ (x, z)


                                          −◦f¯
                                                                 
                    MapsFin∗ (J, K)                     / MapsFin (I, K)
                                                                ∗


is a pullback square in K an [58, 01TL]. Since the spaces in the bottom row are
discrete it suffices further to show that, for each ḡ : J → K and h̄ = ḡ f¯, the map
on the fibers
                      − ◦ ix,f¯ : MapsE ⊗ (xf¯, z)ḡ → MapsE ⊗ (x, z)h̄            (12)
is a homotopy equivalence.
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                         27


   Whether or not the map (12) is an equivalence can be checked at the level of the
homotopy category h K an, at which point one can replace the mapping spaces for
E ⊗ with the mapping complexes for E ⊗ [58, 02LN]. We now ask if the map
                     − ◦ ix,f¯ : HomE ⊗ (xf¯, z)ḡ → HomE ⊗ (x, z)h̄
is an equivalence. However, since the symmetry transformations on E are isomor-
phisms, one can check directly from the defintion of composition (11) that this map
is simply an isomorphism of simplicial sets.                                      □

Remark 4.12. Given p : E ⊗ → Fin∗ as in the statement of Proposition 4.11,
we generally let p : E ⊗ → Fin∗ denote the induced cocartesian fibration from the
homotopy coherent nerve E ⊗ = N(E ⊗ ), by an abuse of notation.
   By the above description of cocartesian edges in E ⊗ we see that the (nerve of
the) symmetric product functor

                                             (E ⊗ )I
                                    ∼    7             transport
                                                              '/
                              EI                                   E,
                                             product

associated to any choice of ordering on I, is a transport functor along the unique
active map I → {0}. The transport functors along the various inert maps ρi : I →
{0} are the projections pi : E I ∼
                                 = (E ⊗ )I → E . Hence we observe the following.
Corollary 4.13. Consider a fibrant symmetric monoidal simplicial category E with
associated ∞-category E . The cocartesian fibration p : E ⊗ → Fin∗ from Proposition
4.11 gives E the structure of symmetric monoidal ∞-category.
4.4. Maps of symmetric monoidal simplicial categories. For any map of
symmetric monoidal simplicial categories F : E 0 → E 1 we have the corresponding
functor F ⊗ : E ⊗      ⊗
                0 → E 1 between simplicial categories over Fin∗ . The functor F
                                                                                      ⊗
                                           I  I       I
is defined on objects via the exponents F : E 0 → E 1 and on Hom complexes via
the maps
                   Q
  HomE ⊗ (x, y)f¯ = j∈J HomE 0 (xIj , yj )
         0

                      −→ j∈J HomE 1 (F (x)Ij , F (yj )) = HomE ⊗ (F I (x), F J (y))f¯
                           Q
                                                                        1

                                                                            ∼
provided by applying F then the tensor compatibilities F (x)Ij → F (xIj ). Taking
homotopy coherent nerves produces a functor F ⊗ : E0⊗ → E1⊗ between ∞-categories
over Fin∗ , where we abuse notation to write simply F ⊗ for N(F ⊗ ).
Proposition 4.14. For any map of fibrant symmetric monoidal simplicial cate-
gories F : E 0 → E 1 the corresponding functor
                                              F⊗             / E⊗
                              E0⊗                                  1

                                    p0                  p1
                                             !   }
                                             Fin∗
is a map of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories.
28                                       CRIS NEGRON


Proof. For each morphism f¯ : I → J in Fin∗ , x in (E0⊗ )I , and index j ∈ J we have
the diagram
                                                  F (id)=id
                        F (xi1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ xir )                            /
                                  O                                      4 F (xO Ij )
                                ∼
                                =                F ⊗ (ix,f¯)j                   ∼
                                                                                =

                      F (xi1 ) ⊗ . . . ⊗ F (xir )                        / F (x)Ij
                                                       (iF ⊗ (x),f¯)j

in E1 . These diagrams yields a diagram
                                              F (x)f¯
                                              ;
                                 iF (x),f¯                      ∼
                                                                =

                                                                      #
                           F ⊗ (x)                                  / F (xf¯)
                                             F ⊗ (ix,f¯)

in E1⊗ in which the map iF (x),f¯ is p1 -cocartesian. Since all isomorphisms are p1 -
cocartesian, and cocartesian edges satisfy the 2-of-3 property [58, 01TS], it follows
that F ⊗ (ix,f¯) is p1 -cocartesian. Hence F ⊗ preserves cocartesian edges, and is thus
a map of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories.                                            □
4.5. Fiber products and transfer of symmetric monoidal structures. Through-
out the text we construct symmetric monoidal ∞-categories by combining data
from, say, a topological source and an algebraic source. Formally such categories
arise as fiber products of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories along pairs of symmetric
monoidal functors. To address such situations we have the following.
Proposition 4.15. Given a pair of symmetric monoidal functors Fi⊗ : Ei⊗ → T ⊗
in which one of the Fi is an isofibration, the fiber product E0⊗ ×T ⊗ E1⊗ inherits a
unique symmetric monoidal structure under which the two projections
                                      E0⊗ ×T ⊗ E1⊗ → Ei⊗
are symmetric monoidal functors
     We omit the details, but indicate some method of proof for the interested reader.
Idea of proof. This result can be proved by hand, or can be deduced from the fact
that the forgetful functor from SM∞ (Defintion C.1) to Cat∞ commutes with
pullbacks [57, Corollary 3.2.2.4].                                             □
   We also note that symmetric monoidality is stable under equivalence of isofibra-
tions.
Lemma 4.16. Consider a diagram

                                  C
                                                 F              / C′

                                        p                  p′
                                              !   |
                                              Fin∗
in which both p and p′ are isofibrations, and F is an equivalence. If one of p or
p′ realizes C or C ′ as a symmetric monoidal ∞-category, then both C and C ′ are
symmetric monoidal and F is an equivalence of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories.
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                      29


Proof. In this case F is an equivalence of isofibrations over Fin∗ [58, 0295], and
hence both p and p′ are cocartesian fibrations whenever one is [58, 028A]. Further-
more F preserves cocartesian edges by [58, 028B], and for any finite set I we have
a commuting diagram

                            CI
                                            FI
                                                                / C′
                                                                         I



                                                                    
                                                      /
                          i∈I C{0}                             i∈I C{0} ,
                                                                    ′
                        Q                                 Q
                                       Q
                                           i F{0}


in Cat∞ obtained
               Q from transport along the inert maps ρ̄i : I →Q{0}.′ It follows that
the map CI → i C{0} is an equivalence if and only if CI′ → i C{0}       is an equiv-
alence, and hence both transport functors induce equivalences by our hypothesis.
Taken together, we see that both C and C ′ are symmetric monoidal ∞-categories
and that F is an equivalence of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories.                  □

4.6. Equifibered ∞-categories. Below we consider the symmetric monoidal cat-
egory of finite sets Fin, under disjoint unions, and have the associated fibration
Fin⊗ → Fin∗ from Proposition 4.11.
Definition 4.17 ([3, Example 4.3.1]). A symmetric monoidal ∞-category over
Fin⊗ , i.e. a symmetric monoidal ∞-category with a fixed symmetric monoidal func-
tor π : T ⊗ → Fin⊗ , is said to be equifibered over Fin if the structure map π is an
isofibration and the diagram
                                 T ×T                     /T                   (13)

                                                        
                                 Fin × Fin            / Fin

for the product functors is a pullback diagram in Cat∞ . A map of equifibered
symmetric monoidal ∞-categories is a strictly commuting diagram of symmetric
monoidal functors
                           S⊗                   /T⊗

                                       #          {
                                           Fin⊗                  .
   By an equifibered ∞-category over Fin we always mean a symmetric monoidal
∞-category which is equifibered over Fin. Intuitively, a symmetric monoidal ∞-
category T ⊗ → Fin∗ admits an equifibered ∞-category structure over Fin provided
objects in the underlying ∞-category T are not too large, and the monoidal product
on T is given by a type of disjoint union.
Example 4.18. The category Topc of compact topological spaces with disjoint
union is almost equifibered over Fin, via the connected components functor π0 :
Topc → Fin. In particular, the product diagram (13) is a pullback diagram, but
the structure map Topc → Fin fails to be an isofibration. Hence, after taking an
                             ∼
isofibrant replacement Topc → Tc → Fin we find that Tc is equifibered over Fin.
Such a replacement can be constructed by considering, for example, the category
30                                       CRIS NEGRON


of pairs (X, α) where X is a compact topological space and α is a bijection α :
        ∼
π0 (X) → I from the connected components to a finite set.
   Similarly, the ∞-category K anc of compact Kan complexes with disjoint union
becomes an equifibered ∞-category over Fin, via the connected components functor,
after taking an isofibrant replacement.
Example 4.19. For any algebraic group G over a field k, one can check that the
category Rep(G) of G-representations admits no equifibered structure over Fin.
Definition 4.20. Fix an equifibered ∞-category over Fin, π : T ⊗ → Fin⊗ . A
T -monoidal ∞-category is an ∞-category equipped with a cocartesian fibration
q : E ⊗ → T ⊗ which satisfies the following:
       • For each object x in the fiber TK⊗ over a given set K in Fin∗ , and inert
         projections ρk : x → xk over the projections ρ̄k : K → {0}, transport
         provides an equivalence
                                          ∼
                                            Y
                                 ρ! : Ex⊗ →   Ex⊗k .
                                                  k∈K


     • For each object x in the fiber TK⊗ , and cocartesian edge f : x → x′ over
       the unique active map f¯ : K → {0}, transport provides an equivalence
                                                  ∼
                                         f! : Ex⊗ → Ex⊗′ .
A map of T -monoidal ∞-categories is a map of cocartesian fibrations over T ⊗ .
    We note that any T -monoidal ∞-category E ⊗ comes equipped with a cocarte-
sian fibration to Fin∗ , via composition. One can check, using [58, 023M] and the
first condition above, that the induced map E ⊗ → Fin∗ gives E ⊗ the structure
of a symmetric monoidal ∞-category and, subsequently, that q : E ⊗ → T ⊗ is a
symmetric monoidal functor. We compose further to observe a symmetric monoidal
functor E ⊗ → Fin⊗ .
Lemma 4.21. If T ⊗ → Fin∗ is equifibered over Fin, then any T -monoidal ∞-
category q : E ⊗ → T ⊗ is equifibered over Fin as well.
Proof. It suffices to show that the diagram
                                ⊗
                               E{0,1}
                                              product
                                                             /E

                            q{0,1}                                 q{0}
                                                              
                                 ⊗
                               T{0,1}                        /T
                                              product
                                                                              ⊗
is a pullback diagram in Cat∞ , or equivalently that the induced map E{0,1}        →
         ⊗
E ×T T{0,1} is an equivalence.
   As we explain at Lemma 16.10 below, the product functor for E ⊗ sends q{0,1} -
                                                                       ⊗
cocartesian edges to q{0} -cocartesian edges, and hence the map E{0,1}      → E ×T
   ⊗                                                 ⊗
T{0,1} is a map of cocartesian fibrations over T{0,1} . This map is therefore an
                                             ⊗
equivalence if and only if its fibers over T{0,1} are equivalences [58, 028B]. Taking
                                         ⊗
the fiber over a given object x in T{0,1} , with image x′ in T , however, simply
recovers the equivalence Ex⊗ → Ex⊗′ promised in the second point of Definition
4.20.                                                                               □
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                       31


4.7. Transport equivalences for T -monoidal ∞-categories. Fix a symmetric
monoidal ∞-category T ⊗ → Fin∗ which is equifibered over Fin, and a T -monoidal
∞-category q : E ⊗ → T ⊗ .
Definition 4.22. We call an object (Ik : k ∈ K) in Fin⊗ separated if each set Ik is
a (nonempty) singleton. Given a symmetric monoidal ∞-category p : T ⊗ → Fin∗
which is equifibered over Fin, via a structure map π : T ⊗ → Fin⊗ , an object x in
T ⊗ is called separated if its image π(x) is separated in Fin⊗ . A map α : x̃ → x
in T ⊗ is called a separation of x whenever x̃ is separated and α is a p-cocartesian
edge.
   In Fin⊗ for example, a separation of an object x = (Ik : k ∈ K) is provided
by the object x̃ = ({i} : i ∈ ⨿k Ik ) with the apparent map x̃ → x. It is clear
that the separation of x is uniquely determined up to unique isomorphism in the
overcategory Fin⊗/x . Similarly, equifiberedness of T
                                                        ⊗
                                                          over Fin implies uniqueness
of separating morphisms in T .  ⊗

   For a fixed object x in T ⊗ take a separation α : x̃ → x and a cocartesian edge
x → x′ over the active map K → {0} in Fin∗ . Then the composite x̃ → x′ is
also cocartesian, and taking transport for our T -monoidal ∞-category E ⊗ now
produces a diagram
                               E⊗
                                          α!
                                                   / Ex⊗
                                  x̃


                                                    ~
                                             Ex⊗′
in Cat∞ in which both functors to Ex⊗′ are equivalences, by the definiton of T -
monoidality. It follows that α! : Ex̃⊗ → Ex⊗ is an equivalence as well.
   The separating object x̃ is now over a set I in Fin∗ , and we have   the inert
                                                                    ∼ Q
projections ρi : x̃ → xi in T ⊗ which induce an equivalence Ex̃⊗ → i∈I Ex⊗i . We
therefore obtain a uniquely determined equivalences from Ex⊗ ,
                                           Ex̃⊗                                 (14)
                                       ∼                ∼

                                  ~                          "
                            Ex⊗
                                             ∼            / Q Ex⊗ .
                                             ∃!              i   i


Definition 4.23. Let T ⊗ → Fin∗ be equifibered Fin. Given a T -monoidal ∞-
category E ⊗ → T ⊗ and an object x in T ⊗ , the completing equivalence from (14)
is referred to as the transport equivalence, and is generally denoted
                                           ∼
                                             Y
                                  ρ! : Ex⊗ →    Ex⊗i
                                                    i∈I
by an abuse of notation.
4.8. Language and notation for monoidal ∞-categories. Given an ∞-category
E , we can speak of a symmetric monoidal structure on E . This is the choice of a
                                                         ⊗
symmetric monoidal ∞-category E ⊗ → Fin∗ with E = E{0}     , or more generally with
                                             ∼  ⊗
a specified isomorphism of simplicial sets E = E{0} . Having specified a symmetric
monoidal structure on a given ∞-category E , we may also just refer to E itself as
a symmetric monoidal ∞-category, by an abuse of language.
32                                      CRIS NEGRON


   Given a symmetric monoidal ∞-category T ⊗ → Fin∗ , we say T is equifibered
over Fin if T ⊗ → Fin∗ is a symmetric monoidal ∞-category which is equifibered
over Fin.
   Given ∞-categories E1 and E2 with specified symmetric monoidal structures, we
can also speak of a symmetric monoidal structure on a given functor F : E1 → E2 .
This is the choice of a map F ⊗ : E1⊗ → E2⊗ between cocartesian fibrations over
Fin∗ which fits into a diagram

                                E1
                                            F         / E2

                          include                           include
                                                       
                               E1⊗                / E ⊗.
                                                     2
                                            F⊗


                    5. ∞-Categories of disk embeddings
   We construct a symmetric monoidal ∞-category f rDisk of ±-colored framed
disks, and disk embeddings. Besides our addition of ±-colors, many of the con-
structions and results of this section are standard. See for example [1, Remark
2.10].
   Following these introductory materials, we show in Section 6 that f rDisk is
equifibered over Fin. Throughout this study we are generically interested in f rDisk-
monoidal ∞-categories as a coarse approximation to ribbon tensor categories, in
the homotopical setting. In particular, we show in Section 7 below that any rib-
bon tensor (1-)category admits the structure of a f rDisk-monoidal ∞-category,
and that the original ribbon structure can be recovered from this structure over
f rDisk.

5.1. Colored sets. A finite colored set is the pairing I of a finite set I with a
morphism of sets colorI : I → {±}. Maps of colored sets f : I → J are maps of
the underling uncolored sets f : I → J which preserve positively colored elements.
(So, we are allowed to send a negative index i to a positive index j, but not vise-
versa.) We let Fin denote the category of finite colored sets.
   When we write i ∈ I for a colored set I, we mean that i is an element in the
underlying uncolored set I. As in the uncolored setting, given a map f : I → J in
Fin we let Ij denote the the preimage f −1 (j) ⊂ I along with its induced coloring.
We have the analogously defined category Fin∗ of finite pointed colored sets.

5.2. The ∞-category of colored disk embeddings. We construct a symmetric
monoidal simplicial category f rDisk of framed colored disks. Objects are finite
colored sets I, and morphisms f : I → J (in the underlying discrete category) are
oriented embedding of disks
                                f : D ×I → D ×J.                                (15)
We assume that f sends positively colored disks in D × I to positively colored
disks in D × J , so that f recovers a map in Fin on connected components, and we
take specifically D to be the standard disk D = {z ∈ R2 : |z| ≤ 1}. The mapping
complexes are the subspaces
       Homf rDisk (I, J ) = Embed(D × I, D × J ) ⊆ Maps(D × I, D × J )
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                        33


whose n-simplices consist of those continuous function
                                 σ : |∆n | × D × I → D × J
which evaluate at each t ∈ |∆n | to a smooth oriented embedding σt : D×I → D×J
which recovers a map in Fin on connected components.
Remark 5.1. One can think of negatively colored disks as copies of the standard
disk in R2 equipped with the negated orientation.
  The composition functions
           ◦ : Homf rDisk (J , K) × Homf rDisk (I, J ) → Homf rDisk (I, J )
are defined by taking a pair of n-simplices σ : |∆n | × D × I → D × J and σ ′ :
|∆n | × D × J → D × K to the usual composite
                      diag ×1                          1×σ           σ′
      |∆n | × D × I     →       |∆n | × |∆n | × D × I → |∆n | × D × J → D × K.
Lemma 5.2. The simplicial category f rDisk is fibrant.
Proof. One can fill horns by noting that the geometric realization |∆n | retracts
onto any given horn |Λni |.                                                    □
   We have the apparent symmetric monoidal structure on f rDisk provided by
disjoint union, and taking connected components provides a symmetric monoidal
functor π0 : f rDisk → Fin to the discrete category of finite pointed sets, with dis-
joint union. Applying the homotopy coherent nerve therefore produces a symmetric
monoidal ∞-category over Fin⊗ ,
             π0⊗ : N(f rDisk⊗ ) → Fin⊗ , (Ik : k ∈ K) 7→ (Ik : k ∈ K),
by Proposition 4.14.
   We give a slightly more efficient presentation of the symmetric monoidal struc-
ture on N(f rDisk) in Section 5.4 below, after recalling a colored variant of the
framed little disk operad.
5.3. The ∞-operad of colored disks. In addition to the symmetric monoidal
∞-category of framed disks we have a related disky ∞-operad. This is a framed
and colored variant of the usual little disk operad, which we recall here.
   Objects in the preceding (fibrant) simplicial category f rE2 are finite colored
sets and morphisms f : I → J consist of a choice of subset If ⊆ I along with an
oriented disk embedding f : D × If → D × J . For higher simplices, the mapping
complexes decompose over morphisms in Fin∗ ,
                                      a
            Homf rE2 (I, J ) =                 Embed(D × Iξ̄ , D × J )ξ̄ ,
                                   ξ̄∈HomFin∗ (I,J )

where an n-simplex in Embed(D × Iξ̄ , D × J )ξ̄ is a continuous function |∆n | × D ×
Iξ̄ → D × J which evaluates to an oriented embedding at each t ∈ |∆n |, and which
recovers the specified map ξ¯ on connected components.
    We have the apparent forgetful functor to the discrete category of pointed colored
sets f rE2 → Fin∗ , and can forget further to Fin∗ . Taking the homotopy coherent
nerve, we obtain an ∞-category with an isofibration f rE2 → Fin∗ , and one can
check that this fibration gives f rE2 the structure of an ∞-operad [57, Definition
2.1.1.10].
34                                     CRIS NEGRON


     Now, taking disjoint unions of continuous functions
                                                         
                                          σ
                |∆n | × D × (⨿k∈Kl Ik ) →l D × Jl : l ∈ L 7→
                                                                     
                              ⨿l σl : |∆n | × D × (⨿k∈Kf¯Ik ) → D × J

defines a simplicial functor f rDisk⊗ → f rE2 . We similarly define a disjoint union
functor Fin⊗ → Fin∗ for the symmetric monoidal category of finite sets. Via these
disjoint union functors, we connect the symmetric monoidal simplicial disk category
to the simplicial little disk operad via a pullback diagram

                             f rDisk⊗
                                         disj union
                                                          / f rE2              (16)

                                                              
                               Fin⊗                        / Fin∗
                                         disj union

of simplicial categories. Taking the homotopy coherent nerve then produces a
pullback diagram of ∞-categories.

5.4. Snatched presentation of f rDisk⊗ . We construct a symmetric monoidal
∞-category p : f rDisk⊗ → Fin∗ and exhibit a symmetric monoidal equivalence

                       N(f rDisk⊗ )
                                               ∼               / f rDisk⊗      (17)

                                                           p
                                           &          z
                                               Fin∗                 .
The point here is to provide a more user-friendly expression of the symmetric
monoidal structure on the underlying ∞-category f rDisk = N(f rDisk).
   An object in f rDisk⊗ is a colored set I equipped with a set map µ : I → K, or
equivalently a continuous map µ : D ×I → K, where K is a finite set which is taken
to be completely positive if one likes. A morphism (I, µ) → (J , ν) in f rDisk⊗ is
the pairing of a map f : D × If → D × J in f rE2 with a map f¯ : Kf¯ → L in Fin∗
which fits into a diagram

                              D × If
                                               f
                                                          / D×J                (18)
                             µ|If                               ν
                                                             
                                Kf¯                        / L,
                                               f¯

and for which If = µ−1 Kf¯.
   In higher dimensions, an n-simplex σ : ∆n → f rDisk⊗ is precisely the informa-
tion of simplices σ : ∆n → f rE2 and σ̄ : ∆n → Fin∗ which are “linked at their
vertices {l} ⊆ ∆n ” via morphisms µl : I l → K l . These linking morphisms are
(only) required to produce a consistency at the level of edges, in the sense that
each pair of edges
                  flm : D × Ifl lm → D × I m and f¯lm : Kfl¯lm → K m
complete diagrams as in (18).
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                         35


  In this alternate guise, the disjoint union functor appears as the projection
                disj union = p1 : f rDisk⊗ → f rE2 , (σ, σ̄, µ) → σ,
and the other projection provides an isofibration to finite pointed sets p = p2 :
f rDisk⊗ → Fin∗ , (σ, σ̄, µ) 7→ σ̄.
   Similarly, for the discrete category of finite sets, we have the alternate presenta-
tion of Fin⊗ as the category whose objects are pairings (I, µ) of a finite set with a
specified map µ : I → K, and whose morphisms consist of diagrams
                                      I         /J
                                     µ                 ν
                                                   
                                     K           / L.
Under this alternate formulation, we again take connected components to obtain a
functor π : f rDisk⊗ → Fin⊗ which fits into a pullback diagram

                            f rDisk⊗
                                          disj union
                                                           / f rE2                (19)
                               π
                                                              
                              Fin⊗                         / Fin∗ .
                                          disj union

Lemma 5.3. The projection p : f rDisk⊗ → Fin∗ gives f rDisk the structure of
                                                                          ∼
a symmetric monoidal ∞-category, and there is an equivalence N(f rDisk⊗ ) →
f rDisk⊗ of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories over Fin⊗ .
Proof. Let ′ Fin⊗ denote the symmetric monoidal construction of Proposition 4.11
and Fin⊗ denote the alternate construction given above. We have the assignment
which sends an ordered tuple of sets (Ik : k ∈ K) to the disjoint union ⨿k Ik
equipped with the unique map µ : ⨿k Ik → K which has µ−1 (k) = Ik . This
assignment defines a functor ′ Fin⊗ → Fin⊗ over Fin∗ , in both ways, which is seen
to be essentially surjective and fully faithful, and thus an equivalence.
   Considering the identities on f rE2 and Fin∗ , we now obtained a unique functor
N(f rDisk⊗ ) → f rDisk⊗ which completes a transformation between the respective
pullback diagrams ∆1 ×∆1 → Cat∞ from (16) and (19). This completing functor is
an equivalence by [58, 033K]. The fact that the isofibration p : f rDisk⊗ → Fin∗ is
a cocartesian fibration which gives f rDisk⊗ the structure of a symmetric monoidal
∞-category now follows by the transfer result of Lemma 4.16.                     □
Warning 5.4. From now on the symmetric monoidal structure on Fin is always
realized via the fibration Fin⊗ → Fin of pairs (I, µ) as above, though the distinction
is of little technical importance.
5.5. Linear disk arrangements. We often consider the subcategory Linf rDisk⊗ ⊆
f rDisk⊗ spanned by all objects, and those morphisms
                                   f :D×I →D×J
whose constituent disk embeddings fi : Di → Dj send the x-axis of Di into the
x-axis of Dj , and have derivatives T0 fi : R2 → R2 equal to the identity. One can
check that the inclusion
                             Linf rDisk⊗ → f rDisk⊗
36                                    CRIS NEGRON


is an equivalence of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories (Lemma A.4).
   From homotopies between such linear arrangements of disks, i.e. from 2-simplices
in Linf rDisk, one can extract some useful combinatorial data.
5.6. Extracting framed braids. From any morphism f : (I, µ) → (J , ν) in
Linf rDisk⊗ , and j ∈ J , the linear ordering on the x-axis in the j-th disk Dj
induces a linear ordering on the preimage Ij → {j}. Any homotopy between two
maps in Linf rDisk⊗ , ζ : |∆1 | × D × If → D × J , then traces out framed braids in
the disks D×J . By a framed braid we mean an element in the fundamental group of
the space of framed configurations of points in the disk Brf r (K) = π0 (Conf K
                                                                              f r (D)),
                                 K
where we point the space Conf f r (D) via a choice of an ordering on the set K, a
map K → D which aligns the points according to the given ordering along the
x-axis, and the points inherit their framings from the ambient framing on D. We
note the decomposition Brf r (K) = Br(K) ⋉ (ZK ) where the integral factor tracks
the windings of the framing around each embedded singleton {k} → D.
Definition 5.5. For any map f : (I, µ) → (J , ν) in Linf rDisk⊗ we take
                                       Y
                          Brf r (f ) =    Brf r (Ij ),
                                          j∈J

where I and J are the underlying uncolored sets for I and J , and each Ij is given
its ordering induced by f .
     Expanding on what was stated above, recall that a 2-simplex
                        σ=                (J , ν)
                                           ;
                                      f             g

                                                          $
                             (I, µ)                     / (L, λ)
                                             h

in Linf rDisk⊗ is precisely the choice of a homotopy σ : |∆1 | × D × Ih → D × J
with σ0 = gf |Ih and σ1 = h, and with the evaluation σt : D × Ih → D × J at each
time t ∈ |∆1 | an oriented embedding. Such a 2-simplex      specifies an element [σ] =
(β, n) ∈ Brf r (gf ), where the integral factor n ∈ j (ZIj ) = i∈If Z has each entry
                                                   Q           Q

ni tracing the winding number of the x-vector in the derivative for σt |Di : Di → Dj
around 0. The j-th contribution to the braid group βj in β = (βj : j ∈ J) is given
by following the centers of the disks under the given homotopy
                                                                 
                                     1×0×1                σ|Ij
                              1                1
                     βj = |∆ | × Ij → |∆ | × D × Ij → Dj .

5.7. A remark on pairings of uncolored disks. We note that there are two
symmetric embeddings ι± : f r Disk⊗ → f rDisk⊗ from the symmetric monoidal
∞-category of uncolored disks. These embeddings are isomorphisms onto the full
subcategories spanned by totally negative, and totally positive disks respectively.
(One defines the uncolored disk category in direct analogy with the colored presen-
tation from above.)
   We can consider further the full subcategory spanned by both collections of to-
tally negative and totally positive disks. The two embeddings ι± are then connected
by a transformation ι : ∆1 × f r Disk⊗ → f rDisk⊗ with ι|{0} = ι− and ι|{1} = ι+ ,
and which is furthermore an equivalence onto this mixed subcategory. For any
             TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                          37


tuple of negatively colored disks x = (−I, µ), the corresponding natural morphism
ιx : ∆1 → f rDisk⊗ is the negating of the identity −idx : (−I, µ) → (+I, µ).
   One can realize the map ι directly at the level of simplicial categories or by solving
a cocartesian lifting problem, though the precise details are not so important for
us. Our only point here is that f rDisk⊗ itself can be considered as a type of
coupling of two copies of the uncolored disk category along with certain transition
morphisms.

                        6. f rDisk-monoidal ∞-categories
   We show that f rDisk is equifibered over Fin (Defintion 4.17). We then provide
basic information regarding f rDisk-subcategories, and symmetric monoidal sub-
categories, in f rDisk-monoidal ∞-categories. We also discuss a relation between
f rDisk-monoidality and monoidality over the colored little disk ∞-operad f rE2 .
   As a fundamental example for the text, we show in Section 7 that any ribbon
tensor category, in the 1-categorical sense of the term, admits a natural f rDisk-
monoidal structure. Following Section 7, we provide constructions of marked bor-
dism categories, then begin our descent into TQFTs.

6.1. f rDisk is equifibered over Fin.
Proposition 6.1. The components functor f rDisk⊗ → Fin⊗ gives f rDisk the
structure of an equifibered symmetric monoidal ∞-category over Fin.
Proof. According to our discussion around Corollary 4.13, the product functors for
f rDisk and Fin are induced by the products on the preceding simplicial categories.
Hence it suffices to show that the diagram

                       f rDisk × f rDisk
                                                ⨿       / f rDisk


                                                             
                            Fin × Fin
                                                ⨿          / Fin

is a pullback diagram of simplicial categories, in the strict sense of the term. For
this we need to show that the corresponding diagrams on objects and morphisms
are pullbacks.
    The case of objects is obvious. Let us now fix finite sets Iε and Jε with colored
lifts Iε and Jε . Take I = I0 ⨿ I1 and J = J0 ⨿ J1 , and define I and J similarly.
We consider the diagram of simplicial sets

    Homf rDisk (I0 , J0 ) × Homf rDisk (I1 , J1 )
                                                    ⨿        / Homf rDisk (I, J )   (20)


                                                                     
        HomFin (I0 , J0 ) × HomFin (I1 , J1 )
                                                    ⨿          / HomFin (I, J).

We note that the vertical maps here are given explicitly by taking maps on con-
nected components and forgetting the colorings
                 (σ : |∆n | × D × L → D × M) 7→ (π0 (σ) : L → M ).
  Since Homs over Fin are discrete, (20) is a pullback diagram if and only if, for
chosen set maps (f¯0 , f¯1 ) 7→ f¯, disjoint union provides an isomorphism between the
38                                         CRIS NEGRON


fibers
         Homf rDisk (I0 , J0 )f¯0 × Homf rDisk (I1 , J1 )f¯1 → Homf rDisk (I, J )f¯.   (21)
This is clear however since both spaces decompose over J as the product space
                     Y
                         Homf rDisk (Ij , {±0}), ± = color(j),
                         j∈J

and under this decomposition the disjoint union map (21) is just the identity.           □
   The same arguments show that the uncolored disk category f r Disk is equifibered
over Fin as well.
6.2. f rDisk-categories. As a shorthand, by a f rDisk-category we mean a f rDisk-
monoidal ∞-category. Similarly, by a f r Disk-category we mean a f r Disk-monoidal
∞-category.
Definition 6.2. For any f rDisk-category q : E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ we let E − and E +
denote the respective fibers over the negatively and positively colored singletons
{±0} in f rDisk ⊆ f rDisk⊗ . Given a colored set I, with negative and positive
indices I− and I+ respectively, the colored exponent E I for E ⊗ is defined as the
product
                             E I = (E − )I− × (E + )I+ .
   The fibers E ± are the underlying ∞-categories for a given f rDisk-category
E → f rDisk⊗ . According to the discussion of Section 5.7, one can think of
 ⊗

a f rDisk-category as a pair of f r Disk-categories coupled by a f r Disk-monoidal
functor.
   To elaborate, we have the two embeddings ι± : f r Disk⊗ → f rDisk⊗ and as-
sociated transformation ι : ∆1 × f r Disk⊗ → f rDisk⊗ whose image is the full
subcategory spanned by consistently colored disks. Hence, any f rDisk-category
E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ pulls pack to a cocartesian fibration
                                   ι∗ E ⊗ → ∆1 × f r Disk⊗ .
   The fibers of the above fibration over {ε} × f r Disk⊗ exhibits f r Disk-structures
qε : (E ε )⊗ → f r Disk⊗ on the underlying ∞-categories E ± . The unique cocartesian
solution to the the lifting problem
                         {0} × (E − )⊗                         4 / ι∗ E

                                                                
                         ∆1 × (E − )⊗                   / ∆1 × f r Disk⊗
                                             id×q−

then provides a f r Disk-monoidal functor
                                               d⊗              / (E + )⊗
                            (E − )⊗

                                      q−                  q+
                                             %      y
                                            f r Disk⊗                 .
Remark 6.3. Straightening provides an identification between our f rDisk-categories
and (colored) “framed disk algebras” in Cat∞ , in the sense of Ayala-Francis [1].
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                       39


6.3. Structure maps for f rDisk-categories.
Definition 6.4. For a given f rDisk-category E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ , the unit and prod-
uct functors
                     = E ⊗ → E ± and m : E ± × E ± ∼
            unit : ∗ ∼  ∅                          = E⊗       → E±
                                                             {±0,±1}

on the underlying ∞-categories E are the transport functors along the respective
                                  ±

like colored embeddings ∅ → D and D ⨿ D → D in f rDisk ⊆ f rDisk⊗ , respec-
tively. The transition functor d : E − → E + is the transport functor along the color
negating identity id : D− → D+ .
  We commonly understand the tuple of functors
               (unit : ∗ → E ± , m : E ± × E ± → E ± , d : E − → E + )
as the underlying structure maps for such a fibration E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ .
   We note that, since all disk embeddings D ⨿ D → D are isotopic (Proposi-
tion A.2), the product functors from Definition 6.4 are well-defined up to natural
isomorphism. For the sake of specificity however, we can fix the disk embedding
D ⨿ D → D as the one which maps the first disks by z 7→ 31 z − 12 and the second
disk by z 7→ 31 z + 12 .
Remark 6.5. We commonly understand an (uncolored) f r Disk-category F ⊗ →
f r Disk⊗ as a homotopical variant of a balanced monoidal category. In topological
terms, the braiding transformation for the product functor is provided by the co-
cartesian transformation ∆1 × (F × F ) → F over the rotation of the two disks
within the ambient disk |∆1 | × (D ⨿ D) → D, and the balancing transformation
∆1 × F → F is provided by rotating a single disk within itself |∆1 | × D → D.
    Similarly, from a f rDisk-category E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ , we extract our two ho-
motopical balanced monoidal categories (E ± )⊗ → f rDisk⊗ and a homotopically
balanced monoidal functor d⊗ : (E − )⊗ → (E + )⊗ .
6.4. f rDisk-categories are f rE2 -monoidal ∞-categories. We take a moment
to clarify the relationship between our monoidal ∞-categories, over the equifibered
∞-category f rDisk, and monoidal ∞-categories over the ∞-operad of little disks.
For the purposes of this discussion, the reader need only understand that an
∞-operad is an ∞-category O ⊗ equipped with a type of isofibration to finite
pointed sets O ⊗ → Fin∗ [57, Definition 2.1.1.10]. As with symmetric monoidal
∞-categories, the underlying ∞-category for an ∞-operad is the fiber over the
                  ⊗
singleton O = O{0}   .
   Given an ∞-operad O ⊗ , an O-monoidal ∞-category is a cocartesian fibration
E ⊙ → O ⊗ which has consistent fibers, as in (9). See [57, Definitions 2.1.1.10 &
2.1.2.13]. We note that any O-monoidal ∞-category is itself an ∞-operad, and that
the structure map E ⊙ → O ⊗ is a map of ∞-operads [57, Proposition 2.1.2.12].
   We have the disjoint union functor Fin⊗ → Fin∗ , (I, µ) 7→ I, and for a given op-
erad O ⊗ an envelope for O ⊗ is any ∞-category Env(O)⊗ which fits into a pullback
diagram
                             Env(O)⊗              / O⊗


                                                       
                              Fin⊗                  / Fin∗
                                       disj union
40                                   CRIS NEGRON


in Cat∞ . We assume additionally that the given diagram strictly commutes, and
that the projection to Fin⊗ is an isofibration.
Remark 6.6. Since the structure map for any ∞-operad is an isofibration, the
strict pullback Fin⊗ ×Fin∗ O ⊗ always provides a pullback, i.e. limit diagram, in
Cat∞ [58, 03G7]. So, any envelope admits a unique equivalence to the strict pull-
back, as a fibration over Fin⊗ .
   For any envelope Env(O)⊗ , composing with the symmetric structure map (not
disjoint union map!) for Fin⊗ produces a functor Env(O)⊗ → Fin∗ which realizes
Env(O)⊗ as a symmetric monoidal ∞-category [57, Corollary 2.2.4.5.]. The under-
lying ∞-category for the resulting fibration Env(O)⊗ → Fin∗ is identified with the
non-full subcategory
                                Env(O) ∼= Act(O) ⊆ O ⊗
consisting of all objects, but only active maps in O ⊗ . We have our primary example
of interest.
Example 6.7. The pullback diagram from (19) realizes the symmetric monoidal
∞-category of framed colored disks as an envelope f rDisk⊗ = Env(f rE2 ) for the
∞-operad of framed colored disks.
   Now, it was shown in works of Barkan, Haugseng, Kock, and Steinebrunner that
the corresponding envelope functor
                    Env = Fin⊗ ×Fin∗ − : Op∞ → (SM∞ )/ Fin⊗
is fully faithful [41], and furthermore an equivalence onto the full subcategory
of equifibered ∞-categories over Fin [3]. Under this equivalence O-monoidal ∞-
categories, in the sense of [57], are identified with Env(O)-monoidal ∞-categories,
in the sense of Definition 4.20. Restricting to our particular case of interest, and
noting [58, 01ZS], we obtain equivalences between f rE2 -monoidal ∞-categories and
f rDisk-monoidal ∞-categories.
Theorem 6.8 ([41, 3]). The envelope functor induces equivalences of ∞-categories
                                           ∼
                        Env : f rE2 -Cats → f rDisk-Cats.
6.5. Symmetric subcategories in f rDisk-categories. Let E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ be
a f rDisk-category and consider full subcategories L ± ⊆ E ± which are stable
under isomorphism in the underlying ∞-categories E ± . We define the associated
subcategory L ⊗ ⊆ E ⊗ generated by the L ± to be the (unique) full subcategory
whose fibers over f rDisk⊗ fit into strict pullback diagrams
                               Lt⊗              / LI                           (22)

                                                   
                               Et⊗              / E I,
                                         ρ!

where t = (I, µ) is arbitrary. Since the inclusion L I → E I is an isofibration in
this case, and since each ρ! is an equivalence, the above pullback diagram implies
                                                                     ∼
that the transport equivalences for E ⊗ restrict to equivalences Lt⊗ → L I for L ⊗
as well (Lemma 3.22).
   Now, according to Section 6.4, we might imagine E ⊗ as a symmetric monoidal ∞-
category of disks which are labeled by objects in the E ± . The symmetric structure
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                       41


is then given by taking disjoint unions of such labeled disks. From this perspective
one expects that the subcategory L ⊗ of disks with labels in L ± forms a symmetric
monoidal subcategory in E ⊗ . One can show that this is in fact the case.
Lemma 6.9. For full subcategories L ± ⊆ E ± which are stable under isomorphism,
the associated ∞-category L ⊗ is naturally symmetric monoidal and the inclusion
L ⊗ → E ⊗ is a symmetric monoidal functor. Furthermore, L ⊗ is stable under
isomorphism in E ⊗ .
   Note that the assertion that the inclusion L ⊗ → E ⊗ is symmetric monoidal
forces the symmetric structure map L ⊗ → Fin∗ to be the one obtained from E ⊗
via restriction. We delay the proof of Lemma 6.9 to Appendix A.5.
Remark 6.10. A version of Lemma 6.9 holds for non-full subcategories L ± ⊆ E ± .
The construction of the category L ⊗ is more delicate in this case, however.
6.6. f rDisk-subcategories.
Proposition 6.11. Let q : E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ be a f rDisk-category and L ± be full
                                                      ⊗
subcategories in the underlying ∞-categories E ± = E{±0}   which are stable under
isomorphism. Suppose also that
      • The unit maps unit : ∗ → E ± have image in L ± .
      • The transition map d : E − → E + sends L − into L + .
      • The product functors m : E ± × E ± → E ± send L ± × L ± into L ± .
Then there is a unique, full f rDisk-subcategory L ⊗ in E ⊗ which is stable under
isomorphism and has underlying ∞-categories L ± .
   The f rDisk-subcategory L ⊗ is, as one expects, precisely the symmetric sub-
category constructed in Section 6.5. So we are giving necessary (and sufficient)
conditions for the associated symmetric subcategory L ⊗ from Lemma 6.9 to be a
f rDisk-subcategory. To assist with the proof we record a related lemma.
Lemma 6.12. For any f rDisk-category q : E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ and morphism f :
s = (I, µ) → t = (J , ν) in f rDisk⊗ , the corresponding transport functor fits in to
a diagram
                                Es⊗
                                         f!
                                                / Et⊗

                               ρ! ∼              ρ! ∼
                                                  
                                EI              / EJ
                                         mf

in Cat∞ in which mf decomposes as a composite of functors D : E I → E I0 ,
M : E I0 → E J0 , and U : E J0 → E J where
     • I0 is obtained from I by changing some negatively colored indices positive,
        and D applies the transition functor d : E − → E + at all such indices.
     • J0 ⊆ J is the image of f : D × If → D × J , or rather π0 (f ), and M is
        an iterated application of the product functors m : E ± × E ± → E ± .
     • U : E J0 → E J inserts the unit unit : ∗ → E ± at all indices in the comple-
        ment J \ J0 .
   The proof of Lemma 6.12 is time consuming but straightforward, and is provided
in Appendix A.4. We return to our original proposition.
42                                   CRIS NEGRON


Proof of Proposition 6.11. From the description of transport provided in Lemma
6.12, and our hypotheses, it is clear that L ⊗ is stable under transport along arbi-
trary maps in f rDisk⊗ . Since L ⊗ is stable under isomorphism in E ⊗ , stability un-
der transport implies that, for any object x in L ⊗ , map q(x) → ȳ in f rDisk⊗ , and
q-cocartesian lift x → y in E ⊗ , the object y is also in L ⊗ . Hence, by fullness, the
structure map E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ restricts to a cocartesian fibration L ⊗ → f rDisk⊗
and the inclusion L ⊗ → E ⊗ preserves cocartesian edges. It follows that the trans-
port functors for E ⊗ , along maps in f rDisk⊗ , restrict to provide transport functors
for L ⊗ .
   We need to show that the transport functors for L ⊗ induce the requisite decom-
positions of the fibers, as outlined in Definition 4.20. Consider an arbitrary object
t = (I, µ) in f rDisk⊗ and the separation t̃ = (I, idI ). By assumption we have
pullback diagrams

                                     Lt̃⊗                             / LI


                                                                        
                                     Et̃⊗
                                                       ∼              / EI

in which the vertical maps are isofibrations, which implies the restricted functor
                                                                  ∼
Lt̃⊗ → L I is an equivalence. The transport equivalence Et⊗ → E I similarly
                                ∼
restricts to an equivalence Lt⊗ → L I . From the diagram

                              Lt̃⊗                                           / Lt⊗

                                     ∼                                   ∼
                                              !                   }
                                                      L   I


we conclude now that the transport functor Lt̃⊗ → Lt⊗ is an equivalence.
  Consider now the maps t = (I, µ) → t′ = I just given by the identity on I.
From the diagram

                             Lt̃⊗
                                                       ∼                     / Lt⊗

                                     ∼
                                                  !           }
                                                      Lt⊗
                                                        ′


                                                                                         ∼
we conclude that transport provides an equivalence Lt⊗ → Lt⊗  ′ as well. Writing

out µ : I → K and taking tk = Ik for k ∈ K, we similarly observer a diagram

                          Lt̃⊗
                                                       ∼                         / Lt⊗


                                         Q$      z
                                                    ⊗
                                 ∼          k∈K L  tk                        ∼

                                                       ∼
                                                        
                                                      LI
             TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                           43

                                                        ∼ Q
to find that transport provides a final equivalence Lt⊗ → k Lt⊗ k
                                                                  . So we see that
the cocartesian fibration L ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ satisfies the factorization constraints
from Definition 4.17, and verify the f rDisk-monoidal structure on L ⊗ .        □

             7. Disk categories from ribbon tensor categories
   We show that any discrete ribbon tensor category A♡ produces a gaggle of
                                                     ⊗
f rDisk-monoidal ∞-categories q⋆ : A⊗   ⋆ → f rDisk (Proposition 7.11 and Corol-
lary 7.12). Here A is the category of cochains A = Ch(A♡ ) and ⋆ is a modifier.
Our constructions follow from a general result which asserts that any functor be-
tween balanced monoidal categories d : E − → E + determines a f rDisk-monoidal
∞-category q : E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ .
   In order to support our analysis of unbounded complexes over cocomplete cate-
gories, like A♡ , we recall basic information concerning pro-finite completion. Pro-
finite objects are essential tools for us, as a pro-finite category is always on the
“other side” of a finitely generated linear abelian category under a duality.
7.1. f rDisk-categories from discrete balanced categories. Recall that a bal-
anced monoidal category E is a (discrete) braided monoidal category which is
equipped with a natural isomorphism θ : idE → idE which satisfies
                                 θx⊗y = (θx ⊗ θy )cyx cxy ,
for any pair of objects x and y in E, where c is the braiding. A balanced functor
between balanced monoidal categories E and D, with associated transformations
θE and θD , is a braided monoidal functor F : E → D which satisfies F θE = θD F .
    A balanced tensor category E is a ribbon tensor category if there is an equality
θx∗ = θx∗ whenever x is rigid in E.
    We consider a pair of balanced monoidal categories E − and E + equipped with a
balanced functor d : E − → E + . For such a pairing, and colored set I we consider
the colored exponent E I , as in Definition 6.2, and for any map f : (I, µ) → (J , ν)
in Linf rDisk⊗ , with underlying disk arrangement D × If → D × J , we let
                                      mf : E I → E J                                  (23)
denote the associated product with constituent factors
                mjf : E Ij → E color(j) , x 7→ dεi1 (xi1 ) ⊗ . . . ⊗ dεir (xr ).
Here each Ij = {i1 , . . . , ir } is given the ordering specified by the map f (see Section
5.6) and                           
                                       id if color(i) = color(j)
                          dεi =
                                       d if color(i) = − color(j).
We refer the the map mf from (23) as the colored product functor for the triple
{E − , E + , d} over f .
   To be clear, mf sends the excess factors E I\If to a point, i.e. mf is a compos-
ite of the projection E I → E If with the aforementioned multiplications, and for
any index j ∈ J with empty preimage the map (23) just chooses the unit object
1color(j) : ∗ → E color(j) . For any composite gf : I → L in Linf rE2 we also have
the natural isomorphism
                                            ∼
                                            =
                                      mg mf → mgf
provided by the associators and the monoidal structure on d.
44                                       CRIS NEGRON


Proposition 7.1. Given any triple E = (E − , E + , d) consisting of balanced monoidal
categories and a balanced monoidal functor d : E − → E + , there is a canonically
defined f rDisk-category q : E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ whose fiber over each colored set (I, µ)
                           ⊗
is the colored exponent E(I,µ)  = E I and whose transport functor along any map
f : (I, µ) → (J , ν) in Linf rDisk⊗ is the colored product functor

                                   f! = mf : E I → E J .

     The proof is covered in Appendix B.


7.2. Describing the fibrations q : E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ . The fibration q : E ⊗ →
f rDisk⊗ is defined by taking a full subcategory E ⊗ ⊆ Ed⊗ in a certain cocartesian
fibration q̃ : Ed⊗ → f rDisk⊗ associated to the map d. We take in particular
Ed⊗ = Ed⊗ ×f r Disk⊗ f rDisk⊗ , for Ed⊗ → f r Disk⊗ the f r Disk-category defined via
the balanced monoidal category Ed from Section B.3. The fibration Ed⊗ → f r Disk
is constructed explicitly in Section B.2, and we thus obtain an explicit description
of the fibration q : E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ . We record the relevant low-dimensional
information for q.
   Before providing this description however, we recall some preliminary topological
information. For a 2-simplex

                                           (J , ν)
                                            ;
                                     f                  g

                                                                  $
                            (I, µ)                              / (L, λ)
                                               h


in Linf rDisk⊗ with specifying homotopy σ : |∆1 | × D × Ih → D × L from gf to h
the associatedQframed braid [σ] = (β, n) ∈ Brf r (gf ) from Section 5.6 has underlying
symmetry in j SIl exchanging the ordering on Il induced by gf with the ordering
induced by h. Hence β provides, via the braidings on E ± , a natural isomorphism
β : mgf → mh . The framed braid itself [σ] = (β, n) then induces a transformation

                  ζβ,n = β ◦ mgf (θn ) ◦ assoc : mg mf ∼
                                                       = mgf → mh                             (24)

in which the integral parameter n ∈ j ZIj acts via the balancing transformaions
                                       Q
on the various factors.
   Returning to the fibration E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ , the objects in E ⊗ consist of a choice
of finite colored set I with a map to a finite set µ : I → K and an object x in
E I . For f : (I, µ) → (J , ν) in the specified subcategory Linf rDisk⊗ , a map
α : (x, I, µ) → (y, J , ν) in E ⊗ over f is the choice of a map α : mf (x) → y. A
2-simplex

             Ay                                        (J , ν)
                                                        ;
         α        κ                                f                   g
                            over                            σ                     in Linf rDisk⊗
                                                                             $
     x                /z             (I, µ)                               / (L, λ)
             γ                                              h
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                            45


is the choice of maps α : mf (x) → y, κ : mg (y) → z, and γ : mh (x) → z which
produce a diagram
                                              mg (α)
                             mg mf (x)                      / mg (y)

                             ζβ,n                                    κ
                                    
                              mh (x)                          / z
                                                γ
    L
in E , where (β, n) is the framed braid specified by σ.
   One should recall at this point that E ⊗ is a symmetric monoidal ∞-category and
that the fibration q : E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ is a symmetric monoidal functor, as is the
restriction to linear disk arrangements q : E ⊗ |Linf rDisk⊗ → Linf rDisk⊗ . From
the above description we see that the underlying ∞-category for E ⊗ |Linf rDisk⊗ is
the ∞-category of disks labeled by objects in E ± and (linear) disk embeddings.
The symmetric structure is given by taking disjoint unions of such labeled disks.
   Since the inclusion Linf rDisk⊗ → f rDisk⊗ is an equivalence (Lemma A.4),
and the structure map q : E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ is an isofibration, we have that the
inclusion E ⊗ |Linf rE2 → E ⊗ is an equivalence as well (Lemma 3.22). From this
one obtains a precise description of the homotopy category for E ⊗ , as a discrete
symmetric monoidal category.
                                                                                       ⊗
Lemma 7.2. For (E + , E − , d) as in Proposition 7.1, the homotopy category h E{0}
of the underlying ∞-category for the symmetric monoidal structure E ⊗ → Fin∗ has
objects given by objects x in E I , across varying I, and morphisms [αf ] : x → y
given by the choice of a linear arrangement of disks f : D ×I → D ×J coupled with
a morphism α : mf (x) → y. Two such maps [αf ] : x → y and [αf′ ′ ] : x → y are
              ⊗
equal in h E{0}   if and only if they are related by the action of the framed braid group,
i.e. if there is a framed braid (β, n) from f to f ′ for which we have an equality
                                        α′ ◦ ζβ,n |x = α.
The symmetric monoidal structure is given by taking disjoint unions of disks and
(cartesian) products of morphisms in E ± .
   Here, again, by a framed braid (β, n) from f to f ′ we mean a framed braid for
which the associated elements in the symmetric groups β̄j ∈ SIj are the unique
permutations which exchange the ordering on Ij defined by f with the ordering
defined by f ′ .

7.3. Pro-finite objects. We show below that the category of unbounded cochains
A = Ch(A♡ ) over a ribbon tensor category produces a f rDisk-category A⊗ →
f rDisk⊗ . Here the positive fiber is a pro-finite variant of Ch(A♡ ) and the negative
fiber is Ch(A♡ )op . Both unboundedness and pro-finiteness cause some technical
issues, which we resolve over the next two subsections.
   Fix a tensor category A♡ , or more generally a finitely generated linear abelian
category (Definition C.8). First, the category A♡   pro-f in of pro-finite objects in A
                                                                                       ♡
                           ♡
consists of objects x in A which come equipped with a filtered collection Bx of
inclusions iλ : xλ → x, over a filtered category Λ, which satisfy the following:
      • An inclusion i′ : x′ → x belongs to Bx if and only if there is a map iλ :
         xλ → x in the collection which factors through i′ .
46                                   CRIS NEGRON


      • Each quotient πλ : x → xλ = x/xλ has xλ of finite length.
      • The natural map
                                  x → lim xλ                                        (25)
                                      ←−
                                            λ
        is an isomorphism.
Morphisms between objects in A♡                                                µ
                                  pro-f in are maps f : x → y for which x ×y (y → y)
                        µ
lies in Bx whenever y → y lies in By . Equivalently, we require each composite
x → y → yµ to factor through some projection x → xλ → yµ . We call the
collection Bx for pro-finite x the base for x around 0, and a general map f : x → y
in A♡ between pro-finite objects is called continuous if it is a map in A♡ pro-f in .

Remark 7.3. The indexing category Λ here is not small but, after identifying
A♡ with a corepresentation category [75, Theorem 5.1], one sees that Λ is is fact
essentially small. So the limit limλ xλ always exists in A♡ .
                                ←−
Remark 7.4. Filteredness, and the first point above, tells us that the intersection
iλµ : xλ ×x xµ → x is in Bx whenever the constituent maps iλ : xλ → x and
iµ : xµ → x are in Bx .
   We note that A♡ and A♡   pro-f in share the subcategory of finite length objects. In
particular, each finite length object is naturally pro-finite and each map between
finite length objects is continuous. So we have fully faithful inclusions
                               A♡ ← A♡       ♡
                                     f in → Apro-f in .

The objects in A♡                                              ♡
                 f in are precisely the discrete objects in Apro-f in , in the sense that
0 → x is in the base around 0 for pro-finite x if and only if x is of finite length.
   When A♡ is a tensor category, we endow A♡      pro-f in with the monoidal structure
induced by the completed tensor product
                             x ⊗ y := x⊗y
                                       b = lim xλ ⊗ yµ .
                                           ←−
                                                 λ,µ

The object x ⊗ y is naturally pro-finite, with canonical base given by all subobjects
w → x ⊗ y which contain the kernel of some structural projection x ⊗ y → xλ ⊗
yµ . When A♡ is braided (resp. balanced) the braiding (resp. balancing structure)
induces a unique braiding (resp. balancing structure) on A♡   pro-f in under which the
             ♡        ♡
inclusion Af in → Apro-f in is a map of braided (resp. balanced) monoidal categories.
    In the following statement, the opposite category (A♡ )op is taken to be monoidal
under the opposite product x ⊗op y = y ⊗ x. When A♡ is braided the opposite
category is naturally braided via the same operations copxy = cxy and any subsequent
             ♡                  ♡ op
twist for A is a twist for (A ) as well.
Lemma 7.5. For any tensor category A♡ , the duality functor provides an equiva-
lence of monoidal categories
                                             ∼
                               −∗ : (A♡ )op → A♡
                                               pro-f in .                           (26)
         ♡
When A is furthermore ribbon, this equivalence is an equivalence of balanced
monoidal categories.
   We note that the expression for the dual x∗ := Hom(x, 1) is valid even when x
is of infinite length, where Hom is the inner-Hom functor for the tensor action of
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                          47


A♡ on itself. In the above expression (26) our duality functor is, more specifically,
this inner-Hom functor on A♡ .

Proof. First recall that duality is an equivalence on the full subcategory of finite
                                op ∼
length objects, −∗ : (A♡  f in )   → A♡f in . We understand that any object x in A
                                                                                       ♡

is canonically expressed as the filtered colimit x = limλ xλ of its finite length sub-
                                                       −→
objects xλ → x, and that all maps in A♡ send finite subobjects to finite sub-
objects. Since the duality functor exchanges colimits with limits, we now have
the canonical expression for the dual x∗ = lim x∗λ which endows x∗ with the base
                                                ←−
provided by the kernels of the projections x∗ → x∗λ . So we see that the duality func-
tor −∗ : (A♡ )op → A♡ naturally has image in the non-full subcategory A♡        pro-f in
of pro-finite objects. The inverse to −∗ is given by the continuous (right) dual
∗
  − : A♡             ♡ op ∗
        pro-f in → (A ) , z = lim
                                     ∗
                                       z .
                                  −→τ τ                                         ∼
    As for the tensor structure, we have the natural isomorphisms (xλ ⊗ yµ )∗ → yµ∗ ⊗
x∗λ for finite-length objects which induce unique natural isomorphisms (x ⊗ y)∗ →
y ∗ ⊗ x∗ for arbitrary objects in A♡ . This gives −∗ its monoidal structure. Com-
patibility with the braiding follows from the identification (cxy )∗ = cx∗ y∗ whenever
x and y are of finite length [2, Lemma 2.1.11], which forces such an equality at
all objects, and the identification for the twist θx∗ = θx∗ is precisely the ribbon
condition.                                                                            □

   We note that the opposite category (A♡ )op itself is both complete and cocom-
plete, since A♡ is both complete and cocomplete. Hence Lemma 7.5 tells us that
the category of pro-finite objects A♡
                                    pro-f in is both complete and cocomplete as well,
and also abelian. When A♡ is finite, and thus has enough projectives, we see that
A♡pro-f in has enough injectives.

Lemma 7.6. Let A♡ be a tensor category.
    (1) The forgetful functor A♡           ♡
                               pro-f in → A preserves all limits.

    (2) Given any essentially small cofiltered diagram K op → A♡ f in in which all of
        the transition maps xα → xβ are surjective, and any pro-finite x, a map
        f : x → limα xα in A♡ is a (continuous) isomorphism in A♡      pro-f in if and
                  ←−
        only if the following hold:
         (a) Each composite fα : x → xα factors through a structural projection
             πµ : x → xµ , and the resulting map xµ → xα is surjective.
         (b) Each structural projection πλ : x → xλ factors through some composite
             fβ : x → x β .

Proof. (1) Follows from the fact that the duality functor −∗ = Hom(−, 1) : (A♡ )op →
A♡ is left exact and restricts to an equivalence onto A♡   pro-f in . (2) Continuity re-
quires that each composite fα factors through some πλ . The fact that the (now
continuous) map f : x → limα xα is an isomorphism if and only if each projection
                           ←−
πλ factor through some fβ follows from the dual statement in A♡ . Namely, one
sees that a map from a filtered colimit in which all transition functions are injective
limα yα → y is an isomorphism if and only if each constituent map yα → y factors
−→
through some inclusion yµ → y of a finite length subobject, and the resulting map
48                                      CRIS NEGRON


yα → yµ is injective, and each inclusion yλ → y from a finite length subobject fac-
tors through some yβ → y. The first condition tells us that the map limα yα → y
                                                                       −→
is injective and the latter forces surjectivity.                                 □

     Applying Proposition 7.1 to Lemma 7.5, we observe the following.
Proposition 7.7. For any ribbon tensor category A♡ , the triple
            (A♡ )− = (A♡ )op , (A♡ )+ = A♡           ∗    ♡ op
                                         pro-f in , − : (A )   → A♡
                                                                  pro-f in

defines a f rDisk-monoidal ∞-category q ♡ : (A♡ )⊗ → f rDisk⊗ as in Proposition
7.1.
7.4. Pro-finite complexes. In this work we have a fundamental interest in cochains
over ribbon tensor categories. We consider pro-finite completion in this specific set-
ting.
   For complexes Ch(A♡ ) over a tensor category A♡ , degree-wise duality provides
an equivalence
                                    ∼
                   −∗ : Ch(A♡ )op → Ch(A♡             ∗ n
                                        pro-f in ), (x ) = (x
                                                             −n ∗
                                                               ) .                       (27)
This degree-wise duality functor is, however, exactly the inner-Hom functor for the
tensor action of Ch(A♡ ) on itself. We note also that Ch(A♡ ) is itself a tensor
category, with finite objects precisely the subcategory
                                 Ch(A♡ )f in = Chb (A♡
                                                     f in )

of bounded complexes of finite length objects.
Lemma 7.8. For any tensor category A♡ , the forgetful functor
                                 Ch(A♡                ♡
                                     pro-f in ) → Ch(A )

identifies complexes over A♡                                          ♡
                           pro-f in with the non-full subcategory Ch(A )pro-f in of
pro-finite cochains.
     We claim, in fact, that these two pro-finite subcategories in Ch(A♡ ) are equal.

Proof. The above discussion at (27) tells us that the inclusion Ch(A♡             pro-f in ) →
Ch(A♡ )pro-f in is fully faithful and essentially surjective. To see that every object
in Ch(A♡ )pro-f in actually lies in the image we note first that limits in Ch(A♡ ) are
calculated degree-wise. Second, we note that for any basic inclusion xλ → x into
a pro-finite complex, and intermediate subobject (xλ )n → (x′ )n → xn , there is an
intermediate subcomplex xλ → x′ → x with x′ equal to (x′ )n in degree n. Thus x′
lies in the base as well.
    We now have that the base around 0 for x produces, in each degree, a base around
0 for xn . So each xn lies in A♡     pro-f in . The fact that the differential is continuous
follows from the fact that x is the limit of its finite quotients x = limλ xλ . So we
                                                                             ←−
see that x lies in Ch(A♡ pro-f in ).                                                         □

   By the materials from Section 7.3 we understand that the category Ch(A♡ pro-f in )
carries a completed product so that the duality equivalence (27) is an equivalence
of monoidal categories, and of balanced categories when A♡ is ribbon. Since the
product v ⊗ w of complexes in Ch(A♡ ) has degree n component (v ⊗ w)n =
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                         49


⊕n1 +n2 =n v n1 ⊗ wn2 , it is easy to see that the product on Ch(A♡
                                                                  pro-f in ) is given
explicit by the formula
                                                                 Y
                    b n−1 → (x⊗y)
  x ⊗ y = · · · → (x⊗y)            b n → · · · , with (x⊗y)
                                                        b n=             xn1 ⊗y
                                                                              b n2 .
                                                                       n1 +n2 =n

In particular, the inclusions from the full subcategories of partially bounded, locally
finite complexes

                 Ch− (A♡
                       f in )                                 Ch+ (A♡
                                                                    f in )
                                    *                    u
                                        Ch(A♡
                                            pro-f in )

are both monoidal. We record the following for the sake of referencing.
Corollary 7.9. Given a ribbon tensor category A♡ , duality provides an equivalence
of balanced monoidal categories
                                              ∼
                          −∗ : Ch(A♡ )op → Ch(A♡
                                               pro-f in ).

Proof. In this case Ch(A♡ ) is ribbon, under the signed braiding cxy = ⊕n,m (−1)nm c♡
                                                                                    xn y m
                                   ♡
and balancing structure θx = ⊕n θxn . So this is just a particular instance of Lemma
7.5.                                                                               □
  The following bit of homological algebra is fundamental.
Proposition 7.10. For any tensor category A♡ , the monoidal products on Ch(A♡ )
and Ch(A♡
        pro-f in ) preserve quasi-isomorphisms in each factor.

Proof. Via duality, it suffices to prove the result for the product on Ch(A♡ ). Since
the tensor functor x ⊗ − for generic x in Ch(A♡ ) commutes with mapping cones,
it suffices to show that x ⊗ y is acyclic whenever y is acyclic. For this we write y
as a directed colimit y = limn y(n) for the bounded subcomplexes
                            −→
         y(n) = · · · → 0 → y −n → y −n+1 → · · · → y n−1 → Z n (y) → 0 → · · · .
Since the product x ⊗ − commutes with arbitrary colimits we have x ⊗ y = limn x ⊗
                                                                           −→
y(n).
    For each constituent complex x ⊗ y(n) the inclusion x ⊗ Z −n (y) → x ⊗ y(n) is a
quasi-isomorphism. This is clear by a simple spectral sequence argument using the
filtration on x ⊗ y(n) provided by the degree on x [79, Theorem 5.5.11].
    We note that the degree m cocycles in x ⊗ Z −n (y) are precisely the subspace
Z  m+n
       (x) ⊗ Z −n (y), and that in x ⊗ y(n + 1) these cocycles are all bounded by
the degree m − 1 subspace Z m+n (x) ⊗ y −n−1 ⊆ (x ⊗ y)m−1 . Hence the sequence
x ⊗ Z −n (y) → x ⊗ y(n) → x ⊗ y(n + 1) induces the 0 map on cohomology

                                   H ∗ x ⊗ y(n)
                                                
                                     6
                                ∼
                                =

                                                                   (
          H ∗ x ⊗ Z −n (y)                                   / H ∗ x ⊗ y(n + 1) ,
                                                                              
                                              0

and it follows that each inclusion x ⊗ y(n) → x ⊗ y(n + 1) induces
                                                                 the 0 map on
cohomology. Thus we conclude that the colimit limn H ∗ x ⊗ y(n) vanishes.
                                               −→
50                                  CRIS NEGRON


  Now, any finitely generated abelian category (Definition C.8) is Grothendieck
abelian, so that directed colimits are exact. Hence, from the expressions
      B m x ⊗ y = lim B m x ⊗ y(n) and Z m x ⊗ y) = lim Z m x ⊗ y(n)
                                                                        
                     −→                                    −→
                      n                                         n
and the exact sequences
           0 → B m x ⊗ y(n) → Z m x ⊗ y(n) → H m x ⊗ y(n) → 0,
                                                       

we conclude in this case that, for all m ∈ Z, H m (x⊗y) = limn H ∗ x⊗y(n) = 0.
                                                                         
                                                                                    □
                                                          −→
7.5. Disk categories from ribbon cochains.
Proposition 7.11. For any ribbon tensor category A♡ , with associated ribbon
tensor category A = Ch(A♡ ) of unbounded cochains, the pair of balanced monoidal
categories A− = Aop and A+ = Apro-f in , along with the balanced duality equivalence
                                          ∼
                                −∗ : Aop → Apro-f in ,
determines a f rDisk-monoidal ∞-category q : A⊗ → f rDisk⊗ . The fibers of A⊗
over colored sets are the colored exponents A⊗         I
                                             (I,µ) = A and the transport functor
along any map f : (I, µ) → (J , ν) in Linf rDisk⊗ is the associated colored product
functor mf : AI → AJ from (23).
   The f rDisk-category of unbounded cochains contains all other homologically
oriented f rDisk-categories of interest.
Corollary 7.12. For the following full subcategories A⊗          ⊗
                                                          ⋆ ⊆ A , the structure map
q : A → f rDisk restricts to a cocartesian fibration q⋆ : A⋆ → f rDisk⊗ which
     ⊗              ⊗                                           ⊗

gives A⊗
       ⋆ the structure of a f rDisk-monoidal ∞-category.
      • The full subcategory A⊗                                                −
                                 f in spanned by the finite length complexes Af in =
        Chb (A♡
              f in )
                    op
                       and A+          b  ♡                              I       I
                            f in = Ch (Af in ), and their higher powers Af in ⊆ A .
     • The full subcategory A⊗
                             l-f in spanned by partially bounded locally finite com-
                           −
       plexes Al-f in = Ch (A♡
                −
                               f in )
                                      op
                                         and A+          +   ♡
                                              l-f in = Ch (Af in ), and their higher
                 I       I
       powers Al-f in ⊆ A .
     • The full subcategory A⊗conn spanned by (co)connective complexes Aconn =
                                                                               −
          ≤0                         ≥0   ♡
       Ch (A♡ )op and A+  conn = Ch     (Apro-f in ), and their higher powers AIconn ⊆
        I
       A .
Furthermore, in each case the inclusion A⊗          ⊗
                                          ⋆ → A is a f rDisk-monoidal functor.

Proof. Apply Proposition 6.11 to the f rDisk-category A⊗ → f rDisk⊗ .               □
  By the explicit construction of the f rDisk-category associated to a triple as in
Proposition 7.1, we also have the apparent f rDisk-monoidal inclusion (A♡ )⊗ →
A⊗ which identifies (A♡ )⊗ with the full subcategory in A⊗ spanned by complexes
concentrated in degree 0.
Lemma 7.13. The inclusions (A♡ )I → AI extend to a f rDisk-monoidal functor
                           (A♡ )⊗                        / A⊗


                                          $    |
                                          f rE2
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                       51


which identifies (A♡ )⊗ with the full subcategory in A⊗ spanned by complexes which
are concentrated in degree 0.
Notation 7.14. Given a ribbon tensor category A♡ , q : A⊗ → f rDisk⊗ always
denotes the f rDisk-monoidal ∞-category of unbounded cochains, as in Proposition
7.11.

                   8. Anomalous bordisms with topology
   We construct a symmetric monoidal ∞-category Bordnc    ∗ of non-compact, anoma-
lous, trivially marked bordisms in 3-dimensions. In Section 9 we use this ∞-
category, and a canonical symmetric monoidal functor ∂out : Bordnc   ∗ → f rDisk, to
construct a symmetric monoidal ∞-category Bordnc      E  of  3-dimensional  E -marked
bordisms which we associate to any f rDisk-monoidal ∞-category q : E ⊗ →
f rDisk⊗ .
   The majority of this section is spent dealing with various technical minutiae and
general tomfoolery. So we actually suggest reading the synopsis provided in Section
8.1, then briskly skimming the remaining contents. The conscientious reader can
return to the section at a later point to digest the details, as the need arises.

8.1. Marked bordisms, in principle. At a basic level, our trivially marked bor-
dism ∞-category Bordnc
                     ∗ appears as follows: Objects are surfaces marked by colored
disks ζ : D × I → Σ. Maps between such marked surfaces Mf : Σζ → Σ′η are 3-
dimensional bordisms M : Σ → Σ′ which are equipped with an additional oriented
embedding of cylinders
                              f : Cyl ×I → M.
This embedding preserves boundaries, and hence defines two disk embeddings at
the boundaries fΣ : D × I → Σ and fΣ′ : D × J → Σ′ . We require that fΣ recovers
the given markings ζ on Σ, and that fΣ′ maps into the image of the markings η
on Σ′ . So, at the outgoing boundary we recover an embedding of colored disks
∂out (f ) : D × I → D × J , i.e. a map in f rDisk.
   For the higher structure, we allow the cylinders f : Cyl ×I → M to move
within M under homotopy. In this way, an n-simplex in Bordnc  ∗ traces out an n-
simplex in f rDisk at the outgoing boundary, and we observe a map of ∞-categories
∂out : Bordnc                                    nc
              ∗ → f rDisk. Furthermore, Bord∗ admits the expected symmetric
monoidal structure under disjoint union, and the map ∂out is the linear term of
a corresponding symmetric monoidal functor to the ∞-category of framed colored
disks
                             ⊗             ⊗         ⊗
                           ∂out  : (Bordnc
                                        ∗ ) → f rDisk .
   Below we take special care to accomodate the anomaly, deal appropriately with
collars around the boundary, mod out by diffeomorphism in dimension 3, etc. How-
ever, for almost all of what is done in this paper, the above description of the bor-
dism category will suffice. So, upon first engagement, the reader might only skim
the contents of this section, then proceed directly to subsequent materials.

8.2. Marked surfaces and bordisms. By a marked surface Σζ we mean a com-
pact oriented surface Σ with a choice of an oriented embedding
                                  ζ : D × I → Σ.
52                                       CRIS NEGRON


A bordism Mf : Σζ → Σ′η between marked surfaces is an oriented 3-dimensional
bordism between the underlying surfaces
                                                          ∼
                                    M, ϕ : Σ ⨿ Σ̄′ → ∂M,
along with a choice of collar around the boundary
                          ϕ̃ : Σ × [0, δ) ⨿ Σ̄′ × (1 − δ, 1] ,→ M
and a choice of embedding f : Cyla ×I → M from cylinders Cyla = D × [0, a], with
a > 0, whose intersections at the boundaries
     p2 : (Cyla ×I) ×M Σ = D × I → Σ and p′2 : (Cyla ×I) ×M Σ′ = D × I → Σ′
recover the markings on the incoming boundary, and send D × I into the image of
the markings on the outgoing boundary.
   We consider the collar on M only up to equivalence, where two collars are equiv-
alent if they are equalized by a third, i.e. if there is a diagram

                                  Σ × [0, ε) ⨿ Σ̄′ × (1 − ε, 1]
                           incl                               incl

                     u                                                    *
 Σ × [0, δ) ⨿ Σ̄′ × (1 − δ, 1]                                    Σ × [0, δ ′ ) ⨿ Σ̄′ × (1 − δ ′ , 1]

                             ϕ̃                                   ϕ̃′
                                              *       t
                                                  M
at some ε ≤ δ, δ ′ . We also assume that f : Cyla ×I → M is constant towards the
boundary of M in the sense that
                f |D×[0,ε)×I : (z, t, i) 7→ (ζ(z, i), t) ∈ Σ × [0, ε) ⊆ M

      and f |D×(a−ε,a]×I : (z, t, i) 7→ (ζ(z, i), 1 − a + t) ∈ Σ̄′ × (1 − ε, 1] ⊆ M
for some small ε > 0.

8.3. Mapping complexes at a fixed bordism. Given marked surfaces ζ : D ×
I → Σ and η : D × J → Σ′ , and an oriented bordism M : Σ → Σ′ (with fixed
collar), we take
                            Hom(Σζ , Σ′η ; M )a
the subcomplex in Maps(Cyla ×I, M ) whose n-simplices consist of continuous maps
σ : |∆n | × Cyla ×I → M which evaluate at each t ∈ |∆n | to a smooth embedding
σt : Cyla ×I → M whose behaviors around the boundary are as prescribed in
Section 8.2.
                                                   ∼
   For each smooth oriented isomorphism w : [0, a] → [0, b] with ∂w/∂t = 1 around
                                                                    ∼
the boundaries we have the induced oriented isomorphism Cyla → Cylb which
induces a further isomorphism of simplicial complexes
                                                      ∼
                                                      =
                     w∗ : Hom(Σζ , Ση ; M )b → Hom(Σζ , Ση ; M )a .
For Param the opposite category of positive real numbers and oriented isomor-
                  ∼
phisms w : [0, a] → [0, b] as above we then have the functor
                          Hom(Σζ , Ση ; M )? : Param → Kan .
           TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                           53


Definition 8.1. Given marked surfaces ζ : D × I → Σ and η : D × J → Σ′ , and
an oriented bordism M : Σ → Σ′ , we take
                    Hom(Σζ , Σ′η ; M ) = lim Hom(Σζ , Σ′η ; M )a .
                                         −→
                                          Param

   Note that n-simplices in the Hom complex are, explicitly, equivalence classes of
n-simplices σ : |∆n | × Cyla ×I → M , where two such simplices are equivalent if
they are related by such an oriented reparametrization in the linear factor
                                              ∼
                          Cyla ×I
                                              =             / Cylb ×I


                                          $       {
                                              M                     .
Due to this freedom of reparametrization, we generally consider maps Cyl ×I → M
only from the standard cylinder Cyl = Cyl1 = D × [0, 1].

8.4. Isomorphisms between bordisms. Fix surfaces Σ and Σ′ . We define the
groupoid Bord(Σ, Σ′ ) whose objects are oriented bordisms M : Σ → Σ′ , with fixed
equivalence class of a collar, and whose morphisms are oriented diffeomorphisms
χ : M → M ′ which are constant towards the boundary. More precisely, for choices
of collars Collar → M and Collar′ → M ′ , we require the existence of a subcollar
                                       Collarε
                                          =
               Collar        Σ × [0, ε) ⨿ Σ̄′ × (1 − ε, 1]               Collar′

along which χ|Collarε = idCollarε .
   For example, for any bordism M : Σ → Σ′ , the resulting bordisms
                                    a          a
                    (Σ × [−1, 0])     M and M     (Σ′ × [1, 2])
                                    Σ                       Σ′

obtained from gluing are both isomorphic to M in Bord(Σ, Σ′ ).
   We note that each isomorphism χ : M → M ′ in Bord(Σ, Σ′ ) determines an
isomorphism between the fixed mapping complexes
                                                  ∼
                    χ∗ : Hom(Σζ , Σ′η ; M ) → Hom(Σζ , Σ′η ; M ′ ).
Definition 8.2. For marked surfaces Σζ and Ση , we define the Hom complex
                 HomBord∗ (Σζ , Σ′η ) =       lim           Hom(Σζ , Σ′η ; M )
                                              −→
                                          Bord(Σ,Σ′ )

and the composition operations
        ◦ : HomBord∗ (Σ′η , Σ′′ξ ) × HomBord∗ (Σζ , Σ′η ) → HomBord∗ (Σζ , Σ′′ξ )
are defined by gluing along the boundary
                                                      a
                               Mg′ ◦ Mf = Mf                Mg′ .                   (28)
                                                      Σ′η

  To clarify what we mean by gluing along the boundary, let us consider n-simplices
            τ : |∆n | × Cyla ×I → M and ω : |∆n | × Cylb ×J → M ′
54                                   CRIS NEGRON


in Hom(Σζ , Σ′η ) and Hom(Σ′η , Σ′′ξ ) respectively. The induced map of disks τΣ′ :
|∆n | × D × I → D × J obtained by intersecting at the outgoing boundary Σ′
produces an inclusion
                      τ̃Σ′ : |∆n | × Cylb ×I → |∆n | × Cylb ×J
and we restrict along this inclusion to obtain an embedding ω|τ : |∆n | × Cylb ×I →
M ′ . We have the apparent decomposition
                                                    a
        |∆n | × Cyla+b ×I = (|∆n | × Cyla ×I)             (|∆n | × Cylb ×I)
                                                      (|∆n |×D×I)

and the two maps
              |∆n | × Cyla ×I                                   |∆n | × Cylb ×I
                                τ     +               s   ω|τ
                                          M ⨿Σ′ M ′
now induce a map from the pushout
                      ω ◦ τ : |∆n | × Cyla+b ×I → M ⨿Σ′ M ′ .
The glued bordism M ⨿Σ′ M ′ along with this n-simplex ω ◦ τ is the composite
Mω′ ◦ Mτ of (28).

8.5. The trivially marked bordism category. The ∗-marked, non-anomalous,
simplicial bordism category Bord∗ = Bord3,2 (∗) is the category of oriented surfaces
with colored markings ζ : D × I → Σ, and mapping spaces as in Definition 8.2.
This simplicial category is symmetric monoidal under disjoint union. Note that we
have the symmetric monoidal forgetful functor
                                    Bord∗ → Bord3,2
to the usual (discrete) bordism category of unmarked oriented surfaces and un-
marked bordisms. This non-anomalous bordism category is not precisely what we
want to consider however, as we want to introduce the anomaly.
   First, we have the usual anomalous bordism category Bord3,2 which consists
of oriented surfaces Σ equipped with a Lagrangian λ ⊆ H1 (Σ, R) and bordisms
M : Σ → Σ′ equipped with an integer nM . Composition is defined by gluing
bordisms and translating the integer parameters via the Maslov index. See for
example [22, Section 4.3].
   The anomalous bordism category is again symmetric monoidal under disjoint
union, and we have the symmetric monoidal forgetful functor Bord3,2 → Bord3,2 .
We then construct the marked, anomalous, simplicial bordism category via pullback
              Bord∗ := Bord3,2 ×Bord3,2 Bord∗                         / Bord∗      (29)


                                                                         
                           Bord3,2                                   / Bord3,2 .

Here the objects are marked surfaces Σζ,λ with a Lagrangian, and the mapping
complexes are the fiber products
               HomBord (Σλ , Σ′λ′ ) ×HomBord (Σ,Σ′ ) HomBord∗ (Σζ , Ση ).
This is again a symmetric monoidal simplicial category under disjoint union.
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                       55


Definition 8.3. The anomalous ∗-marked bordism ∞-category Bord∗ = Bord3,2 (∗)
is the homotopy coherent nerve of the symmetric monoidal simplicial category
                                Bord∗ := N(Bord∗ ),
were Bord∗ is as in (29)
8.6. Anomalous notations! Throughout this document we work with anomalous
bordisms Bord∗ , but we always ignore the anomaly data both in our notations and
in our arguments. We only work in the anomalous setting because our theories are,
quite simply, anomalous.
8.7. Non-compact bordisms. The non-compact bordism category Bordnc         3,2 in
Bord3,2 is the symmetric monoidal subcategory consisting of all surfaces but only
those bordisms M : Σ → Σ′ in which each component Mc in M has non-vanishing
outgoing boundary.
   In the marked setting, we have the full symmetric monoidal simplicial subcat-
egory Bordsurf.nc
            ∗     of surfaces with nontrivial markings. Specifically, we consider
marked surfaces D × I → Σ in which each component Σc in Σ is marked by at least
one disk. We take the fiber product with the anomalous, unmarked, non-compact
bordisms to get the symmetric monoidal simplicial category
                      Bordnc      nc               surf.nc
                          ∗ = Bord3,2 ×Bord3,2 Bord∗       .
Definition 8.4. The non-compact ∗-marked bordism ∞-category Bordnc
                                                                ∗ is the
homotopy coherent nerve
                          Bordnc          nc
                              ∗ := N(Bord∗ ).

   The ∞-category Bordnc
                       ∗ admits the apparent description as the subcategory in
Bord∗ spanned by nontrivially marked surfaces and those bordisms Mf : Σζ → Σ′η
for which each component in the underlying 3-manifold Mc ⊆ M has non-vanishing
outgoing boundary.
Remark 8.5. The term “non-compact” is more about the possible targets for a
symmetric monoidal functor L : Bordnc    ⋆ → V . The point is that coevaluation
bordisms coev : Σ̄ ⨿ Σ → ∅ are omitted when we move from Bord⋆ to Bordnc     ⋆ , so
that the value of such a field theory L on a surface is allowed to be non-compact,
or more specifically non-rigid, in V in the non-compact setting.
Remark 8.6. When working in the non-compact setting there is an apparent
choice of orientation. Namely, by applying the orientation reversal equivalence
         ∼
Bordop
     3,2 → Bord3,2 we exchange outgoing and incoming boundaries, and hence ex-
change a non-compact category of bordisms with non-vanishing outgoing boundary
with an alternate non-compact category of bordisms with non-vanishing incoming
boundary. One should think of this incoming vs outgoing choice as largely an issue
of preference. For example, we prefer to allow for vanishing incoming boundary so
that S 2 is an algebra in Bordnc
                              3,2 , rather than a coalgebra, and so that all surfaces
in Bord3,2 are S -modules in Bordnc
        nc       2
                                     3,2 .

8.8. Disk arrangements at the boundary. We have a symmetric monoidal
simplicial functor dout : Bord∗ → f rDisk given by intersecting at the outgoing
boundary. In particular, we send each marked surface ζ : D × I → Σ to the colored
marking set I in f rDisk and for an n-simplex
                              σ : |∆n | × Cyl ×I → M,
56                                   CRIS NEGRON


with M a bordism M : Σ → Σ′ between marked surfaces Σζ and Ση , we intersect
with the outgoing disks to obtain a well-defined n-simplex
                                          ∃! dout (σ)
                          |∆n | × D × I                 / D×J

                                                            η
                                                          
                         |∆n | × Cyl ×I                  /M
                                              σ

We apply the construction from Section 4.4, and the homotopy coherent nerve,
or alternatively a construction as in Section 5.4, to obtain a map of symmetric
                                    ⊗             ⊗
monoidal ∞-categories d⊗ out : Bord∗ → f rDisk . We then restrict along the
                                 ⊗          ⊗
symmetric monoidal functor Bord∗ → Bord∗ to obtain a map from the anomalous
bordism category.
Definition 8.7. The symmetric monoidal functor
                               ⊗
                              ∂out : Bord⊗
                                         ∗ → f rDisk
                                                     ⊗


is the composite of the projection Bord⊗         ⊗              ⊗
                                        ∗ → Bord∗ with the map dout from above.
We let
                              ∂out : Bord∗ → f rDisk
                                       ⊗                        ⊗
denote the linear term of the functor ∂out , i.e. the fiber of ∂out over {0} in Fin∗ .
   We usually restrict further to the symmetric monoidal subcategory (Bordnc
                                                                          ∗ )
                                                                              ⊗
                                                                   ⊗
of non-compact bordisms, though we still employ the same notation ∂out .

                    9. An ∞-category of marked bordisms
   Given a f rDisk-monoidal ∞-category q : E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ , we define an associ-
ated symmetric monoidal ∞-category Bordnc  E of E -marked bordisms. In the case
of cochains A = Ch(A♡ ) over a ribbon tensor category A♡ , we describe the bor-
dism ∞-category Bordnc A in explicit terms. In Section 10 we show, subsequently,
that results from [22, 20] imply the existence of a symmetric monoidal functor
LAf in : Bordnc                                            ♡
             Af in → Ch(Vect) whenever the input category A is finite and modu-
lar.
9.1. Bordisms with f rDisk-markings. Recall our symmetric monoidal functor
 ⊗
∂out : Bord⊗
           ∗ → f rDisk
                      ⊗
                        from the 3-dimensional bordism ∞-category of Section
8.7.
Definition 9.1. Given a f rDisk-monoidal ∞-category q : E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ , the
E -marked bordism category is the fiber product
                            Bord⊗        ⊗
                                E := BordE ×f rDisk⊗ E .
                                                      ⊗


The non-compact E -marked bordism category is the subcategory
                      (Bordnc ⊗        nc ⊗
                           E ) := (Bord∗ ) ×Bord⊗
                                                ∗
                                                  Bord⊗
                                                      E .

Remark 9.2. In our notation BordE , one can take “E ” to be the underlying
triple (E − , E + , d). In our case of special interest A = Ch(A♡ ), for ribbon A♡ , we
simply confuse the distinction between the triple (Aop , Apro-f in , d) and A itself, and
recognize Bord⊗    A as the symmetric monoidal ∞-category of surfaces and bordisms
with labels from A and Apro-f in .
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                          57


   We note that the forgetful functors Bord⊗        ⊗          nc ⊗
                                           E → Bord∗ and (BordE ) → (Bord∗ )
                                                                            nc ⊗

are cocartesian fibrations, and hence the corresponding maps to Fin∗ are cocarte-
sian fibrations.
Proposition 9.3. The functor Bord⊗   E → Fin∗ endows BordE with a symmetric
monoidal structure under which the cocartesian fibration Bord⊗       ⊗
                                                             E → Bord∗ is a map
                                                        nc
of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories. Similarly, BordE is naturally symmetric
                                              ⊗
monoidal and the inclusion (Bordnc  ⊗
                                 E ) → BordE is a symmetric monoidal functor.

Proof. Since the symmetric monoidal functor E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ is an isofibration,
this result is an immediate consequence of Proposition 4.15.                □

Notation 9.4. Given an object Σx , or morphism Mα in BordE we let Σtop(x)
and Mtop(α) denote the corresponding images in Bord∗ under the forgetful func-
tor/projection BordE → Bord∗ . For a morphism Mf : Σζ → Σ′η in Bord∗ we
let
                   mf : (BordE )Σζ = E I → (BordE )Σ′η = E J              (30)
denote the corresponding transport functor mf = (Mf )! .
   In the expression (30), I and J are the marking sets for Σζ and Σ′η respectively.
We also note that the transport functor along Mf is identified with transport for
E ⊗ along the corresponding map ∂out (Mf ) in f rDisk. So mf is always a type of
colored product for E I , in the language of Section 7.1.

9.2. Describing the ∞-category BordA . We consider a ribbon tensor category
A♡ and its associated f rDisk-category q : A⊗ → f rE2 of unbounded cochains, as
in Proposition 7.11. This fibration was described explicitly in Section 7.2.
   From our description of A⊗ over f rDisk⊗ we deduce an explicit description of
the bordism category BordA over Bord∗ . Specifically, we can describe the equivalent
subcategory
     Linf rDisk ×f rDisk BordA = (Linf rDisk ×f rDisk Bord∗ ) ×f rDisk A⊗
                                                                        {0}

spanned by all objects and all morphisms whose disk arrangements at the outgoing
boundary lie in Linf rDisk (Corollary A.8).
   Objects in BordA are surfaces with embedded, colored disks which are marked
by objects in A± ,
                                  x2
                                              x1              x3

                    Σx =

                                                                    .

The positive colored disks are labeled by objects in Ch(A♡   pro-f in ) = Apro-f in = A
                                                                                       +
                                                                      ♡ op     op      −
and the negatively colored disks are labeled by objects in Ch(A ) = A = A .
We denote such an object by Σx , where Σ is the underlying oriented surface and
x = (xA , top(x)) is the pairing of the tuple of objects xA in AI with the underlying
configuration of disks top(x) : D × I → Σ.
   Morphisms Mα : Σx → Σ′y in the subcategory Linf rDisk ×f rDisk BordA consist
of a bordisms Mtop(α) : Σtop(x) → Σtop(y) between the underlying ∗-marked surfaces
58                                               CRIS NEGRON


along with morphisms αj : xIj → yj in Acolor(j) over each disk in the outgoing
boundary
                                                                                                      Σ′
                                                                          x1
                                                                                                       m(x4 , x1 )
                                                  x4                                                                y1
             Σ                                                                                        α1

                                                                          x3


                                                                                                     α2
                                  M                                                                             y2
                                                              x2
                                                                                                  m(x2 , x3 )

                                                                                                                     .

Here we note that the outgoing arrangement of disks aligns each incoming tuple
D × Ij linearly along the x-axis of Dj ⊆ Σ′ , so that the corresponding marking
objects {xi : i ∈ Ij } are naturally ordered via the topology of Mtop(α) . So it makes
sense to label each outgoing disk Dj by the chosen morphism αj from the ordered
product of the incoming objects to the outgoing objects,
                                 αj : xIj = m(xi1 , . . . , xir ) → yj .
Remark 9.5. This ordered product includes an application of duality whenever
we encounters a color transition color(ia ) = − color(j), as in Section 7.1.
     A 2-simplex
                          Σ′y                                                                  Σ′η
                      ?                                                                    ?               ′
                 Mα                   Mδ′                                 Mtop(α)                         Mtop(δ)
                           σ
                                                         over                            h=top(σ)
                                                                                                            
             Σx                         / Σ′′z                                Σζ                            / Σ′′
                          Mγ′′                                                            ′′
                                                                                         Mtop(γ)                ξ


in Linf rDisk×f rDisk BordA consists of an underlying 2-simplex in Linf rDisk×f rDisk
Bord∗ , which is explicitly represented by a choice of a diffeomorphism ϕ : M ′ ◦M →
M ′′ and a homotopy
                               h : |∆1 | × Cyl ×I → M ′′
from the cylindrical diagram ϕ(top(δ) ◦ top(α)) to the cylindrical diagram top(γ),
along with an algebraic compatibility at the terminal boundary. For the algebraic
compatibility, the homotopy h provides a homotopy |∆1 | × D × Il → Dl between
linear disk arrangements at the outgoing boundary ξ : D × L → Σ′′ , and this
boundary homotopy traces out a collection of framed braids (βl , nl ) in the outgoing
disks Dl . We require that the associated actions of the framed braid transformation
ζβl ,nl from (24) completes a diagram
                                                                   8 yJl
                                                 ⊗j αj                              δl

                               N                                   / xI                  / # zl
                                   j∈Jl (xIj )      ζβl ,nl               l
                                                                                   ξl
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                       59


for each index l in L.
   The symmetric monoidal structure on BordA is given by disjoint union.
Remark 9.6. One should view the allowance of homotopies as the institution
of a universal skein relation, where the twistings and rotations at the outgoing
boundary are compensated for algebraically via the appropriate application of the
ribbon structure on A− or A+ .
9.3. Including bounding constraints. We recall that we have fully faithful in-
clusions
                      A⊗         / A⊗ o      A⊗
                       f in                    l-f in


                                       #  z
                                     f rDisk
for the f rDisk-categories of finite and locally finite complexes (Proposition 7.11).
Pulling back, we obtain full, symmetric monoidal subcategories
                         BordAf in → BordA ← BordAl-f in
spanned by surfaces labeled by finite and locally finite cochains, respectively. In
particular, the above explicit description of BordA restricts to provide explicit de-
scriptions of both BordAf in and BordAl-f in .
9.4. Comments on general marking schemes. Given a symmetric monoidal
∞-category T ⊗ , and a corresponding “T -flavored” bordism ∞-category, by which
we mean a symmetric monoidal ∞-category of bordisms with a symmetric monoidal
functor
                           Bord⊗triv → T
                                         ⊗
                                           × Bord3,2 ,
we obtain a corresponding class of marked bordisms just as above. Namely, for
any symmetric monoidal cocartesian fibration A ⊗ → T ⊗ we get an ∞-category of
A -marked bordisms via pullback
                           BordA = Bordtriv ×T ⊗ A ⊗ .
This situation is what we would call a 3-dimensional T -flavored marking scheme.
   We’ve provided above a 3-dimensional f rDisk-flavored marking scheme, but
certainly there are other natural schemes one might consider. We have some inter-
est, for example, in the case where T is the 2-dimensional bordism category (see
[16, 9]). Though we operate within the scheme of framed disks, we note that many
of our arguments through the remainder of the text apply equally well under any
marking scheme.
   The main point of contention, as far as our arguments are concerned, is the exis-
tence (or non-existence) of an abelian theory for cochains under the given scheme.

        10. Discrete Lyubashenko-Reshetikhin-Turaev theories
  For any modular tensor category A♡ –which we recall is a special type of rib-
bon tensor category–we construct a symmetric monoidal functor LA : Bordnc    A →
Ch(Vect)pro-f in from the ∞-category of A-labeled bordisms. We describe the values
LA (Σx ) for a connected marked surface Σ via mapping complexes in A.
  The field theory LA is constructed by completing pre-existing TQFTs from De
Renzi-Gainutdinov-Geer-Patureau-Mirand-Runkel [22] and Czenky-Negron [20].
60                                     CRIS NEGRON


10.1. Discrete LRT in the finite setting.

Theorem 10.1. Let A♡ be a finite modular tensor category and A⊗     f in → f rDisk
be the associated f rDisk-monoidal ∞-category of finite cochains. The field theories
from [22, 20] determine a corresponding symmetric monoidal functor

                          LAf in : Bordnc        +
                                       Af in → Ch (Vectf in ).

Proof/Construction. The inclusion
                      Linf rDisk ×f rDisk Bordnc          nc
                                              Af in → BordAf in

is an equivalence (Corollary A.8) which is bijective on objects, so that the induced
map on homotopy categories is an isomorphism. Hence the homotopy category
h Bordnc
       Af in is explicitly identified as the discrete category of Af in -labeled surfaces
Σx and equivalence classes of bordisms Mα : Σx → Σy in which ∂out (Mtop(α) )
consists of a linear arrangement of disks D × I → D × J .
   Consider maps Mα , Mγ : Σx → Σ′y in Linf rDisk ×f rDisk Bordnc          Af in with cor-
responding disk arrangements f, g : D × I → D × J in Linf rDisk. These maps
are identified in the homotopy category if and only if there is a smooth homotopy
between the constituent cylinder embeddings Cyl ×I → M , as in Section 8.3, for
which the resulting homotopy σ : |∆1 | × D × I → D × J at the outgoing boundary,
and associated framed braid [σ] = (β, n), produce a diagram

                                            mg (x)
                                            :
                                    ζβ,n              γg


                              mf (x)                       /! y
                                             αf


in AJf in . Here ζβ,n is the transformation provided by applications of the braiding and
twist on Chb (A♡                                                                    nc
                   f in ), as in (24). The symmetric monoidal structure on h BordAf in
is given by disjoint union, as expected.
   Now for Bordnc   Af in the “reduced” bordism category from [20, Definition 6.1], we
have a symmetric monoidal functor
                              p : h Bordnc          nc
                                        Af in → BordAf in

which sends each marked surface Σx to the same surface Σ marked by the centers
of the corresponding disks I → D × I → Σ, and with the i-th marking labeled by
the object xi in x = (x1 , . . . , xr ). We send a bordism Mα : Σx → Σy to the ribbon
bordism p(Mα ) obtained as follows:
     (a) We replace the cylindrical diagram Cyl ×I → M with the ribbon diagram
         [0, 1]×I → Cyl ×I → M obtained by following the centers of the cylinders,
         and endow each constituent path with the framing inherited by the framing
         on the ambient cylinders.
     (b) In a small collar around the outgoing boundary (1 − δ, 1] × Σ′ → M , and
         at each marking disk Dj → Σ′ → M , we take the ribbons mapping to the
         x-axis in Dj
                        (1 − δ, 1] × Ij → (1 − δ, 1] × Dj → M,
                TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                    61


          and merge them along the x-axis into a single string emerging from the
          center of Dj ,


                                    Σ′                                      Σ′

      1                                             1
           2                                            2
                                               7→
                   ··




                                                            ··
                    ·




                                                                ·
                   r                                        r




    (c) We label the unique vertex generated in this process by the underlying map
        αf : mf (x) → y for the bordism Mα , where f = ∂out (Mtop(α) ).

The fact that p is well-defined on equivalence classes of morphisms follows by the
relation [20, Section 5.2, U3] on maps in Bordnc
                                              Af in , and p respects composition by
the relation [20, Section 5.2, U1].
   Having constructed such a symmetric monoidal functor p : h Bordnc             nc
                                                                     Af in → BordAf in
                                                           ∗
we obtain the TQFT LAf in by pulling back the TQFT Z from [20, Theorem 9.3]
along p,

                                                                    Z∗
                        n                           p
          LAf in :=         Bordnc            nc          nc        +
                                Af in → h BordAf in → BordAf in → Ch (Vectf in ).



                                                                                    □


10.2. Merging bordisms. Let ζ : D × I → Σ be a marked connected surface. A
basic merging bordism for Σζ is a bordism Mf : Σζ → Ση to the same surface Σ
equipped with a single positive marking η : D → Σ, and with Mf satisfying the
following:

    (0) Σ admits an auxiliary embedding τ : D → Σ which contains the images of
        both ζ and η in τ (D).
    (1) The underlying 3-manifold for Mf is the product Σ × [0, 1].
    (2) The mappings from the cylinders f : Cyl ×I → Σ × [0, 1] factor through
        the image of the auxiliary disk embedding τ : D → Σ.
    (3) The corresponding map

               f ×(Σ×[0,1]) (D × [0, 1]) : Cyl ×I = D × [0, 1] × I → D × [0, 1]


          is induced by a smooth homotopy h : |∆1 | × D × I → D, in the sense that
          f (z, t, i) = (h(t, z, i), t).
62                                    CRIS NEGRON


For example, a basic merging bordism might appear as
                     τ (D)                                τ (D)
                                          Mf




                                                                   .



Definition 10.2. Given two markings Σζ and Ση of the same underlying surface
Σ, a merging bordism Mf : Σζ → Ση is a bordism which decomposes over the
components as
                       a
                Mf =        Mfcc : Σζ = ⨿c Σcζ c → Ση = ⨿c Σcηc
                         c∈π0 (Σ)

with each Mfcc either an isomorphism, or isomorphic to a basic merging bordism in
MapsBord∗ (Σζ , Ση ), defined as above.

Lemma 10.3. For any marked surface Σζ in Bord∗ , there is a choice of single
positive markings η : D × π0 (Σ) → Σ on the components of Σ which admits a
merging bordism Mf : Σζ → Ση . We may assume further that the outgoing diagram
∂out (Mf ) lies in Linf rDisk.

Proof. It suffices to deal with the case where Σ is connected with specified markings
ζ : D × I → Σ. We consider a path [0, 1] → Σ which passes through the centers of
the ζ(Di ), and by taking a tubular neighborhood we obtain an embedding from a
disk η : D → Σ which contains the centers of the ζ(Di ) in its interior. We can take
a smooth homotopy κ : |∆1 | × D × I → Σ which shrinks the image of each Di so
that ζ ′ = κ1 : D × I → Σ has image in η(D).
    We consider now ζ ′ as a disk embedding ζ ′ : D × I → D by pulling back along
η, and we are free to assume that the images of the disks Di are arbitrarily small
in D. In particular, we assume that each Di has image in the interior Do . We
consider, for each index i, the differential A−1
                                               i   = T0 (ζ ′ )i ∈ GL2 (R). Since Ai has
positive determinant we can connect the identity matrix I2 to Ai via a smooth path
Ai (t) : |∆1 | → GL2 (R).
    We take now A(t) : |∆1 | × D × I → D with A(t)|Di = s−1        i Ai (t)si where si :
R → R2 is the translation which sends the center of ζ ′ (Di ) to 0. Since the disk
  2

is compact, we can assume the images ζ ′ (Di ) are sufficiently small so that A(t) is
a diffeomorphism at each time t which does in fact have image in the unit disk
D ⊆ R2 . Then ζ ′′ = A(1) : D × I → D is a disk embedding which sends the center
of each Di to the x-axis in D and has differentials T0 (ζ ′′ )i = idR2 . We are free to
assume that κ(t) and A(t) are constant in neighborhoods of both 0 and 1, so that
we obtain smooth homotopies

                             hA , hκ : |∆1 | × D × I → D → Σ
             TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                                63


which define respective marked bordisms
     f A , f κ : Cyl ×I = D × |∆1 | × I → Σ × |∆1 |, f ⋆ (z, t, i) 7→ (h⋆ (z, t, i), t).
The map Mf κ is an isomorphism, and Mf A satisfies (0)–(4), so that the composite
Mf = Mf A Mf κ is a merging bordism.                                           □
10.3. State spaces and merging bordisms. For each marked surface ζ : D ×
I → Σ in Bordnc
              ∗ we recall that the projection
                                              ⊗          I
                           (Bordnc
                                Af in )Σζ → (Af in )I = Af in                              (31)
is an isomorphism of simplicial sets, since Bordnc  Af in is constructed from the fibration
A⊗f in →   f rDisk  via pullback.  Now  for a bordism   f : Cyl ×I → M between between
                                     ′
∗-marked surfaces Mf : Σζ → Ση , an edge Mα : Σx → Σy over Mf is cocartesian in
                                                ⊗
Bordnc Af in if and only if its projection to Af in is cocartesian over f rE2 . From this
we conclude that the isomorphisms from (31) fit into a diagram
                                              T Mf
                     ∆ × (Bordnc
                              Af in )Σζ
                                                             / Bordnc
                                                                   A        f in


                             ∼
                             =                                             project
                                                                      
                          ∆ × AIf in                           / A⊗ ,
                                           T∂out (Mf )                f in


where each T⋆ is the cocartesian transformation over the given map. Evaluating at
1 : ∗ → ∆1 now produces a diagram for the transport functors
                                           (Mf )!
                       (Bordnc
                            Af in )Σζ
                                                         / (Bordnc
                                                                Af in )Σ′η

                            ∼
                            =                                         ∼
                                                                      =
                                                                 
                            AIf in                            / AJ
                                         ∂out (Mf )!             f in


where we recall that the map ∂out (Mf )! is the colored product functor m∂out (Mf ) .
The above diagram can furthermore be chosen to strictly commute.
   After we identify the fibers in Bordnc
                                       Af in with their respective colored exponents
for Af in , we denote the transport functor (Mf )! simply by mf : AIf in → AJ f in , as
in Notation 9.4.
Lemma 10.4. Let Σζ be a marked surface in Bordnc   ∗ . For any merging bordism
Mf : Σζ → Ση the corresponding transport functor provides a natural isomorphism
                 LAf in ◦TMf : ∆1 × (Bordnc            +
                                         Af in )Σζ → Ch (Vectf in ).

Equivalently, evaluating at each object Σx over Σζ produces a natural isomorphism
between the state spaces
                                          ∼
                              LAf in (Σx ) → LAf in (Σmf (x) ).
Proof. We need only demonstrate a single cocartesian edge Mα : Σx → Σmf (x)
over Mf which is sent to an isomorphism in Ch+ (Vectf in ) under LAf in . In the case
where Σ is connected this is covered in (the proof of) [20, Lemma 8.4]. In the case
where Σ is not connected the result follows by the connected case and the monoidal
structure on LAf in .                                                              □
64                                      CRIS NEGRON


Proposition 10.5 ([22, 20]). Consider a connected genus g surface Σ with arbitrary
markings ζ : D × I → Σ. Any merging bordism Mf : Σζ → Ση specifies a natural
isomorphism
                                  ∼
                     LAf in (Σ− ) → Hom∗Af in C ⊗g , mf − ,
                                                         

of functors from (Bordnc           I         +
                      Af in )Σζ = Af in to Ch (Vectf in ).

   In the above expression C is the coend for A♡ , i.e. the value C = mR(1) where
R : A♡ → A♡ ⊗Vect A♡ is right adjoint to the product functor m : A♡ ⊗Vect A♡ →
A♡ . In the case of representations of a Hopf algebra A♡ = Rep(H), for example,
C is the coadjoint representation C = H ∗ .
Proof of Proposition 10.5. By [20, Theorem 8.5]–which follows [22, Proposition
4.17]–there is such a natural isomorphism
                                               ∼    ∗        ⊗g
                      LAf in |(Bordnc
                                   A       )Ση → HomAf in (C    , −)
                                    f in

when η : D → Σ is a single positive marking. So the result follows by Lemma
10.4.                                                                     □
10.4. Discrete LRT theory for unbounded cochains. Below we consider the
symmetric monoidal category Ch(Vect)pro-f in = Ch(Vectpro-f in ) of pro-finite linear
cochains, as in Section 7.4.
Proposition 10.6. Let A♡ be a finite modular tensor category, A = Ch(A♡ ), and
q : A⊗ → f rDisk be the associated f rDisk-category of unbounded cochains (see
Proposition 7.11). There is a unique symmetric monoidal functor
                          LA : Bordnc
                                   A → Ch(Vect)pro-f in
which fits into a commuting diagram
                                        LAf in
                      Bordnc
                          Af in
                                                     / Ch+ (Vectf in )           (32)
                                                            
                       Bordnc
                            A
                                                    / Ch(Vect)pro-f in ,
                                           LA

and for which the natural map LA (Σx ) → limλ LAf in (Σxλ ) is an isomorphism when-
                                         ←−
ever x = limλ xλ is an expression of x as a filtered limit of finite cochains as in
          ←−
Lemma 7.6.
Proof. Each object x in a colored product AI admits a structural expression as a
filtered limit x = limλ xλ over finite length (bounded) complexes. We define the
                   ←−
state spaces in our proposed theory directly as the limits
                             LA (Σx ) = lim LAf in (Σxλ ).
                                        ←−
                                                λ
Via the mutual refinement property, one sees that the above limit is always identified
with the limit over any system as in Lemma 7.6. Consider any bordism Mα : Σx →
Σ′y with y consisting of finite, bounded complexes. Such Mα consists of a bordism
Mf : Σtop(x) → Σtop(y) and a map αf : mf (x) → y in AJ .
   Since the product on Ch(A♡ ) commutes with filtered colimits and preserves
injections, the product the dual category Ch(A♡ )pro-f in commutes with filtered
limits and preserves surjections. Hence mf (x) = limλ mf (xλ ) with each map
                                                       ←−
mf (x) → mf (xλ ) surjective. In particular the kernels of these maps provide a
           TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                                         65


base for the topology on mf (x) around 0, and continuity of αf : mf (x) → y implies
a (unique) factorization through mf (xλ ) → y at all sufficiently large λ,
                                                     αf
                              mf (x)                                       9/ y
                                                '                 αλ
                                                                   f
                                                    mf (xλ )                 .

Hence we obtain a collection of compatible bordisms Mαλ : Σxλ → Σ′y for large λ,
and so obtain a well-defined morphism
                               LA (Mα ) = LAf in (Mαλ ) ◦ πλ
where πλ is the structure map Σx → Σxλ .
  In the case of a bordism Mα : Σx → Σ′y with general marking object y we have
LA (Σ′y ) = limµ LA♡ (Σ′yµ ) and so define
            ←−     f in

                     LA (Mα ) = lim LA (Mα,µ ) : LA (Σx ) → LA (Σ′y )
                                ← −
                                  µ

where each Mα,µ is the composite of Mα with the projection Σ′y → Σ′yµ . For a
composite of bordisms Nβ Mα : Σx → Σ′y → Σ′′z with z bounded and finite, the
diagram(s)
                                                             Nβ
                                 Σx
                                          Mα
                                               / Σ′y              / Σ′′z
                                                                   >

                                                              Nβµ
                                                    
                                 Σxλ           / Σ′y
                                        λ           µ
                                       Mα,µ

give LA (Nβ Mα ) = LA (Nβ ) LA (Mβ ). For general z the equality LA (Nβ Mα ) =
LA (Nβ ) LA (Mβ ) follows from the finite case.
   For the symmetric monoidal structure we have
                LA (Σx ) ⊗ LA (Σ′y ) = lim LAf in (Σxλ ) ⊗ LAf in (Σ′yµ )
                                       ←−
                                           λ,µ

and
                         LA (Σx ⨿ Σ′y ) = lim LAf in (Σxλ ⨿ Σ′yµ )
                                          ←−
                                               λ,µ
                                                                                                    ∼
in Ch(Vect)pro-f in . Hence we have a unique natural isomorphism LA (−)⊗LA (−) →
L(− ⨿ −) which fits into diagrams
                   LA (Σx ) ⊗ LA (Σ′y )
                                                         ∼                 / LA (Σx ⨿ Σ′y )


                                                                                      
            LAf in (Σxλ ) ⊗ LAf in (Σ′yµ )
                                                         ∼          / LA            (Σxλ ⨿ Σ′yµ )
                                                                             f in


at each λ and µ.                                                                                    □
Definition 10.7. For a finite modular tensor category A♡ , and A = Ch(A♡ ), the
discrete LRT theory is the symmetric monoidal functor
                             LA : Bordnc
                                      A → Ch(Vect)pro-f in

constructed in Theorem 10.1 and Proposition 10.6.
66                                    CRIS NEGRON


Remark 10.8. The letters LRT reference Lyubashenko, Reshetikhin, and Turaev.
It would also be reasonable to reference De Renzi, Gainutdinov, Geer, Patureau-
Mirans, and Runkel here, though the label DGGPR is a bit too rambunctious for
our liking.
10.5. State spaces for discrete LRT.
Lemma 10.9. Let A♡ be a finite modular tensor category, and A = Ch(A♡ ). For
any connected genus g surface Σ with fixed markings ζ : D × I → Σ, and any map
f : D×I → D to a positively colored disk in f rDisk, there is a natural isomorphism
                                       ∼
                              LA (Σ− ) → Hom∗A (C ⊗g , mf −)
of functors from (Bordnc       I
                      A )Σζ = A to Ch(Vect)pro-f in .

Proof. We note that all embeddings f : D × I → D are smoothly homotopic
(Proposition A.2) so that all of the associated product functors mf : AI → A+ =
Apro-f in , i.e. all transport functors along the maps f , are naturally isomorphic. It
follows that the functor Hom∗A (C ⊗g , mf −) is independent of the choice of f , up to
natural isomorphism.
   Now, for any marking object x in AI with structural expression x = limλ xλ ,
                                                                 ∼
                                                                               ←−
continuity of mf gives the product mf (x) as the limit mf (x) = limλ mf (xλ ). Hence
                                                                   ←−
we have a natural isomorphism
                                           ∼
                Hom∗A (C ⊗g , mf (x)) → lim Hom∗Af in (C ⊗g , mf (xλ ))
                                        ←−
                                               λ
                          I
between functors from A to Ch(Vect)pro-f in . By construction we have a natural
isomorphism
                                  ∼
                         LA (Σx ) → lim LAf in (Σxλ )
                                    ←−
                                               λ
                                                         ∼
as well. Hence the natural isomorphisms LAf in (Σxλ ) → Hom∗A (C ⊗g , mf (xλ )) from
Proposition 10.5 imply the claimed identification
                                     ∼
                          LA (Σx ) → Hom∗A (C ⊗g , mf (x)).
                                                                                     □

   We recall that any product functor mf : AI → A+ = Apro-f in sends homotopy
equivalences in each factor to homotopy equivalences in Apro-f in , and hence sends
any product of homotopy equivalences ξ : x → x′ to a homotopy equivalence
in Apro-f in . This follows by the duality of Corollary 7.9 and the fact that the
product on Ch(A♡ ) preserves homotopy equivalence in each factor. Furthermore,
the functor
                    Hom∗A (C ⊗g , −) : Apro-f in → Ch(Vect)pro-f in
preserves homotopy equivalences as well. It follows from the identification of Lemma
10.9, and symmetric monoidality, that the LRT theory preserves homotopy equiv-
alences.
Corollary 10.10. Consider a marked surface ζ : D × I → Σ. The symmetric
monoidal functor LA : Bordnc A → Ch(Vect)pro-f in sends homotopy equivalences in
the fiber (Bordnc
               A  )Σζ
                      = AI
                           to homotopy equivalences in Ch(Vect)pro-f in .
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                          67


               11. Deriving LRT at the 1-categorical level
   Consider the discrete derived category D = D(A♡ ) of a modular tensor category
A♡ . We have the induced ribbon structure on D and corresponding duality equiv-
                        ∼
alence −∗ : D(A♡ )op → D(A♡                                               ♡
                               pro-f in ). This equivalence gives D(A ) a f rDisk-
            ⊗             ⊗
structure D → f rDisk via Proposition 7.1, and we produce the subsequent
marked bordism category Bordnc  D.
   Low dimensional simplices in Bordnc    D are described precisely as in Section 9.2,
from which one deduces an explicit description of the homotopy truncation h Bordnc    D.
Vaguely, h Bordnc
                D is (equivalent to)  a symmetric  monoidal   category   of surfaces with
markings from the discrete categories D(A♡ ) and D(A♡   pro-f in ), and ribbon bordisms
between such surfaces. The underlying graphs for such ribbon bordisms are required
to be trees in which each component has a unique internal vertex, and a unique
external vertex which is attached to the outgoing surface.
Theorem 11.1. Let A♡ be a finite modular tensor category with corresponding
discrete derived category D = D(A♡ ). There is a symmetric monoidal functor
                           LD : h Bordnc
                                      D → D(Vectpro-f in )

which is obtained by “deriving” the theory from Proposition 10.6.
   We note that LD is a map between 1-categories, and can therefore be approached
in completely 1-categorical terms. We outline a proof of Theorem 11.1 below in
two parts. Following the proof, we discuss various means of “expanding” the theory
from Theorem 11.1, and requisite liftings to the ∞-categorical setting.

11.1. Step 1: Introducing the homotopy category. We consider the homo-
topy category K = K(A♡ ) with its f rDisk-structure induced by the duality equiv-
                     ∼
alence −∗ : K(A♡ )op → K(A♡pro-f in ). We show that discrete LRT induces a unique
symmetric monoidal functor from h Bordnc K which fits into a diagram


                       h Bordnc
                             A
                                         LA
                                               / Ch(Vectpro-f in )                  (33)
                                                         quotient
                                                      
                       h Bordnc
                             K
                                         LK
                                               / D(Vectpro-f in )

Proof for Theorem 11.1, Step 1. Consider the equivalence relation ∼htop on maps
in h Bordnc
          A , where two morphisms Mα , Mβ : Σx → Σy are equivalent whenever
they have the same underlying topology
                              Mtop(α) = Mf = Mtop(β) ,
and the outgoing morphisms α, β : mf (x) → y are related by a tuple of cochain
homopies in A± . We have the symmetric monoidal functor h BordncA → h BordK
                                                                            nc

provided by the balanced projection A → K, and this induces a symmetric equiv-
alence
                                          ∼
                         h Bordnc                 nc
                                A / ∼htop → h BordK .
   We note that each colored product functor m : AI → A+ along a linear disk
arrangement D × I → D sends cochain homotopies in the incoming factors to
cochain homotopies in A+ , and that the Hom functors Hom∗A (C ⊗g , −) preserve
68                                   CRIS NEGRON


cochain homotopies as well. Thus, from the description of the state spaces provided
in Lemma 10.9, and the fact that the functor
                          Ch(Vectpro-f in ) → D(Vectpro-f in )
is a quotient along cochain homotopy, we understand that there is a unique sym-
metric monoidal functor LK which completes a diagram as in (33).             □
11.2. Step 2: Deriving LRT.
Proof of Theorem 11.1, Step 2. The localization functor K(A♡                  ♡
                                                             pro-f in ) → D(Apro-f in )
                                             ♡                ♡
admits a fully faithful right adjoint R : D(Apro-f in ) → K(Apro-f in ) which is, by
nonsense, lax monoidal and compatible with the balanced structure. The exis-
tence of such an adjoint follows from the fact that K(A♡   pro-f in ) admits enough
K-injectives (see Section 14.3). Hence R induces a symmetric monoidal functor
h Bordnc           nc          nc
      R : h BordD → h BordK , and we obtain a symmetric monoidal functor to
D(Vectpro-f in ) via composition
                  LD = LK ◦ h Bordnc        nc
                                  R : h BordD → D(Vectpro-f in ).

This completes the proof of Theorem 11.1.                                               □
     One can show that the functor LD : h Bordnc
                                              D → D(Vectpro-f in ) is a left Kan
extension for the functor LK , so that LD is a “derivation” of discrete LRT. One
can also check that the state spaces for LD over a genus g marked surface Σζ are
identified with derived Homs
                                    ∼
                          LD (Σ− ) → RHomA♡ (C ⊗g , mf −),
in direct analogy with Lemma 10.9 (cf. Proposition 15.5). From this description
of the state spaces one sees that LD restricts to a D(Vect) valued theory from the
full subcategory of surfaces labeled by objects in the bounded derived category
Db (A♡f in ) of finite length complexes, i.e. that we can forgo pro-finite completion in
the finite bounded setting,
                            LDf in : h Bordnc
                                           Df in → D(Vect).

11.3. Unmarking the discrete derived theory. We recall that all nonempty
surfaces in h Bordnc
                   D are equipped with markings from the discrete derived category.
In a skein theoretic setting, we could remove all such markings by employing unit
labels on surfaces and noting that the particular positions of unit markings do not
matter, modulo skein relations.
   In our setting we can still label all surfaces by the identity object 1D in Db (A♡
                                                                                    f in )
to obtain a symmetric inclusion
                                h Bordnc        nc
                                      ∗ → h BordDf in

from the trivially marked bordism category. We then institute certain coarse skein
relations on h Bordnc
                    ∗ via a localization process which we outline in Section 16.
While we defer the details, and direct the interested reader to Sections 16 and 17
below, let us record our ultimate conclusion.
Theorem (17.10). For any finite modular tensor category A♡ , the discrete derived
theory from Theorem 11.1 induces an unmarked, anomalous topological field theory
in 3 dimensions
                          LDf in : Bordnc
                                       3,2 → D(Vect).
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                           69


For each genus g surface Σ, the corresponding state space admits a natural identi-
fication with derived Homs LDf in (Σ) ∼
                                      = RHomA♡ (C ⊗g , 1).
   As we explain in Section 17.6, the existence of such a field theory implies a
natural, projective action of each mapping class group MCG(Σ) on the associated
derived Homs RHomA♡ (C ⊗g , 1) (cf. [51, 72]). We also discuss implications in
dimension 3 in Section 19.

11.4. Expanding from Theorem 11.1? At the center of our project, even be-
yond the present paper, is the following question:
   – To what extent do the symmetric monoidal functors LD and LDf in expand into
a system of (T)QFTs, in analogy with the fusion or 1-categorical settings? –
  To list a few explicit points:
(A) For a given finite modular tensor category A♡ , is there a once extended, anoma-
lous 3-d topological theory L′ whose circle value L′ (S 1 ) recovers the derived category
for A♡ ? Does such an extended theory imply a natural marking scheme which su-
persedes the one employed in our construction of LD ? (See Conjectures 17.12 and
18.5 below, as well as [4, 21, 50] for the 1-categorical setting.)
(B) Is there an extended 4-dimensional topological theory associated to the derived
category of a modular tensor category, and can we recover our 3-dimensional theo-
ries from such a 4-d theory via a boundary construction? (See Question 18.8 below
and compare with [39].)
(C) Is there an effective notion of skeins, and skein relations, for the derived cate-
gory which allows one to calculate values in the 4-dimensional theory from (b)? In
particular, can one calculate factorization homology using skeins? Thinking further
about (a), can this skein theory be used to implement skein relations into a suffi-
ciently receptive 3-dimensional marking scheme? (See again Sections 2 and 9.4,
Question 18.9 below, and compare with [14, 10].)
   Questions (A)–(C) all ask, in the non-semisimple/derived setting, if there is an
ecosystem of interconnected topological field theories which parallel those one finds
in the fusion setting, for say Crane-Yetter vs. Chern-Simons/Reshetikhin-Turaev
theories. We record, finally, a principle concerning flat connections which is unique
to the non-semisimple world.
(D) Does the theory LD , or some enhanced version of it, couple naturally to flat
connections? (See Conjectures 18.10 and 18.11 below, and also [47].)
    We defer further discussions of point (D) to Section 18, though it is certainly a
deep and interesting story, both in mathematics and in physics.
    Thinking seriously about any of the questions above requires one to think about
the derived category in some locale where one has an effective theory of categories.
It is apparent that the triangulated setting will not suffice for this task, which then
prompts our transition to the world of ∞-categories.

11.5. Derivating LRT in ∞-categories. The remainder of the text–or more
precisely, the next five sections–is dedicated to the construction of a lift for the
marked theory from Theorem 11.1 to the level of ∞-categories. We suggest this lift
as a projection of a more expansive system of TQFTs, as proposed above, and so as
an indication that such a system should in fact exist. We return to the fundamental
70                                    CRIS NEGRON


questions (A–D), and provide a more thorough discussion of these issues, in Section
18 at the conclusion of the text.
   In lifting the theory LD to the homotopical setting, we follows essentially the
same processes outlined above. We begin in Sections 12 and 13 with the movement
from the abelian category of cochains to the homotopy ∞-category, then Kan extend
to produce a theory for the derived ∞-category. In comparing with Step 1 above,
we note that the homotopy ∞-category K (A♡ ) is no longer obtained from chains
over A♡ via a quotient construction, but via localization.
Remark 11.2. The methods employed below are not sensitive to our specific choice
of marking scheme (see Section 9.4). What’s required is the existence of a preced-
ing abelian theory at the level of cochains, for the given marking scheme, as in
Proposition 10.6.

                12. Localization for monoidal ∞-categories
   We claim that the discrete LRT theory LA : Bordnc      A → Ch(Vect)pro-f in from
Proposition 10.6 localizes to provide a symmetric monoidal functor, i.e. field theory,
from a bordism ∞-category Bordnc  K with labels in the homotopy ∞-category. While
this is more-or-less an immediate consequence of Corollary 10.10, one needs to
understand the behaviors of localization when applied to various types of fibrations
in order to effectively proceed in this direction.
   In this section we present an overview of localization for cocartesian fibrations,
and monoidal ∞-categories, which essentially follows work of Hinich on the topic
[43]. (See also [57, Propositions 2.2.1.9 & 4.1.7.4] and [65, Appendix A].)

12.1. Vertical localization. Let W be a collection of morphisms in an ∞-category
C . Recall that a localization for C along W is the choice of a functor F : C → C ′
for which restriction
                           F ∗ : Fun(C ′ , D) → Fun(C , D),
at arbitrary D, provides an equivalence onto the full subcategory Fun(C , D)W ⊆
Fun(C , D) spanned by those functors which send all morphisms in W to isomor-
phisms in D. Via a pushout construction [58, 05ZL], or fibrant replacement [56,
Proposition 3.1.3.7], we understand that localizations always exist.
Proposition 12.1 ([43, Proposition 2.1.4]). Let q : C → T be a cocartesian
fibration and W ⊆ C [1] be a collection of edges. Suppose that every edge in W lies
in the fiber Ct over some object t in T , that each fiber Wt = W ∩ Ct [1] is stable
under isomorphism in Fun(∆1 , Ct ), and that the transport functor f! : Ct → Cu
over each map f : t → u in T sends Wt into Wu . Then there is a pairing of a
localization F : C → C [W −1 ] with a map q ′ : C [W −1 ] → T which fts into a strictly
commuting diagram
                              C
                                               F    / C [W −1 ]                   (34)

                                  q                q′
                                              {
                                           T             ,
and for which the following hold:
    (i) q ′ : C [W −1 ] → T is an isofibration.
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                                71


   (ii) For any isofibration D → T , restriction provides an equivalence
                                                       ∼
                     F ∗ : FunT (C [W −1 ], D) → FunT (C , D)W .
   (iii) q ′ : C [W −1 ] → T is a cocartesian fibration, and F is a map of cocartesian
         fibrations over T .
   (iv) For each t in T the induced map on the fibers Ft : Ct → (C [W −1 ])t realizes
         the target category as a localization for Ct along the class Wt .
    (v) For any cocartesian fibration D → T , restriction provides an equivalence
                                                       ∼
                     F ∗ : Funcc
                              T (C [W
                                      −1
                                         ], D) → Funcc
                                                    T (C , D)W .

Furthermore, any such pairing (F, q ′ ) in which q ′ is an isofibration automatically
satisfies (ii)–(v).
  As in Section 3.11, FunT (C , D)W denotes the fiber
                    FunT (C , D)W = {q} ×Fun(C ,T ) Fun(C , D)W

        T (C , D)W is the full subcategory spanned by all functors which preserve
and Funcc
cocartesian edges, i.e. maps of cocartesian fibrations.

Proof. From either [56, Proposition 3.1.3.7] or [58, 05ZL], one sees that there is a
construction of the localization F ′ : C → C ′′ for which F ′ is injective, as a map of
simplicial sets. In this case the restriction equivalence
                               Fun(C ′′ , D) → Fun(C , D)W
is furthermore an isofibration [58, 01F3]. Hence, considering the case D = T , we
see that the structure map q lifts uniquely to a map q ′′ : C ′′ → T which completes
the proposed diagram.
                                                  w        q′
   We can factor q ′′ into a sequence C ′′ → C ′ → T in which w is an equivalence
and q ′ is an isofibration [58, 02VM]. Then the composition F = wF ′ : C → C ′
is also a localization of C along W , and we claim that this choice of localization,
C [W −1 ] = C ′ coupled with q ′ : C ′ → T , satisfies (i)–(iv). Indeed, we claim that
any choice of a localization F : C → C ′ with an isofibration q ′ : C ′ → T which
completes a diagram as in (34) satisfies (ii)–(v).
   (i) Holds by construction. (ii) Given an isofibration D → T , we have a diagram

         FunT (C ′ , D)                               / Fun(C ′ , D)
                                                                        ∼
                                )                                              )
                              FunT (C , D)W                                 / Fun(C , D)W

                                                            
               ∗                                      / Fun(C ′ , T )
                                              ′
                                          q                             ∼
                                                                            )   
                                   ) ∗
                          =
                                                                        / Fun(C , T )W .
                                                                q

in which the vertical maps are isofibrations [58, 01H7] and the front and back faces
are pullback diagrams. It follows that the induced map on the fibers FunT (C ′ , D) →
FunT (C , D)W is an equivalence as well, by Lemma 3.22.
   (iii) In [43, Section 2.2.2] Hinich constructs a localization E for C by localizing
the functor FCmarked : T → Catmarked∞     associated to C . The associated localized
72                                     CRIS NEGRON


functor FE : T → Cat∞ comes equipped with a transformation FC → FE so that
we have an induced map of cocartesian fibrations

                                   C
                                                            l                /E

                                       q
                                                                    ~
                                                           T                  .
By (ii) this triangle extends to a diagram

                                                       >C
                                                                ′
                                                                                       (35)
                                       F
                                                                q′

                                   C               l                         /E

                                       q
                                                             ~
                                                           T                  .
in which the sub-diagram     Λ33    → Cat∞ strictly commutes and the map of ∞-
categories C ′ → E is an equivalence, by uniqueness of localization. Since q ′ is
an isofibration it follows, via the above diagram and the fact that l is a map of
cocartesian fibrations, that q ′ is in fact a cocartesian fibration [58, 028A] and that
F is a map of cocartesian fibrations [58, 028B].
    (iv) By [43, Proposition 2.1.4] the localization E considered above has the prop-
erty that all of its fibers Et over T localize the respective fibers Ct . (This property
is actually clear from its construction via the localization of FC .) Via the equiv-
alence C ′ → E over T , and the above diagram (35), it follows that the fibers Ct′
similarly localize the fibers Ct [58, 023M].
    (v) Suppose that D → T is a cocartesian fibration. Given the equivalence of
(ii), it suffices to show that a functor G : C → D over T preserves cocartesian
edges if and only if its localized map G′ : C ′ → D preserves cocartesian edges.
However, since F is essentially surjective, and since cocartesian lifts of edges in the
base are unique, this just follows from the fact that F itself preserves cocartesian
edges.                                                                                □
Definition 12.2. Given a cocartesian fibration q : C → T , a collection of edges W
in C is said to be a vertical class over T if it satisfies the hypotheses of Proposition
12.1. Given such such a vertical class W , a vertical localization over T is a choice
of strictly commuting diagram

                              C
                                               F                         / C [W −1 ]

                                   q                                    q′
                                                      {
                                               T
          ′
in which q is a cocartesian fibration and F is a localization functor which preserves
cocartesian edges.
   Proposition 12.1 says that such vertical localizations for cocartesian fibrations
always exist. We also observe that vertical localizations are stable under pullback.
Proposition 12.3. Let q : C → T be a cocartesian fibration, W ⊆ C [1] be a
vertical class over T , and C [W −1 ] → T be the associated vertical localization over
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                        73


T . Consider any functor R → T , and let WR be the collection of all maps in the
fiber product CR = R ×T C which are sent to degenerate edges in R and to W in
C . Then WR is a vertical class in CR and the natural map
                                   −1
                              CR [WR  ] → R ×T (C [W −1 ])                       (36)
is an equivalence of cocartesian fibrations over R.
Proof. We note that the fibers of CR over R are identified with the fibers of C over
T , and under these identifications the transport functors for CR are identified with
the transport functors for C . So it is clear that WR is a vertical class. We consider
the claim that the map (36) is a equivalence.
   By Proposition 12.1 (v), the map of cocartesian fibrations CR → R ×T C [W −1 ]
induced by the map of cocartesian fibrations C → C [W −1 ] localizes to provide a
map of cocartesian fibrations
                                       −1
                            nat : CR [WR  ] → R ×T (C [W −1 ])
over R. This is our functor (36). Note that for each object r : ∗ → R, with image
t in T , the induced map on fibers (CR )r → Ct is an isomorphism which sends the
class (WR )r bijectively to Wt . Hence, from the diagram
                                   ∼
               (CR )r
                                   =                   / Ct


                                                         
           (CR [WR −1
                      ])r               / R ×T (C [W −1 ]) = (C [W −1 ])t
                                natr                         r

and Proposition 12.1 (iv), we find that each fiber natr over R is an equivalence. It
follows that nat itself is an equivalence [58, 023M].                             □

12.2. Aside: Generation of classes.
Lemma 12.4 (Morphism generation). Let E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ be a f rDisk-category
and W ± be classes of maps in the underlying ∞-categories E ± which are stable
under isomorphism in Fun(∆1 , E ± ) and contain all identities. Suppose also that
     • The transition map d : E − → E + sends W − into W + .
     • The product functors m : E ± × E ± → E ± send (W ± )2 into W ± .
There is a (unique) vertical class W in E ⊗ whose fibers W(I,µ) are precisely the
                                                                             ⊗
pullbacks of the product classes W I along the transport equivalences ρ! : E(I,µ) →
E .
 I


   To recall, the transition functor d : E − → E + is the transport functor along the
color negating identity id : D− → D+ , and the product functors m : E ± × E ± are
the transport functors along any like colored disk embedding D ⨿ D → D.

Proof. For the union W = ∪(I,µ) W(I,µ) , stability under transport follows by the
description of transport along maps in f rDisk⊗ provide in Lemma 6.12.         □

Definition 12.5. For a f rDisk-category q : E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ and classes W ± ⊆
E ± [1] as in Lemma 12.4, we call the corresponding collection W ⊆ E ⊗ [1] from
Lemma 12.4 the class generated by W ± .
74                                        CRIS NEGRON


12.3. Localization for monoidal ∞-categories. In general, one can use Propo-
sition 12.1 to effectively localize O-monoidal ∞-categories along classes of maps
which are stable under any collection of “generating morphisms” in O ⊗ , for a given
∞-operad or equifibered symmetric monoidal ∞-category O ⊗ . We cover two spe-
cific instances which are relevant for us.
Proposition 12.6. Let q : E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ be a f rDisk-category, and W ± be col-
lections of edges in the underlying ∞-categories E ± which are stable under isomor-
phism in Fun(∆1 , E ± ) and contain all identities. Suppose that the W ± are stable
under the product functors on E ± as well as the transition functor d : E − → E + .
Then the localization q ′ : E ⊗ [W −1 ] → f rDisk⊗ along the corresponding vertical
class (see Lemma 12.4) is a f rDisk-monoidal ∞-category.
Proof. Take G ⊗ = E ⊗ [W −1 ]. By Proposition 12.1, q ′ : G ⊗ → f rDisk is a co-
cartesian fibration and the fibers of the localization functor E ⊗ → G ⊗ induce
                         ∼
equivalences Et⊗ [Wt−1 ] → Gt⊗ , over each object t in f rDisk⊗ .
   Let f : t = (I, µ) → t′ be a cocartesian edge in f rDisk⊗ over the active
surjection K → {0} in Fin∗ . We have the diagram

                                Et⊗
                                               f!
                                                                   / E⊗
                                                                      ′
                                                                     t

                                          ρ!               ρ!
                                                       ~
                                               E   I

in which f! is an equivalence, by the definition of f rDisk-monoidality. So we see,
from the definition of W , that f!−1 (Wt′ ) = Wt . Similarly, for the inert projections
                                            ∼ Q
ρk : t → tk the transport
                 Q        equivalence Et⊗ → k∈K Et⊗      k
                                                           recovers Wt as the preimage
of the product k∈K Wtk . Hence, from the diagrams
                       ∼ / ⊗                                ∼ / Q
           Et⊗ [Wt−1 ]     Et′ [Wt−1
                                  ′ ]        Et⊗ [Wt−1 ]              ⊗   −1
                                                                  k Etk [Wtk ]

              ∼                       ∼                    ∼                                 ∼
                                                                                    Q 
              Gt⊗              / G ⊗′                      Gt⊗                     /        ⊗
                      transp      t                                       transp        k Gtk

                                                                             ∼                   ∼
we see that transport for G ⊗ induces equivalences Gt⊗ → Gt⊗′ and Gt⊗ →                                  ⊗
                                                                                                     k Gtk .
                                                                                                     Q
This verifies f rDisk-monoidality of the localization.                                                   □
     The analogous statement for symmetric monoidal ∞-categories is well-known.
Proposition 12.7 ([43, Proposition 3.2.2]). Let q : F ⊗ → Fin∗ be a symmetric
monoidal ∞-category, and W0 ⊆ F [1] be a class of maps which is stable under
isomorphism in Fun(∆1 , F ) and contains all identities. Suppose also that W0 is
stable under the product functor m : F × F → F , and define W ⊆ F ⊗ [1] to be
the collection of edges in the varied fibers (F ⊗ )I which are sent to W I under the
                                ∼
transport equivalences (F ⊗ )I → F I .
   The collection W is a vertical class in F ⊗ and the corresponding cocartesian
fibration q ′ : F ⊗ [W −1 ] → Fin∗ realizes F ⊗ [W −1 ] as a symmetric monoidal ∞-
category.
  One can show that in fact all “symmetric monoidal localizations” are of the form
considered in Proposition 12.7. We record a variation on this point.
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                        75


Lemma 12.8. Let q : F ⊗ → Fin∗ be a symmetric monoidal ∞-category and
W ⊆ F ⊗ [1] be a class of maps for which q(α) is a degenerate whenever α ∈ W .
Suppose that there is a localization l : F ⊗ → F ⊗ [W −1 ] which fits into a strictly
commuting diagram
                         F⊗
                                         l    / F ⊗ [W −1 ]

                                     q                      q′
                                          "    y
                                          Fin∗                           ,
and that the following hold:
   (a) q ′ is a cocartesian fibration which gives F ⊗ [W −1 ] the structure of a sym-
        metric monoidal ∞-category.
   (b) l is a map of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories.
                            −1
    (c) The natural map F [W{0} ] → F ⊗ [W −1 ]{0} is an equivalence.
Then a map of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories F : F ⊗ → D ⊗ factors to provide
a (uniquely associated) map of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories F ′ : F ⊗ [W −1 ] →
D ⊗ if and only if F{0} : F → D sends W{0} into the class of isomorphisms in D.
Proof. Throughout we let Isom(C ) ⊆ C [1] denote the class of isomorphisms in an
∞-category C . Take G ⊗ = F ⊗ [W −1 ] and consider the class U in F ⊗ [1] obtained
as the union of all of the maps
                          UI = lI−1 Isom(GI⊗ ) ⊆ FI⊗ [1],
                                              

across all finite sets I. Via the diagrams
                                GI⊗
                                              ∼                  / GI
                                  O           ρ̄!                   O
                                                                     I
                                lI                                  l{0}


                                FI⊗
                                              ∼                  / FI
                                              ρ̄!

in Cat∞ we understand that each fiber UI is the preimage of U{0}
                                                             I
                                                                 under the trans-
                        ∼
port equivalence FI⊗ → F I . Furthermore from the general compatibility with
transport
                                               f¯!
                                 GI⊗                             / G⊗
                                   O                                JO

                                 lI                                     lJ


                                 FI⊗                             / F⊗
                                               f¯!                  J

we understand that f¯! (UI ) ⊆ UJ for all f¯ : I → J in Fin∗ . Hence U is the vertical
class generated by U{0} over Fin∗ , as in Proposition 12.7, and via Proposition 12.1
we observe an equivalence of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories
                            F ⊗ [U −1 ]
                                                        ∼                    / G⊗

                                                                    q′
                                                    %        |
                                                        Fin∗                   .
See also [58, 0285].
76                                 CRIS NEGRON


   Consider now any symmetric monoidal functor F : F ⊗ → D ⊗ and suppose
that F (U{0} ) ⊆ Isom(D). Then by compatibility of F with transport we have
F (UI ) ⊆ Isom(DI⊗ ) for all I, and hence F (U ) ⊆ Isom(D ⊗ ). So we obtain an
induced map of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories F : G ⊗ → D ⊗ by Proposition
12.1 (v).
   We claim finally that F sends U{0} into Isom(D) if and only if F sends W{0}
into Isom(D). Clearly the former property implies the latter, and if we suppose
that F sends W{0} into isomorphisms then F{0} : F → D admits a factorization

                                        >G
                                 l{0}          ∃!


                               F                    /D
                                        F{0}

by condition (c). But this diagram implies F sends U{0} into Isom(D) as well, by
the definition of U .                                                          □
12.4. Derived ∞-categories as f rDisk-categories. Let A♡ be a (discrete) rib-
bon tensor category and q : A⊗ → f rDisk⊗ be the corresponding f rDisk-monoidal
∞-category of unbounded cochains. Recall the values
           A− = Aop = Ch(A♡ )op and A+ = Apro-f in = Ch(A♡
                                                         pro-f in ).

We have the classes Htop± ⊆ A± [1] of homotopy equivalences. These classes are
stable under duality −∗ : A− → A+ and under the tensor products A± ×A± → A± .
Stability under the tensor product, in particular, follows from the fact that the
tensor product preserves homotopy equivalences between morphisms in each factor.
We then have the class Htop in A⊗ generated by {Htop− , Htop+ }, and localization
produces a f rDisk-category
                              qK : K ⊗ → f rDisk⊗
whose underlying ∞-categories are the homotopy ∞-categories
         K − = K op = K (A♡ )op and K + = Kpro-f in = K (A♡
                                                          pro-f in ),

by the calculations K ± = A± [(Htop± )−1 ] [57, Proposition 1.3.4.5]. We note that
the localization qK : K ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ is the unique f rDisk-category which admits
a monoidal functor
                          A⊗                       /K⊗


                                      $    z
                                    f rDisk⊗
with the fibers A± → K ± over the ±-colored disks inverting homotopy equivalences
                                             ∼
and inducing equivalences A± [(Htop± )−1 ] → K ± . Such uniqueness is deducible
from Proposition 12.1 and [58, 028B].
   We can also consider the collections Qiso± ⊆ A± [1] of quasi-isomorphisms. These
classes are again stable under duality and tensoring, by Proposition 7.10, and hence
generate a vertical class Qiso in A⊗ . We therefore localize to obtain a f rDisk-
category
                                qD : D ⊗ → f rDisk⊗
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                         77


with underlying ∞-categories

            D − = D op = D(A♡ )op and D + = Dpro-f in = D(A♡
                                                           pro-f in )

[57, Proposition 1.3.5.15]. (See also Section 14.3.) As in the homotopy situation,
the fibration qD : D ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ is the unique f rDisk-structure on the derived
∞-category for which the localization functors A± → D ± lift to a f rDisk-monoidal
functor.


                          13. Homotopy LRT theories
   We construct a homotopical variant LK : Bordnc    K → V ectpro-f in of the discrete
Lyubashenko-Reshetikhin-Turaev theory from Section 10, and calculate the state
spaces in this theory. The state spaces are, in particular, identified with inner
mapping spaces for the action of V ectpro-f in on K (A♡  pro-f in ).
   In order to tame the topology in the target category, we show that LK also
restricts to a V ect-valued TQFT LKl-f in : Bordnc
                                                 Kl-f in → V ect from the ∞-category
of bordisms with labels in the homotopy ∞-category of locally finite cochains.

13.1. Homotopical vector spaces.

Definition 13.1. We take
     V ect := Ch(Vect)[Qiso−1 ] and V ectpro-f in := Ch(Vect)pro-f in [Qiso−1 ],
and refer to these localizations as the ∞-categories of homotopical vector spaces
and homotopical pro-finite vector spaces, respectively.

   Since quasi-isomorphisms are preserved under the tensor products on Ch(Vect)
and Ch(Vect)pro-f in , by Proposition 7.10, we see that these localizations inherit
unique symmetric monoidal structures under which the localization functors Ch(Vect)⋆ →
V ect⋆ are symmetric monoidal functors. This follows by Proposition 12.7.

Remark 13.2. As with any abelian category, one can explicitly construct the ∞-
categories V ect and V ectpro-f in by taking the dg nerves of the dg categories of
unbounded cochains Chdg (Vect) and Chdg (Vectpro-f in ), respectively [57, Proposi-
tion 1.3.4.5]. (We note that in this case the classes of homotopy equivalences and
quasi-isomorphisms agree, so that there are no distinctions between the homotopy
and derived ∞-categories.)
   However, one can also construct V ect as the stabilization of the ∞-category
K ank of linear Kan complexes–aka simplicial vector spaces.

   We observe that the pair of fully faithful, symmetric monoidal functors from
Ch± (Vectf in ) to Ch(Vect) and Ch(Vect)pro-f in (see Section 7.4) localizes to produce
fully faithful, symmetric monoidal embeddings

                                   V ect±
                                        l-f in

                               v                    )
                       V ect                       V ectpro-f in .
                                         ±                −1
As expected, we’ve taken V ect±
                              l-f in = Ch (Vectf in )[Qiso   ] in the above expression.
78                                   CRIS NEGRON


13.2. Discrete LRT with homotopical target. Let A♡ be a finite modular ten-
sor category with corresponding f rDisk-category A⊗ → f rDisk⊗ of unbounded
cochains. We have the symmetric monoidal functor L⊗          nc ⊗              ⊗
                                                    A : (BordA ) → Ch(Vect)pro-f in
                                                                        ⊗
from Proposition 10.6 and compose with the localization functor Ch(Vect)pro-f in →
V ect⊗
     pro-f in to obtain a map of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories

                          L⊗                   ⊗
                           A : (BordA ) → V ectpro-f in .
                                    nc ⊗


This is just a version of the discrete LRT theory with a homotopical target.

13.3. Homotopy LRT theories. Below we speak of a diagram in the ∞-category
SM∞ of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories. We recall the construction of this ∞-
category in Section C.1 of the appendix, but it suffices to understand that a 2-
simplex in SM∞ is a choice of composable functors between symmetric monoidal
∞-categories
                            F0⊗
                                                F02
                                                               / F⊗
                                                                 = 2
                                     F01                F12
                                           !
                                    q0         F1⊗        q2

                                                q1
                                                  
                                               Fin∗
and a choice of natural isomorphism σ : ∆1 × F0⊗ → F2⊗ in FunFin∗ (F0 , F2 ) with
σ0 = F12 F01 , σ1 = F02 , and q2 σ = idq0 .
Proposition 13.3. Consider a finite modular tensor category A♡ and let K ⊗ =
K (A♡ )⊗ → f rDisk⊗ be the associated f rDisk-category for the homotopy ∞-
category of unbounded cochains over A♡ . There is a unique symmetric monoidal
functor LK : BordncK → V ectpro-f in from the ∞-category of K -labeled bordisms
which completes a diagram

                     Bordnc
                                               LA
                                                              / V ectpro-f in
                         A                                        8
                              loc
                                          $              LK

                                         Bordnc
                                             K

in SM∞ .
Proof. We obtain the fibration K ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ via vertical localization of the
fibration A⊗ → f rDisk⊗ along homotopy equivalence, so that the map
                                      ⊗       nc ⊗
                              (Bordnc
                                   A ) → (BordK )

realizes (Bordnc  ⊗                                                 nc ⊗
              K ) as the symmetric monoidal localization of (BordA ) along the
pullback class Htop(Bordnc
                         ∗ )
                            ⊗ (Proposition 12.3). Furthermore, taking the fiber at

{0} in Fin, which is the same as taking the fiber along the underlying ∞-category
Bordnc           nc ⊗
      ∗ → (Bord∗ ) , produces an equivalence
                                     −1                  ∼
                          Bordnc
                              A [HtopBordnc
                                         ∗
                                            ] → Bordnc
                                                    K
             TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                                        79


of cocartesian fibrations over Bordnc
                                   ∗ , again by Proposition 12.3. Thus Lemma 12.8
tells us that the functor
                                       ⊗          nc ⊗
                               (Bordnc
                                    A ) → (BordK )
is universal amongst symmetric monoidal functors which invert the class HtopBord∗
in the underlying ∞-category.
   Now, according to the construction from Proposition 12.3, we can describe the
class HtopBord∗ explicitly. These are simply bordisms Mα : Σx → Σy whose under-
lying topology Mtop(α) is the identity map, i.e. the 3-manifold M = Σ × [0, 1] with
embedded cylinders Cyl ×I → Σ × [0, 1] traveling in straight lines from Σtop(x) to
Σtop(y) = Σtop(x) , and whose labeling morphisms αi : xi → yi are all homotopy
equivalences. Hence, by Corollary 10.10, the LRT theory
                                        A → V ectpro-f in
                               LA : Bordnc
sends all maps in HtopBord∗ to isomorphisms in V ectpro-f in . We therefore obtain
the claimed factorization
                                                 L⊗
                    (Bordnc
                         A )
                            ⊗                     A
                                                                 / V ect⊗                          (37)
                                                                    8 pro-f in

                                loc⊗         &               ∃ L⊗
                                                                K

                                           (Bordnc
                                                K)
                                                   ⊗


in SM∞ .
   For uniqueness, restriction along the localization functor provides an equivalence
                              ⊗              ∼                      ⊗
        Fin∗ ((BordK ) , V ectpro-f in ) → FunFin∗ ((BordA ) , V ectpro-f in )Htop ,
                   nc ⊗                                  nc ⊗
     Funcc                                    cc


by Proposition 12.1 (v). Hence the homotopy fiber
                               ⊗           htop
         Fin∗ ((BordK ) , V ectpro-f in ) ×Funcc
                    nc ⊗
      Funcc                                                      nc ⊗     ⊗                {LA }
                                                      Fin∗ ((BordA ) ,Vectpro-f in )Htop

is contractible [58, 033M]. By defintion of the homotopy pullback [58, 032Z], this
contractible space parametrizes those symmetric monoidal functors which complete
such a diagram (37) in SM∞ .                                                    □
Definition 13.4. For any finite modular tensor category A♡ , with corresponding
homotopy ∞-category K = K (A♡ ), we refer to the symmetric monoidal functor
                                       K → V ectpro-f in
                              LK : Bordnc
from Proposition 13.3 as the homotopy LRT theory.
13.4. Calculating the state spaces. We recall that the state spaces in discrete
LRT are identified with the Hom complexes
                                       ∼
                            LA (Σx ) → Hom∗A (C ⊗g , mf (x)),
whenever Σ is connected of genus g and mf : AI → A+ = Apro-f in is the product
associated to any embedding D × I → D to a positively colored disk. We can
obtain the Hom complexes in a manner internal to Apro-f in by taking inner-Homs
for the action of Ch(Vect)pro-f in on Apro-f in (Lemma C.13). We recall also that
the object C here is the canonical coend in A♡ .
   For Kpro-f in = K (A♡                                                   ♡
                        pro-f in ), the action of Ch(Vectpro-f in ) on Ch(Apro-f in ) local-
izes to endow Kpro-f in with a natural module structure over V ectpro-f in (Corollary
80                                         CRIS NEGRON


C.16), and the V ectpro-f in -module category Kpro-f in admits inner-Homs. In par-
ticular, for any bounded complex of finite length objects x in Kpro-f in we have the
associated internal mapping spaces
                    MapsK              (x, −) : Kpro-f in → V ectpro-f in                        (38)
                            pro-f in


(Corollary C.18). The following is an analog to Lemma 10.9 for homotopy LRT.
Proposition 13.5. Consider a finite modular tensor category A♡ and the corre-
sponding f rDisk-category K ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ for the homotopy ∞-category. For a
connected genus g surface Σ with markings ζ : D × I → Σ, and any choice of map
f : D × I → D to a positive disk in f rDisk, there is a natural isomorphism
                                       ∼
                         LK (Σ− ) → MapsK                              (C ⊗g , mf −)
                                                            pro-f in


of functors from K I ∼      K )Σζ to V ectpro-f in .
                     = (Bordnc

Proof. Given any f rDisk-category E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ we have the canonical identifi-
cation
                                                                                             ∼
                                    ∗ ×f rDisk⊗ E   = {I} ×f rDisk⊗ E ⊗ → E I .
                                                  ⊗
     (Bordnc
          E )Σζ = {Σζ } ×Bordnc
                             ∗
                                Bordnc
We consider the fibration Bordnc       nc
                              K → Bord∗ and, taking the fiber at Σζ , the diagram
from Proposition 13.3 produces a diagram
                                                   LA |Σζ
                           AI                                   / V ectpro-f in
                                                                     9
                                loc        !                  LK |Σζ

                                                   K   I
                                                                           .
The fact that the map AI → K I is the localization functor along homotopy
equivalences follows by Proposition 12.3.
                             ∼
   Via the isomorphism LA → loc ◦ Hom∗A (C ⊗g , mf −) we obtain an isomorphic
diagram
                                loc Hom∗   ⊗
                                       A (C ,mf −)
                           AI                                   / V ectpro-f in
                                                                     9
                                loc            !              LK |Σζ

                                                   KI                      ,
and hence conclude that LK |Σζ is the unique functor obtained from Hom∗A (C ⊗g , mf −)
via localization. Rather, LK |Σζ is isomorphic to any other functor which completes
such a diagram.
   By Corollary C.18 and the fact that the localization functor A⊗ → K ⊗ is a map
of f rDisk-categories, we have a diagram
                           mf                      Hom∗ (C ⊗g ,−)
                     AI          / A+                                  / Ch(Vect)pro-f in

                   loc          loc                                                  loc
                                                                               
                    KI          /K+                                      / V ectpro-f in .
                           mf                      Maps(C ⊗g ,−)
             TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                                               81


in Cat∞ . This diagram reduces, via a sequence of horn fillings, to provide a diagram
                                 loc Hom∗   ⊗
                                        A (C ,mf −)
                            AI                          / V ectpro-f in
                                                             9
                                 loc   !            Maps(C ⊗g ,mf −)
                                           K   I

                                                           ∼
in Cat∞ and a subsequent isomorphism LK |Σζ → MapsK                                  (C ⊗g , mf −).         □
                                                                          pro-f in


Remark 13.6. As is clear from the proof, or more directly from Corollary C.18
in the appendix, each mapping space at fixed x in K + is identified with the Hom
complex
                   MapsK      (C ⊗g , x) ∼
                                         = loc ◦ Hom∗A (C ⊗g , x).
                            pro-f in

So, as an object, this complex is not mysterious. Its behaviors on higher simplices
in K represent the only non-trivial point. However, even this higher structure can
be understood concretely if one adopts any explicit construction of the homotopy
∞-category.
13.5. Restricting to locally finite complexes. We are interested in producing
a version of the field theory LK which takes values in V ect, rather than in the
pro-finite completion V ectpro-f in . It is relatively clear that the restriction of LK
to the subcategory of bordisms with locally finite labels has the desired property.
We argue the point explicitly below.
   Take K = K (A♡ ) for a ribbon tensor category A♡ and consider the corre-
sponding f rDisk-category K ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ from Section 12.4. Let Kl-f          ±
                                                                                in ⊆ K
                                                                                       ±

be the full subcategories spanned by complexes which are isomorphic (homotopic)
to complexes in the full subcategories K ± (A♡               −   ♡          +     ♡
                                                  f in ) in K (A ) and K (Apro-f in ),
                             ⊗
respectively. Define now Kl-f in ⊆ K as the full subcategory whose fibers along
                                          ⊗

various t = (I, µ) in f rDisk⊗ are the pullbacks
                                ⊗
                             (Kl-f                          /KI
                                   in )t                       l-f in                                     (39)


                                                               
                                 KI⊗
                                                   ∼         / K I,
                                                   ρ!

as in Section 6.5.
   Since locally finite complexes are stable under tensoring and duality, Proposition
                       ⊗
6.11 tells us that Kl-f  in is a f rDisk-category, in the expected way.
                             ⊗               ⊗
Lemma 13.7. The map Kl-f       in → f rDisk inherited from K
                                                                 ⊗
                                                                   via restriction is
a cocartesian fibration which gives Kl-f in the structure of f rDisk⊗ -category, and
                                       ⊗
                 ⊗
the inclusion Kl-f in → K
                           ⊗
                             is a f rDisk-monoidal functor.

   For any complex x in K + (A♡
                              f in ) the linear mapping space MapsK                                  (C ⊗g , x)
                                                                                          pro-f in

lies in the symmetric subcategory V ect+      l-f in in V ectpro-f in . Since the inclusion
V ectl-f in → V ectpro-f in is fully faithful, the corresponding map of symmetric
     +

monoidal ∞-categories
                                                       ⊗
                                    l-f in ) → V ectpro-f in
                                            ⊗
                              (V ect+
82                                         CRIS NEGRON

                                                              ±
is also fully faithful [58, 01VB]. So, since all objects in Kl-f in are isomorphic to an
                   ♡
object in K (Af in ), the entire restricted TQFT
               ±


                                         L⊗
                                          K |(BordK
                                                  nc            )⊗
                                                       l-f in


admits a unique symmetric monoidal lift to the ∞-category of locally finite, bounded
below, homotopical vector spaces

                                             (V ect+
                                                   l-f in )
                                                            ⊗
                                              7
                                   ∃!

                                                                             '
                 (Bordnc
                      Kl-f in )
                               ⊗                                         / V ect⊗
                                                                                pro-f in .
                                                  L⊗
                                                   K



Via a consideration of the symmetric monoidal embedding V ect+
                                                             l-f in → V ect, we
observe the following.
                                                                               ⊗
Proposition 13.8. Let A♡ be a finite modular tensor category and Kl-f            in →
       ⊗
f rDisk be the associated f rDisk-category of partially bounded, locally finite cochains.
There is a symmetric monoidal functor

                                             Kl-f in → V ect
                              LKl-f in : Bordnc

which is obtained from LK via restriction. Furthermore, for any connected genus
g surface Σζ with marking set I, and embedding f : D × I → D to a positively
colored disk, there is a natural isomorphism
                                              ∼
                          LKl-f in (Σ− ) → MapsK (C ⊗g , mf −)

of functors from Kl-f    ∼
                      in = (BordKl-f in )Σζ to V ect.
                   I            nc


Proof. To ease notation we take Kl-f in = Kl-f     +
                                                     in and V ectl-f in = V ectl-f in . The
                                                                                +

only issue is the identification of the state spaces. First, via the action of Ch+ (Vectf in )
on Ch+ (A♡ f in ) we obtain a natural action of V ectl-f in on the homotopy ∞-category
Kl-f in via localization (Proposition C.14). From the inner-Homs for Ch+ (A♡            f in ),
which are just given by the Hom-complexes, we also obtain inner-Homs for Kl-f in
via localization (Proposition C.17). In particular, the inner-Homs for Kl-f in agree
with those of the ambient category Kpro-f in of pro-finite complexes,
                        MapsK            = MapsK                 |Kfop
                                                                     in ×Kl-f in
                                                                                 .
                                l-f in               pro-f in


Similarly, we have the inclusion Kl-f in → K = K (A♡ ), inner-Homs MapsK for
the action of V ect on K , and an identification of inner-Homs
                           MapsK             = MapsK |Kfop
                                                         in ×Kl-f in
                                                                     ,
                                    l-f in


so that we may write MapsK               (C ⊗g , mf −) = MapsK (C ⊗ , mf −)|(K ⊗                         .   □
                                l-f in                                                       l-f in )I



Remark 13.9. One can (easily) show that the theory LKl-f in is the unique one
obtained from LAl-f in = LA |Bordnc
                                 A
                                    via localization.
                                         l-f in
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                        83


                14. Adjoints and Kan extension over a base
   From our theory LK : Bordnc    K → V ectpro-f in for the homotopy ∞-category we
can produce a theory LD : Bordnc    D → V ectpro-f in for the derived ∞-category as
well. We proceed, in particular, via a Kan extension along the localization functor
Bordnc            nc
      K → BordD . In order to control this extension to a sufficient degree–for
example, in order to calculate the state spaces in LD –we want to understand what
such a Kan extension actually looks like.
   In this section we give a general presentation of relative Kan extension, and
relative adjoints for fibrations over a fixed base. We employ relative constructions
in order to account for behaviors of monoidal structures under Kan extension, for
example.
Remark 14.1. There is a more complicated notion of operadic Kan extension [57,
Definition 3.1.2.2]. For our purposes, we expect that one can employ operadic Kan
extension instead of relative Kan extension, and obtain the same output. So the
distinction is not a deep one for us, and the reader might consult [57, Section 3.1.2]
for an alternate point of view.
14.1. Relative adjoints.
Definition 14.2. We say a functor between isofibrations

                                C
                                          F                /E

                                     q                 p
                                                   ~
                                          T
admits a right adjoint relative to T if there is another functor

                                E
                                          G                /C

                                    p                  q
                                               ~
                                          T
and a transformation ε : GF → idC in FunT (C , C ) which exhibits G as right
adjoint to F , in the non-relative sense of the term [58, 02EJ].
  We note that this notion is symmetric with respect to units and counits.
Lemma 14.3. If F : C → E is a functor between isofibrations over a given base
T , and G : E → C is a right adjoint relative to T with corresponding counit
ε : GF → idC , then there is a unit transformation u : idE → F G which lies in
FunT (E , E ).
Proof. Let q : C → T and p : E → T be the structure maps and let u′ : F G → idE
be any choice of unit. We have the diagram

                                         GF
                                          < G
                                G(u′ )                 εG

                                                            "
                               G                                /G
                                         idG
84                                           CRIS NEGRON


in Fun(E , C ) which provides a diagram
                                                   @p
                                        p(u′ )                id


                                        p                          / p
                                                   id
                                    ′
after applying q. So we see p(u ) is isomorphic to the identity on p in the functor
category Fun(∆1 × E , T ). Since the map
     p∗ : Fun(∆1 × E , E ) → Fun(∂∆1 × E , E ) ×Fun(∂∆1 ×E ,T ) Fun(∆1 × E , T )                  (40)
is an isofibration [58, 01F1] we can find a diagram

                                            FG
                                                   id       / FG                                  (41)
                                             O                < O
                                            u′                  u

                                            idE             / idE
                                                   id

in Fun(E , E ) which maps to the paired diagrams

                     FG
                           id   / FG                                         pO
                                                                                  id   /p
                                                                                       A O
                                                 and                p(u′ )        id         id

                     idE        / idE                                        p         /p
                           id                                                     id

under (40). The transformation u : idE → F G in (41) provides the requisite unit
transformation.                                                               □
  Since the unit and counit transformations have constant projections to the base,
we can pull back along any map R → T to obtain an adjunction over R from any
adjunction over T .
Proposition 14.4 ([57, Proposition 7.3.2.5]). Suppose a map between isofibrations

                                    C
                                                   F                /E

                                                        ~
                                                   T
admits a right adjoint G : E → C relative to T . Then for any functor R → T the
pullback
                             GR : R ×T E → R ×T C
is a right adjoint to FR relative to R.
   As for the existence of such adjunctions, we have a convenient reduction to the
fibers in the cocartesian case.
Proposition 14.5 ([57, Proposition 7.3.2.6]). A map between cocartesian fibrations

                                    C
                                                   F                /E

                                                        ~
                                                   T
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                           85


admits a right adjoint relative to T if and only if, for each t in T , the fiber
Ft : Ct → Et admits a right adjoint.
14.2. Adjoints and (relative) Kan extension. Let l : C → C ′ be a functor
between ∞-categories. We recall that a left Kan extension for a functor F : C → E ,
along l, is the choice of a functor F ′ : C ′ → E and transformation α : F → F ′ l
which realizes, at each x in C ′ , the value F ′ (x) as a colimit of the diagram

                                   f orget   8C      F

                                C/x                      /& E .

(See [58, 02Y7].) Here C/x is the relative overcategory
                                  C/x := C ×C ′ C/x
                                                 ′
                                                    ,
i.e. the ∞-category which parametrizes objects x̃ in C equipped with a specified
map l(x̃) → x.
    The following is standard in 1-category theory, and should be well-known in the
∞-categorical setting as well.
Lemma 14.6. Let l : C → C ′ be any functor which admitis a right adjoint R :
C ′ → C . Then any functor F : C → E admits a left Kan extension along l, and
this Kan extension can be calculated as the composite F ′ = F R : C ′ → E along
with the shifted unit transformation F (u) : F → F ′ l.
Proof. At each x in C ′ we have the transformation
                                  F (u)           F ′ (can)
                           F |C/x → F ′ l|C/x       →         F ′ (x)               (42)
in Fun(C/x , E ), where F ′ (x) is the constant diagram of value F ′ (x). The transfor-
mation F ′ l|C/x → F ′ (x) is obtained as follows: We have the coslice equivalence
                     ∼
                C/x → C ′ ×Fun({0},C ′ ) Fun(∆1 , C ′ ) ×Fun({1},C ′ ) {x}
[58, 02GH] which specifies, and is specified by the choice of a canonical transfor-
mation
                               can : ∗ → Fun(∆1 × C/x , C ′ )
with can0 = l|C/x and can1 = x. Rather, the coslice equivalence chooses a
transformation can : l|C/x → x, and we apply F ′ to obtain the transformation
F ′ (can) : F ′ l|C/x → F ′ (x). All we need to know about this transformation is
that it evaluates at each object tx̃ = (x̃, t : l(x̃) → x) in Cx/ to the chosen map
cantx̃ = t : l(x) → x.
    To say that F ′ is a left Kan extension for F along l is, by definition, to say that
the transformation (42) realizes F ′ (x) as a colimit for the diagram F |C/x , for each
x in C ′ . Let us denote the transformation (42) by canF   u and argue this point.
    Since the functor l admits a right adjoint R : C ′ → C , the counit map εx :
lR(x) → x is a terminal object (R(x), εx ) in the relative overcategory Cx/ [58,
                                                           ′
02J9, 038S]. Hence the transformation canF     u realizes F (x) as a colimit of the given
diagram if and only if its restriction along the inclusion (R(x), εx ) : ∗ → C/x realizes
F ′ (x) as a colimit for the trivial diagram F R(x) : ∗ → E [58, 02XW]. But now we
simply observe
                                                                          
                   F                     F (uR(x) )         F R(εx )
              (canu )(Rx,εx ) = F R(x) → F RlR(x) → F R(x) .
86                                   CRIS NEGRON


By the definition of a unit and counit for an adjunction [58, 02EJ] this composite is
isomorphic to the identity, and in particular an isomorphism. Hence canF      u |(Rx,εx )
                                              ′
is a colimit diagram, canF  u  realizes all F   (x) as a colimit for the corresponding
diagram F |C/x , and F ′ is realized as a left Kan extension for F .                  □
     As with adjoints, we are interested in a relative notion of Kan extension.
Definition 14.7. Consider a partial diagram of isofibrations

                                                             7/ E
                                                 F
                                 C
                                         l   '
                                                 C′
                                     q           q′      p

                                                   
                                                 T             .
A left Kan extension F ′ : C ′ → E of F along l is said to be a relative left Kan
extension over T if F ′ is a map over T and if the given transformation α : F → F ′ l
satisfies p(α) = idq .
     We obtain immediately a relative version of Lemma 14.6.
Lemma 14.8. Consider isofibrations q : C → T and q ′ : C ′ → T . If l : C → C ′
admits a right adjoint over T then any functor F : C → E over T admits a left
Kan extension over T . In particular, for such a right adjoint {R, ε}, any choice
u : idC → Rl of a unit over T provides a left Kan extension {F R, F (u)} over T .
Remark 14.9. We expect that one can establish the existence of relative Kan
extensions, in the cocartesian setting, by checking at the fibers (cf. [56, Proposition
4.3.3.10]). However, we have no need for such a result.
14.3. Homotopy vs. derived ∞-categories. We consider a standard example
concerning the construction of the derived ∞-category from the homotopy ∞-
category, via reflective localization.
   Consider a finitely generated linear abelian category A♡ , in the precise sense
of Definition C.8, and its homotopy ∞-category K = K (A♡ ). Suppose also
that A♡ has enough projectives, so that K has enough K-projective complexes.
Explicitly, we assume that each complex x admits a quasi-isomorphism P → x from
a complexes P for which the functor Hom∗A (P, −) preserves quasi-isomorphisms, and
hence for which the inner-Hom functor MapsK (P, −) preserves quasi-isomorphisms.
See for example [48, Theorems 2.3, 2.6] or [25, Lemma 13.3].
   Dually, the ∞-category Kpro-f in = K (A♡   pro-f in ) admits enough K-injectives.
We take
                 Inj K − = (Proj K )op and Inj K + = Inj Kpro-f in
the full subcategories spanned by K-injectives in K − = K (A♡ )op and K + =
K (A♡ )pro-f in , respectively. We note that isomorphisms in these subcategories,
which are homotopy equivalences, agree precisely with quasi-isomorphisms, and
the statement that we have enough K-projectives is precisely the statement that
the full subcategories
                                   Inj K ± ⊆ K ±
are reflective [58, 01F5]. We therefore obtain the following.
           TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                        87


Lemma 14.10. Let A♡ be a finitely generated linear abelian category with enough
projectives, and take K ± one of K (A♡ )op or K (A♡ pro-f in ). The fully faithful
inclusion R± : Inj K ± → K ± admits a left adjoint
                                l : K ± → Inj K ± .
Furthermore, this left adjoint realizes Inj K ± as a localization of K ± along the
class of quasi-isomorphisms.
Proof. Given the above analysis, this is an immediate consequence of reflective
localization. See in particular [58, 02FA, 02FE, 04JL].                      □
  Uniqueness for localizations now gives the following.
Corollary 14.11. Let A♡ be a finitely generated linear abelian category with enough
projectives, and let D ± = K ± [Qiso−1 ] denote one of the derived ∞-categories
D − = D(A♡ )op or D + = D(A♡pro-f in ). The following hold:
   (1) The localization functor loc : K ± → D ± admits a fully faithful right adjoint
       R± : D ± → K ± .
   (2) For each x in K ± , the unit transformation ux : x → R± ◦ loc(x) is a
       quasi-isomorphism, and for each y in D ± the counit transformation εy :
       loc ◦ R± (y) → y is an isomorphism.
   (3) The right adjoint R± is an equivalence onto the full subcategory Inj K ±
       spanned by K-injectives in K ± .
                                                                     ∼
   (4) The localization functor restricts to an equivalence Inj K ± → D ± .
   Let us suppose now that A♡ is a finite ribbon tensor category and consider
the corresponding cocartesian fibration q : K ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ for the homotopy
∞-category (see Section 12.4). We consider the full subcategories Inj K ± and, as
in Section 6.5, and the associated full symmetric monoidal subcategory Inj K ⊗ in
K ⊗ whose fibers, along objects t = (I, µ) in f rDisk⊗ , fit into pullback squares
                           Inj Kt⊗              / Inj K I


                                                   
                            Kt ⊗                 / K I.
                                         ρ!

We have the following particular instance of Lemma 6.9.
Lemma 14.12. Let A♡ be a finite ribbon tensor category. The subcategory Inj K ⊗
of K-injective complexes is a symmetric monoidal ∞-category, and the inclusion
Inj K ⊗ → K ⊗ is a symmetric monoidal functor. Furthermore, Inj K ⊗ is stable
under isomorphism in K ⊗ .
   As a consequence of isoclosure we see that the structure map K ⊗ → f rDisk⊗
restricts to an isofibration Inj K ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ .
Proposition 14.13. Suppose A♡ is a finite ribbon tensor category. For q : K ⊗ →
f rDisk⊗ and q ′ : D ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ the corresponding cocartesian fibration for the
homotopy and derived ∞-categories, the following hold:
    (1) The (vertical) localization functor loc : K ⊗ → D ⊗ admits a relative right
        adjoint R : D ⊗ → K ⊗ over f rDisk⊗ .
88                                   CRIS NEGRON


     (2) The right adjoint R is fully faithful, and an equivalence onto the full sub-
         category Inj K ⊗ ⊆ K ⊗ spanned by K-injectives.
     (3) The localization functor loc : K ⊗ → D ⊗ restricts to an equivalence of
                               ∼
         isofibrations Inj K ⊗ → D ⊗ .
Proof. (1) Over any object (I, µ) the fiber of localization reproduces the localization
functor
                                  locI : K I → D I ,
by Proposition 12.1, and each fiber locI admits a fully faithful right adjoint RI :
D I → K I by Corollary 14.11. Hence loc admits a right adjoint R : D ⊗ → K ⊗
over f rDisk⊗ , by Proposition 14.5.
   (2) & (3) By Proposition 14.4 the fiber of R over any (I, µ) recovers the right ad-
joint RI to the localization functor locI , and we know that this functor has image in
the full subcategory Inj K I by Corollary 14.11 (3). Furthermore, again after reduc-
ing to the fibers, the same result tells us that the unit and counit transformations
provide natural isomorphisms
                           ∼                               ∼
                        x → R ◦ loc(x) and loc ◦ R(y) → y
whenever x is in Inj K ⊗ and y is in D ⊗ . However, the unit and counits for the
fibers RI and locI are just obtained from the unit and counit transformations for R
and loc. In particular, these transformations realize R and loc|Inj K ⊗ as mutually
inverse equivalences over f rDisk⊗ .                                              □
Corollary 14.14. Suppose we are in the situation of Proposition 14.13. The struc-
ture map K ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ restricts to a cocartesian fibration Inj K ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ .
Furthermore, the right adjoint R : D ⊗ → K ⊗ to localization is a fully faithful sym-
metric monoidal functor which restricts to an equivalence of cocartesian fibration
D ⊗ → Inj K ⊗ .
Proof. The first and third claims follow by [58, 028A], and the second claim follows,
subsequently, from the fact that the right adjoint factors as a composite
                                     ∼
                                D ⊗ → Inj K ⊗ ,→ K ⊗
of an equivalence of cocartesian fibrations composed with an inclusion of symmetric
monoidal ∞-categories.                                                           □
Remark 14.15. Since K-injective complexes are stable under tensoring, in the
complete setting, the only thing that is stopping the inclusion Inj K ⊗ → K ⊗ from
being a map of cocartesian fibrations over f rDisk⊗ is the unit. Specifically, the
unit in the category of K-injectives is provided by an injective resolution I of the
unit in K ± , so that the inclusion does not preserve unit object. See Lemma 15.6
below.
Corollary 14.16. Suppose A♡ is a finite ribbon tensor category. Then for any
functor T → f rDisk⊗ , any ∞-category E over T , and any map F : T ×f rDisk⊗
K ⊗ → E of ∞-categories over T , a relative left Kan extension
                               F ′ : T ×f rDisk⊗ D ⊗ → E
along locT : T ×f rDisk⊗ K ⊗ → T ×f rDisk⊗ D ⊗ exists. This extension is explicitly
given by the composite F ′ = F RT .
Proof. Apply Proposition 14.13 and Lemma 14.8.                                       □
             TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                                               89


14.4. Uniqueness of Kan extension over a discrete base. We consider the
following particular expression of the universal property for Kan extensions.
Proposition 14.17. Consider functors F : C → E and l : C → C ′ . For any left
Kan extension F ′ : C ′ → E , the structural transformation α : F → F ′ l realizes F ′
as an initial object in the relative undercategory
                  Fun(C ′ , E )F/ = Fun(C ′ , E ) ×Fun(C ,E ) Fun(C , E )F/ .
Proof. For any choice of functor G : C ′ → E , the usual universal property for Kan
extensions tells us that the sequence
                                 l∗                                          −◦α
           HFun(C ′ ,E ) (F ′ , G) → HFun(C ,E ) (F ′ l, Gl) → HFun(C ,E ) (F, Gl)
is a homotopy equivalence [58, 0309]. (Here the H⋆ are arbitrary choices of Hom
functors [58, 03MR].) When we choose G = F ′ , this functor sends the identity idF
to α. We therefore have a natural isomorphism
                                                       ∼
                         HFun(C ′ ,E ) (F ′ , −) → HFun(C ,E ) (F, −l)
of functors from Fun(C ′ , E ) to K an and subsequent equivalence between the cor-
responding cocartesian fibrations

    Fun(C ′ , E )F ′ /
                                   ∼                          / Fun(C ′ , E ) ×Fun(C ,E ) Fun(C , E )F/


                              '            t
                             Fun(C ′ , E )

[58, 02GT, 01QC] which sends the object idF ′ to (F ′ , α). Since idF ′ is initial in
Fun(C ′ , E )F ′ / [58, 02J2], α is initial in the given fiber product.            □

   This universality statement directly implies uniqueness of Kan extensions over a
discrete base.
Proposition 14.18. Let Z be a discrete category, and consider a partial diagram

                                                                      7/ E
                                                      F
                                      C                                                                   (43)
                                              l   '
                                                      C′
                                          q           q′          p

                                                        
                                                       Z
of maps between cocartesian fibrations over Z. Suppose also that one of the following
conditions hold:
       i) For each x′ in C ′ the relative overcategory C/x′ is nonempty.
      ii) E has no initial object.
     iii) E admits an initial object o for which AutZ (p(o)) = 1.
If a left Kan extension of F over Z exists, then this extension is uniquely determined
up to a contractible spaces of choices. In particular, the full subcategory
              LK an(F ; Z) ⊆ FunZ (C ′ , E ) ×FunZ (C ,E ) FunZ (C , E )F/
spanned by left Kan extensions over Z is a contractible Kan complex.
90                                           CRIS NEGRON


Proof. Consider two ∞-categories over Z, qi : Bi → Z. Since Z is discrete, the
subcomplex
                         FunZ (B0 , B1 ) ⊆ Fun(B0 , B1 )
is the subcategory spanned by all functors over Z and all transformations ζ : F →
F ′ between such functors for which q1 (ζ) : q0 → q0 is the identity. Furthermore,
transformations in FunZ (B0 , B1 ) satisfy the 2-of-3 property in that for any diagram
                                                         ′
                                                    >F
                                            ζ0                  ζ1

                                                                      !
                                       F                             / F ′′
                                                     ζ2

in which two of the ζj are in FunZ (B0 , B1 ), the third transformation is also in
FunZ (B0 , B1 ).
   Considering now the situation (43). If we have two left Kan extensions over Z,
say F0 , F1 : C ′ → E with transformations αi : F → Fi l, then the universal property
of Kan extensions promises the existence of a natural isomorphism ζ : F0 → F1
which completes a diagram

                                                   > F0 l
                                           α0                   ζl

                                                                       !
                                   F                                 / F1 l.
                                                     α1

Since the αi are transformations over Z we conclude that ζl is a transformation
over Z as well, and hence that ζ itself is a transformation over Z.
     To see this clearly, we consider an object x′ in C ′ and the corresponding map
p(ζx′ ) : q ′ (x′ ) → q ′ (x′ ). If x′ admits a map t : l(x) → x′ from some x in C then, via
cocartesianness of q and q ′ and the fact that l is a map of cocartesian fibrations,
we can assume that x and t lie in a single fiber over Z, i.e. that q(x) = q ′ (x′ ) and
q ′ (t) = idq′ (x′ ) . In this case, we have p(ζl(x) ) = idq(x) and the diagram
                                                 p(ζl(x) )=id
                               q ′ (l(x))                            / q ′ (l(x))

                          q ′ (t)=id                                          q ′ (t)=id
                                                                            
                                q ′ (x′ )                             / q ′ (x′ )
                                                   p(ζx′ )

in Z implies p(ζx′ ) = id.
   On the other hand, if x′ admits no maps from an object of the form l(x) then
F0 (x) and F1 (x) are both colimits over the empty diagram C/x → E , and are hence
initial objects in E which lie in the same fiber over Z. In this case assumption (iii)
must hold, which forces p(ζx′ ) = idq′ (x) .
   Let us take now
                    ΠZ = FunZ (C ′ , E ) ×FunZ (C ,E ) FunZ (C , E )F/
and
                     Π = Fun(C ′ , E ) ×Fun(C ,E ) Fun(C , E )F/ .
We note that ΠZ includes into Π as the subcategory spanned by functors and
transformations over Z. The above arguments tell us that any map ζ : {F0 , α0 } →
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                          91


{F1 , α1 } between left Kan extensions over Z in Π is a map in ΠZ . So we see that
the full subcategory
                                   LK an(F ; Z) ⊆ Π
spanned by left Kan extensions over Z, all of which are initial in Π by Proposition
14.17, already lies in ΠZ . Since the full subcategory spanned by initial objects in any
∞-category is contractible–provided it’s not empty–we conclude that LK an(F ; Z)
is a contractible full subcategory in ΠZ .                                             □
Remark 14.19. Naı̈ve versions of Proposition 14.18 do not hold when the base
Z is allowed to be an ∞-category. Also, one can check in examples that some
hypotheses are needed in order to establish uniqueness for relative Kan extensions.
   As an example we can consider the case of a discrete operad. When Z is an
∞-operad and p : E → Z is a map of ∞-operads, then one of the conditions (ii)
or (iii) must hold. In particular, if E has an initial object that object lies in the
contractible fiber E∅ over the empty set in Fin∗ . Such an object maps to an object
in Z∅ , and contractibility of this discrete category implies that all automorphism
groups of objects in Z∅ are trivial.
Corollary 14.20. Suppose that we have a partial diagram of cocartesian fibrations
as in (43), with Z discrete. Suppose also that Z is an ∞-operad and that p : E → Z
is a map of ∞-operads. If a Kan extension F ′ : C ′ → E over Z exists, then this
extension is unique up to a contractible space of choices.
   Our main example of interest here is Z = Fin∗ , though Corollary 14.20 applies
to other operads as well, including those that control associative monoidal ∞-
categories and module ∞-categories over (symmetric) monoidal ∞-categories.
   Considering the case where the functor F : C → E is the identity on C , in the
statement of Proposition 14.18, we obtain the following.
Corollary 14.21. If a map of cocartesian fibrations over a discrete base Z admits
a relative right adjoint over Z, then this adjoint is unique up to a contractible space
of choices.
Proof. Given such a relative right adjoint G to l we only note that condition (i)
holds, as we always have the object {G(x′ ), εx′ : lG(x′ ) → x′ } in C/x′ .    □
Definition 14.22. Given a situation as in the statement of Proposition 14.18, we
denote the relative left Kan extension of F : C → E along l : C → C ′ , if it exists,
by Lanl (F ; Z) : C ′ → E .
   When no confusion will arise we drop the subscript l, and write simply Lan(F ; Z)
for Lanl (F ; Z).

               15. Deriving LRT at the ∞-categorical level
  For a finite modular tensor category A♡ with derived ∞-category D = D(A♡ ),
we construct a topological field theory
                                      D → V ectpro-f in
                             LD : Bordnc
from the 3-dimensional anomalous bordism category with labels in D. This theory
is constructed by taking a Kan extension of the homotopical theory LK along the
localization functor Bordnc        nc
                         K → BordD . We then apply results from Section 14 and
Appendix C to calculate the state spaces for LD via maps in D.
92                                       CRIS NEGRON


   We show that the restriction LDf in of LD to the full subcategory Bordnc  Df in of
bordisms with rigid labels defines a field theory which is valued in V ect, rather
than V ectpro-f in . Finally we show that the cohomology of this theory recovers the
original abelian theory from De Renzi et al. [22],
                                     ∼
            H 0 (LDf in |Bordnc♡ ) → Original Lyubashenko theory LA♡ .
                          A                                          f in
                              f in


The theory LDf in can therefore be viewed as a derivation of the original abelian
Lyubashenko theory from [22], or conversely, we can view the abelian theory as a
homological truncation of a fundamentally derived theory LDf in .

15.1. Derived LRT theories.
Theorem 15.1. Consider a finite modular tensor category A♡ , and let K ⊗ →
f rDisk⊗ and D ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ be the corresponding f rDisk-categories for the ho-
motopy and derived ∞-categories of unbounded cochains (see Section 12.4). The
symmetric monoidal functor LK : BordncK → V ectpro-f in from Proposition 13.3
admits a left Kan extension

                                        D → V ectpro-f in
                               LD : Bordnc
and this Kan extension admits a canonical symmetric monoidal structure.
   Let us expand on the above statement in order to clarify the point about sym-
metric monoidality. We have the symmetric monoidal functor loc⊗ : (Bordnc        ⊗
                                                                              K) →
(BordD ) induced by the localization functors K → D on the marking cate-
       nc ⊗                                          ±       ±

gories (see Section 12.4, Proposition 12.6). As these localization functors from K ±
admit right adjoints, the corresponding localization functor for bordisms admits a
relative right adjoint
                            R⊗ : (Bordnc  ⊗
                                       D ) → (BordK )
                                                     nc ⊗

over (Bordnc   ⊗
            ∗ ) , and this right adjoint recovers the right adjoints on the marking
               I ∼                     I ∼
categories K = (Bord⊗                            ⊗
                         K )Σζ and D = (BordD )Σζ over each marked surface Σζ
                    ⊗
in Bord∗ ⊆ (Bord∗ ) (Propositions 14.5, 14.4).
   Now, given that we have such a right adjoint, relative left Kan extensions along
arbitrary functors F : (BordncD ) → E over (Bord∗ )
                                 ⊗                    ⊗
                                                         exist, by (Corollary 14.16).
Furthermore, all such extensions are obtained via precomposition with R⊗ . In
particular, we have the relative left Kan extension
                   L⊗                 ⊗       nc ⊗
                                                     = L⊗       ⊗
                                                   
                    D := Lanloc⊗ LK ; (Bord∗ )           K ◦R :                  (44)
                                                ⊗
                                     D ) → V ectpro-f in .
                                        ⊗
                                (Bordnc
We also understand that the fiber of L⊗                              nc
                                          D along the inclusion Bord∗ → (Bord∗ )
                                                                                nc ⊗
                                                                               nc
recovers the left Kan extension LD of the underlying functor LK : BordK →
V ectpro-f in along localization. We are claiming, in the statement of Theorem 15.1,
that the map L⊗    D is a map of cocartesian fibrations over Fin∗ , i.e. that it is a
symmetric monoidal functor.

Proof of Theorem 15.1. Since the map L⊗                       ⊗
                                         K : (BordK ) → V ectpro-f in is symmet-
                                                     ⊗

ric monoidal it suffices to establish symmetric monoidality of the right adjoint
R⊗ : (Bordnc  ⊗           nc ⊗
           D ) → (BordK ) . However, this point is apparent, though we take a
moment to account for the details.
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                       93


  In the notation of Proposition 14.4, R⊗ = R(Bord∗ )⊗ is the unique functor which
completes a strictly commuting diagram

                  (Bordnc
                       D )
                          ⊗                     / D⊗
                                                              R
                                   (                              %
                                  (Bordnc
                                       K)
                                          ⊗                       /K⊗


                                                                
                                  (Bordnc∗ )
                                            ⊗              / f rDisk⊗ .

By Corollary 14.14 the functor R is symmetric monoidal, and the two projections

                               ∗ ) ← (BordD ) → D
                                  ⊗       nc ⊗    ⊗
                          (Bordnc
are symmetric monoidal functors as well. Furthermore, by Proposition 4.15, the
cocartesian edges in (Bordnc  ⊗
                           K ) , as a fibration over Fin∗ , are precisely those edges
which have cocartesian image in both K ⊗ and (Bordnc       ⊗
                                                       ∗ ) . From these two points
it follows immediately that the completing map R : (Bordnc
                                                    ⊗            ⊗          nc ⊗
                                                              D ) → (BordK ) is a
map of cocartesian fibrations over Fin∗ , i.e. a symmetric monoidal functor.       □

Remark 15.2. As far as uniqueness, LD is uniquely determined as a map in
Cat∞ . The author cannot determine if LD is uniquely determined as a functor
over Bordnc
          ∗ . In any case, having specified LD , the symmetric monoidal structure
is uniquely determined up to a contractible space of choices by Corollary 14.21.
Definition 15.3. Given a finite modular tensor category A♡ , we refer to the sym-
metric monoidal functor

                                     D → V ectpro-f in
                            LD : Bordnc
from Theorem 15.1 as the derived LRT theory for D = D(A♡ ).
15.2. Restriction to the finite derived category. For a modular tensor cate-
gory A♡ we consider the full subcategory Df⊗in spanned by those complexes with
bounded, finite length cohomology in D ⊗ . More precisely, as in Section 13.5, the
fibers in this ∞-category over objects t = (I, µ) in f rDisk⊗ are the pullbacks

                             (Df⊗in )t
                                           ∼      / DI
                                                       f in


                                                     
                               Dt⊗
                                           ∼       / DI.
                                           ρ!


By Proposition 6.11, Df⊗in is a f rDisk-subcategory in D ⊗ .

Theorem 15.4. Let A♡ be a finite modular tensor category, and Df⊗in → f rDisk⊗
be the associated f rDisk-category of complexes with finite cohomology. There is a
V ect-valued topological field theory

                                           Df in → V ect
                              LDf in : Bordnc
which is obtained from LD via restriction.
94                                       CRIS NEGRON


Proof. We have the symmetric monoidal functor LKl-f in : Bordnc   Kl-f in → V ect of
Proposition 13.8, which is obtained from LK via restriction and a change of the
target category according to the pair of fully faithful embeddings
                           V ectpro-f in ← V ect+
                                                l-f in → V ect.

  Since the right adjoint R : D ⊗ → K ⊗ restricted to Df⊗in has image in Kl-f ⊗
                                                                                in , the
explicit expression LD = LK R gives an identification of V ectl-f in -valued functors
                                                              +


                 LD |Bordnc = LK R|Bord      ∼
                                             = LK      R|Bord        .
                          Df in                  Df in      l-f in       Df in


After embedding into V ect, we obtain the proposed symmetric monoidal functor
                                                        Df in → V ect.
                    LDf in = LKl-f in R|BordDf in : Bordnc
                                                                                              □
15.3. Calculation of the state spaces.
Proposition 15.5. Let Σζ be a connected genus g surface with markings ζ : D ×
I → Σ. For any embedding f : D × I → D into a positively colored disk there is a
natural isomorphism
                                    ∼
                           LD (Σ− ) → MapsD (C ⊗g , mf −)
                               ∼ (Bordnc )Σ to V ectpro-f in .
of functors from the fiber D I =             D    ζ


     Before proving Proposition 15.5 we establish a helpful lemma.
Lemma 15.6. Let A♡ be a finite ribbon tensor category, and consider the subcat-
egory f rDisk⊗              ⊗
             surj in f rDisk spanned by all objects and all morphisms f : I → J
whose corresponding disk embedding f : D × If → D × J is surjective on connected
components. The inclusion Inj K ⊗ → K ⊗ pulls back to a map of cocartesian
fibrations
     f rDisk⊗                                            / f rDisk⊗
            surj ×f rDisk⊗ Inj K                                     surj ×f rDisk⊗ K
                                 ⊗                                                      ⊗
                                                                                            (45)


                                          (        v
                                         f rDisk⊗
                                                surj                      .

Proof. For any map f : (I, µ) → (J , ν) in f rDisk⊗
                                                  surj , Lemma 6.12 tells us that
the corresponding transport functor
                                             ⊗            ⊗
                                  f! : Inj K(I,µ) → Inj K(J ,ν)

is expressible as a composite of duality functors and product functors. Since the
subcategories Inj K ± are identified under duality, by construction, we see that
the subcategory Inj K ⊗ ⊆ K ⊗ is stable under transport if and only if objects in
Inj K ± are stable under the respective product functors on K ± . Since Inj K ⊗ is
full in K ⊗ and stable under isomorphism, stability under transport is equivalent
to the claim that any cocartesian edge α : x → y from an object in Inj K ⊗ also
has y in Inj K ⊗ .
    Considering Inj K − = (Proj K )op , and the duality equivalence with Inj Kpro-f in ,
it suffices to show that a product P ⊗P ′ of two K-projectives remains K-projective.
For this we observe the formula
                      Hom∗A (P ⊗ P ′ , y) = Hom∗A (P, Hom(P ′ , y))
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                          95


via inner-Homs for the action of A = Ch(A♡ ) on itself, and note that the functor
Hom(P ′ , −) sends acyclic complexes to acyclic complexes. For this latter point one
can consider a finite projective generator G in A♡ and note the formula
        Hom∗A (G, Hom(P ′ , −)) = Hom∗A (G ⊗ P ′ , −) = Hom∗A (P ′ , G∗ ⊗ −).
The left hand functor preserves acyclics if and only if Hom(P ′ , −) preserved acyclics,
and the right hand functor preserves acyclics via exactness of the action functor
G∗ ⊗ − and K-projectivity of P ′ .                                                    □
  We return to our analysis of the state spaces in derived LRT theory.
Proof of Proposition 15.5. By our construction via the right adjoint we have
                                      ∼
                LD (Σ− ) = LK (ΣR− ) → MapsK C ⊗g , mf (R−) ,
                                                                

where the equivalence with inner-Homs comes from Proposition 13.5. We also note
that the map f : D×I → D in this case is in the subcategory f rDisksurj ⊆ f rDisk.
   By Corollary 14.14 and Lemma 15.6 the symmetric monoidal functor R : D ⊗ →
K ⊗ restricts to a map of cocartesian fibrations
              f rDisk⊗                         ⊗
                     surj ×f rDisk⊗ D → f rDisksurj ×f rDisk⊗ K
                                     ⊗                          ⊗

                                                                       ∼
over f rDisk⊗
            surj , so that there is a natural isomorphism mf R → Rmf . This gives
an equivalence
                                   ∼
                         LD (Σ− ) → MapsK C ⊗g , Rmf − .
                                                         

By the calculation of inner-Homs for the derived ∞-category provided in Proposi-
tion C.24, we have MapsD (loc−, −) ∼  = MapsK (−, R−), so that finally
                                         ∼
                           LD (Σ− ) → MapsD (C ⊗g , mf −).
                                                                                      □
15.4. Recovering discrete LRT at the heart. Consider the full subcategory
(Df♡in )⊗ in Df⊗in spanned by complexes with cohomology concentrated in degree 0.
This is a f rDisk-category by Proposition 6.11, the inclusion (Df♡in )⊗ → D ⊗ is a
f rDisk-monoidal functor, and the sequence
                                 (A♡ )⊗ → A⊗ → D ⊗
                                 ∼
induces an equivalence (A♡ )⊗ → (Df♡in )⊗ [58, 0288]. Hence we obtain a symmetric
                              ∼
monoidal equivalence Bordnc           nc
                          A♡ → BordD ♡ . We therefore have two field theories
                                                f in

                  LA♡ = LA |   Bordnc♡       and LD ♡ = LDf in |Bordnc♡ ,
                                   A                    f in        D
                                                                     f in

the first of which is valued in the full symmetric monoidal subcategory Vect ⊆
Ch(Vect) and, via the identification of the state spaces in Proposition 15.5, the
second field theory is (up to natural isomorphism) valued in the full subcategory
V ect≥0 of coconnective cochains.
   Now, the 0-th cohomology functor H 0 : V ect≥0 → Vect admits a natural sym-
metric monoidal structure, which one can realizes via localization for example. We
therefore have the Vect-valued symmetric monoidal functor
                            H 0 LD ♡ : Bordnc
                                           D♡
                                              → Vect .
                                     f in              f in

We compare this cohomological LRT theory to the original Lyubashenko theory
from [22]. As a preliminary point, however, we record the following.
96                                        CRIS NEGRON


Lemma 15.7. A transformation

                           ∆1 × G0⊗
                                                      ζ
                                                                                  / G⊗
                                                                                    1

                                     q 0 p2                                 q1
                                                  $             }
                                                      Fin∗
between symmetric monoidal functors F0 and F1 is a natural isomorphism if and
only if, for each x in the underlying ∞-category G0 , ζ evaluates to an isomorphism
ζx : F0 (x) → F1 (x) in G1 .
Proof. As in the statement, we take F0 = ζ|{0} and F1 = ζ|{1} . For an object x in
a general fiber (G0⊗ )I we have that ζx is an isomorphism if and only if the induced
map
                  (ζx )∗ : π0 MapsG ⊗ (y, F0 x) → π0 MapsG ⊗ (y, F1 x)
                                     1                                                  1

is an isomorphism at all y. For the inert projections ρ̄i : I → {0} we have the
cocartesian lifts ρi : x → xi in G0⊗ which map to cocartesian lifts Fε (ρi ) : Fε x →
Fε xi , since the Fε are symmetric monoidal functors. For each i in I, we also have
the diagrams
                                     F0 x
                                                ζx
                                                           / F1 x

                               F0 (ρi )                                  F1 (ρi )
                                                              
                                     F0 xi                / F1 x i .
                                                ζxi

   By the factorization property on morphisms for ∞-operads [57, Definition 2.1.1.10]
we see that the map ζx is an isomorphism if and only if all ζxi are isomorphisms.
In particular, if we assume that ζ{0} is a natural isomorphism then ζx is an isomor-
phism at all x in G0⊗ . This is sufficient to show that ζ itself is an isomorphism in
the functor category Fun(G0⊗ , G1⊗ ) [58, 01DK]. We now seek an inverse to ζ in the
relative functor category FunFin∗ (G0⊗ , G1⊗ ).
   The inverse to ζ in the non-relative functor category is uniquely determined, up
to isomorphism, as the transformation ζ ′ : F1 → F0 which completes a diagram

                                               > F1                                         (46)
                                          ζ                         ζ′

                                                                           !
                                F0                                       / F0 .
                                                id

Since the induced map (q1 )∗ : Fun(G0⊗ , G1⊗ ) → Fun(G0⊗ , Fin∗ ) is an inner fibration
[58, 01H0], and any isomorphism is therefore both a (q1 )∗ -cocartesian and cartesian
edge, we can produce a candidate inverse ζ ′ to ζ in FunFin∗ (G0⊗ , G1⊗ ) by solving the
lifting diagram
                             Λ20       / Fun(G ⊗ , G ⊗ )                            (47)
                                             9 0    1


                                                     
                               ∆2             / Fun(G ⊗ , Fin∗ )
                                         q0                 0

in which the bottom map is constant of value q0 . This solution provides a 2-simplex
                             ⊗    ⊗
                      Fin∗ (G0 , G1 ) which realizes ζ as a left inverse to ζ, as a
in the subcategory Funcc                               ′
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                         97


symmetric monoidal transformation, and one subsequently completes a diagram of
the form
                            F0
                                   ζ
                                        / F1
                                                               id

                                          ζ′                     *
                                  id                            7 F1
                                                  ζ
                                        F0
by solving a lifting problem as in (47) for the horn inclusion Λ30 → ∆3 to see that
                                           ⊗    ⊗
                                    Fin∗ (G0 , G1 ).
ζ ′ is a 2-sided inverse to ζ in Funcc                                           □

Proposition 15.8. For any finite modular tensor category A♡ , there is a diagram
                                              LA♡
                         Bordnc                                        / Vect
                             A♡                                          :

                                   ∼
                                                                H 0 LD ♡
                                           %                           f in
                                          BordD ♡
                                                    f in


in SM∞ . In particular, there is a natural isomorphism of symmetric monoidal
             ∼
functors LA♡ → H 0 LD ♡ |BordA♡ .
                        f in


Proof. We have the symmetric monoidal transformation
                α⊗ : L⊗♡ ∼
                         = L⊗ |(Bordnc )⊗ → L⊗ ♡ |(Bordnc )⊗
                         A      Kf in                               Df in
                                               A♡                               A♡


provided by our construction of L⊗
                                 D via Kan extension. Taking cohomology, and
                                                    H0
noting that the sequence Vect⊗ → V ect⊗ → Vect⊗ is the identity, we obtain
another natural transformation
                        H 0 α⊗ : L⊗
                                  A♡
                                     → H 0 L⊗   |    nc ⊗ .
                                            D ♡ (Bord ♡ )
                                                        f in           A

                  0 ⊗
We claim that H α is a natural isomorphism.
   To test if H 0 α⊗ is a natural isomorphism, it suffices to check that the underlying
transformation
                             H 0 α : LA♡ → H 0 LD ♡ |Bordnc♡
                                                         f in          A

evaluates to an isomorphism at each object Σx in the underlying ∞-category
Bordnc                                         0
     A♡ , by Lemma 15.7. Furthermore, since H α is symmetric monoidal we reduce
to the case where Σ is connected and, since merging bordisms induce isomorphisms
on state spaces, we reduce further to the case of a surface with a single positive
marking. In this case, for such singly marked Σζ in Bordnc
                                                         ∗ , we have the localization
functor
                l : Kpro-f in = (Bordnc
                                     K )Σζ → Dpro-f in = (BordD )Σζ
                                                               nc

with right adjoint R, and the transformation
                α : LA♡ (Σx ) = LK (Σx ) → LK (ΣRl(x) ) = LD (Σl(x) )
is induced by the unit map ux : x → Rl(x) for the adjunction between R and l. In
particular, α is obtained by applying the functor LK to the bordism Σux : Σx →
ΣRl(x) over idΣζ with the outgoing disk labeled by the morphism ux .
98                                  CRIS NEGRON


   As relayed in Corollary 14.11, this object Rl(x) is K-injective and ux : x → Rl(x)
is a quasi-isomorphism. So, after applying the identification of state spaces from
Proposition 15.5, we have
 αΣx = − ◦ ux : HomA♡ (C ⊗g , x) → Hom∗A♡ (C ⊗g , Rl(x)) = MapsK (C ⊗g , Rl(x)).
(Here we adopt the explicit construction of the homotopy ∞-category as the dg
nerve of the dg category of linear cochains.) Taking 0-th cohomology we see that
H 0 αΣx recovers the standard identification
                                          ∼
                         HomA♡ (C ⊗g , x) → Ext0A♡ (C ⊗g , x),
so that all H 0 αΣx are isomorphisms and hence H 0 α⊗ is a natural isomorphism of
symmetric monoidal functors.                                                   □

                  16. Derived theories with universal skeins
     We aim to produce, in these final sections, an unmarked field theory
                                           3,2 → h V ect
                              LDf in : Bordnc                                     (48)
from the marked theory LDf in constructed in Section 15. The theory LDf in is ob-
tained in two basic movements: We first localize the bordism category Bordnc      Df in
along a special class of colored merging bordisms, and produce in this way a sym-
                                           −1
metric monoidal ∞-category Bordnc  Df in [ΘDf in ] of bordisms with embedded skein-like
diagrams. We also argue that the derived LRT theory LDf in sends all such colored
merging bordisms to isomorphisms in V ectpro-f in , and therefore induces a symmet-
ric monoidal functor from this localization. We clarify these points in the present
section.
   Subsequently, in Section 17 we establish an identification between the homotopy
category of localized, trivially marked bordisms h Bordnc        −1
                                                             ∗ [Θ∗ ] and the unmarked
              nc
category Bord3,2 , thus yielding the promised theory (48) after restricting along a
unit map Bordnc            nc
               ∗ → BordDf in .

16.1. Special merging bordisms. For any surface Σ with markings ζ : D × I →
Σ, and index i in I, we have the corresponding surface Σiζ obtained by deleting all
but the i-th marking disk. We also consider the apparent inclusion M Σiζ : Σiζ → Σζ
given by the 3-manifold Σ×[0, 1] with the embedded cylinder D ×[0, 1] → Σ×[0, 1],
(z, t) 7→ (ζ(z, i), t). The reader might recall at this point the notion of a merging
bordism from Section 10.2.
Definition 16.1. For a connected marked surface ζ : D×I → Σ and positive index
i in I, a merging bordism Mf : Σζ → Σiζ in Bordnc   ∗ is called special if the identity
on Σiζ is recovered as a composite idΣiζ = Mf ◦ M Σiζ . For a general marked surface
Σζ , a special merging bordism Mf : Σζ → Ση is a bordism whose components are
each special merging bordisms, or identities.
   For a f rDisk-category q : E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ with corresponding cocartesian fi-
bration q ′ : Bordnc          nc
                    E → Bord∗ , a special merging bordism Mα : Σx → Σy in BordE
                                                                                     nc
                                                                  nc
is a q ′ -cocartesian edge over a special merging bordism in Bord∗ .
Lemma 16.2. Let E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ be a f rDisk-category. Consider any object
Σx in BordncE and positive index i for the underling ∗-marked surface top(x) :
D × I → Σ. Let Σc ⊆ Σ be the component of Σ which contains the image of this
i-th marking disk. There is a special merging bordism Mα : Σx → Σy in which the
              TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                        99


outgoing surface Σy is endowed with the single marking top(x)i : D → Σc on the
specified component Σc of Σ.
Proof. Since the forgetful functor Bordnc                nc
                                             E → Bord∗ is a cocartesian fibration it
suffices to prove the result in the ∗-marked bordism category. We can assume
further that the surface Σ is connected. Consider Σζ in Bordnc          ∗ and a positive
index i. We take an embedding from an auxiliary disk τ : D → Σ which contain
all of the markings ζ : D × I → Σ in its image and view ζ as a map into this new
disk ζ : D × I → D, by intersecting with the image of τ .
   Let N be large and consider any smooth function c : [0, 1] → R≥0 which is
constant around 0 and 1, is weakly decreasing, and has values c(0) = 1 and c(1) =
N −1 . We can take a smooth homotopy h : [0, 1] × D × I → D which satisfies the
following:
     (a) ht : D × I → D is a smooth embedding at all t.
     (a) h0 = ζ and h(t, z, i) = ζ(c(t) · z, i), where i is the specified index.
     (b) There exists ϵ > 0 for which h(t, z, j) = h(t′ , z, j) whenever t, t′ < ϵ or
         t, t′ > 1 − ϵ.
     (c) h1 : D × I → D has image in ζ(Di ).
The corresponding bordism Mf : Σζ → Σiζ with M = Σ × [0, 1] and cylinders
                f : D × [0, 1] × I → Σ × [0, 1], f (z, t, i) := (h(t, z, i), t)
is a special merging bordism. (See also Proposition A.2.)                             □
   We have the following analog of Lemma 10.4.
Proposition 16.3. Let A♡ be a modular tensor category and D ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ be
the associated f rDisk-category for the derived ∞-category. Any special merging
bordism Mα : Σx → Σy in Bordnc D evaluates to an isomorphism
                                                     ∼
                              LD (Mα ) : LD (Σx ) → LD (Σy )
in V ectpro-f in .
Proof. We can lift this special merging bordism in Bordnc
                                                       D along the equivalence
     nc    ∼       nc                               ′
BordInj K → BordD to a special merging bordism Mα′ : Σx′ → Σy′ in BordInj K ,
at least up to an isomorphism of morphisms. From the natural isomorphism
                                                 ∼
                                  LD |Bordnc
                                          Inj K
                                                → LInj K
it now suffices to show that LK sends special merging bordisms to isomorphisms.
Now, since the localization functor Bordnc          nc
                                         A → BordK is an essentially surjective
                                       nc
map of cocartesian fibrations over Bord∗ , we can furthermore lift special merging
bordisms in Bordnc           nc
                   K to BordA , again up to isomorphism. We thus reduce further
to proving that the functor
                                             A → V ect
                                    LA : Bordnc
sends special merging bordisms to isomorphisms, and via symmetric monoidality
we reduce further to considering such bordisms M : Σx → Σy for connected Σ.
   In the setting of Bordnc
                          A we can be very explicit about things. An object Σx
in Bordnc
        A  is a surface D × I → Σ with complexes xi labeling each disk Di . For
each positive index, xi is a complex in Ch(A♡pro-f in ), and for each negative index
xi is a complex in the opposite category Ch(A♡ )op . A special merging bordism
100                                          CRIS NEGRON


M : Σx → Σy with Σ connected is either an isomorphism or some non-trivial
merging of markings on Σ. In the former case it is immediate that LA (M ) is an
isomorphism. So we consider the latter setting.
   Such a non-trivial merging bordism Mα : Σx → Σy has the unique outgoing disk
labeled by an isomorphism αA : mf (x) → y. We can write the tuple x as a limit
x = limλ xλ of objects in AIf in giving the product as a limit mf (x) = limλ mf (xλ ),
     ←−                                                                 ←−
via continuity of mf . Via the isomorphism αA we have a corresponding expression
y = limλ yλ with αA inducing isomorphisms αA,λ : mf (xλ ) → yλ . We therefore
     ←−
have corresponding merging bordisms Mα,λ : Σxλ → Σyλ at each λ which fit into a
diagram
                                                L(Mα )
                                 LA (Σx )                     / LA (Σy )


                                                               
                                 LA (Σxλ )                / LA (Σy ).
                                                                     λ
                                               L(Mα,λ )

    By Lemma 10.4 the bottom maps LA (Mα,λ ) are all isomorphisms, and by Propo-
sition 10.6 the vertical maps assemble into an isomorphisms
                     LA (Σx ) = lim LA (Σxλ ) and LA (Σy ) = lim LA (Σyλ ).
                                ←−                           ←−
                                  λ                                      λ

From this we conclude that LA (Mα ) is an isomorphism.                              □

16.2. Color change bordisms.
Definition 16.4. In Bordnc
                        ∗ a color change bordism Mf : Σζ → Ση is one in which
the following hold:
       • The marking set I ′ for Ση is obtained from the marking set I for Σζ by
         changing some negatively colored indices in I to positive indices.
       • After forgetting the colors, the markings ζ̄, η̄ : D × I → Σ agree.
       • The bordism Mf is just Σ × [0, 1] along with the constant cylinder embed-
         ding
                     f : D × [0, 1] × I → Σ × [0, 1], f (z, t, i) = (ζ(z, i), t).
For E → f rDisk⊗ any f rDisk-monoidal ∞-category, a color change bordism in
       ⊗

Bordnc                                                                     nc
     E is a cocartesian lift Mα : Σx → Σy of a color change bordism in Bord∗ .

Lemma 16.5. Let A♡ be a finite modular tensor category. Any color change
bordism Mα : Σx → Σy in Bordnc
                            D evaluates to an isomorphism
                                                          ∼
                                  LD (Mα ) : LD (Σx ) → LD (Σy )
in V ectpro-f in .
Proof. As in the proof of Proposition 16.3, it suffices to show that the map
                                  LA (Mα ) : LA (Σx ) → LA (Σy )
is an isomorphism whenever Mα : Σx → Σy is a color change bordism in Bordnc A .
                                                                     ∼
Such a bordism has outgoing boundary labeled by isomorphisms αi : xi → yi when
the color of the i-th makings in Σx and Σy are the same, and is labeled by an
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                       101

                     ∼
isomorphism αi : x∗i → yi when the colors of the i-th markings differ. Via the limit
expressions
               LA (Σx ) = lim LA (Σxλ ) and LA (Σy ) = lim LA (Σyλ )
                          ←−                           ←−
                           λ                              λ
we reduce to the case where x and y are finite.
   We recall, in the finite setting, that the Ch(Vect)-valued TQFT LAf in is obtained
by applying a symmetric map p : Bordnc                  nc
                                            Af in → BordAf in to the “reduced” bordism
category from [20, Section 8.1], then composing with the symmetric monoidal func-
tor Z ∗ : Bordnc
              Af in → Ch(Vect) from [20, Theorem 9.3]. The image p(Mα ) in already
an isomorphism in Bordnc  Af in so that

                                LAf in (Mα ) = Z ∗ p(Mα )
                                                          

is an isomorphism in Ch(Vect). Consequently, after applying the localization loc :
Ch(Vect) → V ect, we have that LAf in (Mα ) = loc LAf in (Mα ) is an isomorphism in
V ect.                                                                           □
  We are interested in a class of maps which mixes both special merging bordisms
and color change bordisms in BordncE .

Definition 16.6. A colored merging bordism in Bordnc ∗ is a bordism Mf : Σζ → Ση
which decomposes as a disjoint union of special merging bordisms and color change
bordisms. For any f rDisk-category E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ , a colored merging bordism in
Bordnc
     E is a cocartesian lift Mα : Σx → Σy of a colored merging bordism in Bord∗
                                                                               nc
                         nc        nc
along the fibration BordE → Bord∗ .
16.3. Inverting colored merging bordisms.
Definition 16.7. For any f rDisk-monoidal ∞-category E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ , let ΘE ⊆
Bordnc
    E [1] be the collection of colored merging bordisms.

Theorem 16.8. Let E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ be a f rDisk-category. There is a unique sym-
                                     −1 ⊗                                    −1
metric monoidal structure Bordnc                                          nc
                                 E [ΘE ] → Fin∗ on the localization BordE [ΘE ]
for which the following hold:
                                                 −1
    (1) The localization functor Bordnc       nc
                                     E → BordE [ΘE ] lifts to a symmetric monoidal
                            nc ⊗        nc −1 ⊗
        functor loc : (BordE ) → BordE [ΘE ] .
    (2) For any symmetric monoidal ∞-category G ⊗ → Fin∗ , restriction provides
        a fully faithful functor
                                   −1 ⊗
                     Fin∗ (BordE [ΘE ] , G ) → FunFin∗ ((BordE ) , G )
           loc∗ : Funcc        nc         ⊗       cc         nc ⊗   ⊗

        which is an equivalence onto the full subcategory spanned by those symmetric
        monoidal functors F ⊗ for which the underlying map F : Bordnc  E → G sends
        each morphism in ΘE to an isomorphism in G .
                                                                      −1 ⊗
   Ultimately, we obtain the symmetric monoidal ∞-category Bordnc E [ΘE ] via a
vertical localization procedure (see Lemma 12.8). We give the proof of Theorem
16.8 in Section 16.5 below. For now, let us record an immediate consequence.
Corollary 16.9. For a finite modular tensor category A♡ , with corresponding de-
rived ∞-category D, the derived LRT theory LD : BordncD → V ect localizes to a
symmetric monoidal functor
                                      −1
                          D : BordD [ΘD ] → V ectpro-f in .
                                  nc
                         Lloc
102                                 CRIS NEGRON


Proof. By Proposition 16.3 and Lemma 16.5 the functor LD sends the class ΘD
into the class of isomorphisms in V ectpro-f in . So the result follows by Theorem
16.8.                                                                            □
16.4. Describing the localization via “coarse skeins”. Let E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗
be an arbitrary f rDisk-category. We note that the forgetful functor Bordnc     E →
Bordnc3,2 to the unlabeled (anomalous)   bordism   category sends all colored merging
bordisms to the identity, and thus localizes to provide a symmetric monoidal functor
           −1
Bordnc                 nc
      E [ΘE ] → Bord3,2 . So the localization is some kind of decorated bordism
category.
   The objects in the localization are still marked surfaces–or at least, they can be
taken to be marked surfaces–but morphisms are now bordisms M : Σ → Σ′ with
a kind of “coarse wiring diagram” which is comprised of cylinders merging and
splitting in M .
                                        mf (x)            mg (y)




                           w            mh (z)

The interfaces of these cylinders are labeled by morphisms from products of objects
in E ± , so that one can imagine them as skein diagrams. Indeed, if one has some
notion of a bordism category SkBordnc  E with “skeins labeled by E ” then we expect
a symmetric monoidal functor Bordnc                nc
                                      E → SkBordE which inverts colored merging
bordisms, and hence expect a canonical map from the localization
                                    −1
                            Bordnc              nc
                                E [ΘE ] → SkBordE .
We leave it to the interested reader to explore the relation between the localization
BordA♡ [Θ−1 A♡
                ] and the skein bordism category for a ribbon category A♡ , in the
      f in   f in
discrete setting.
   From the above perspective, Corollary 16.9 says that the LRT theory for the
derived ∞-category D(A♡ ) can be taken as a theory from a category of bordisms
with “coarse D(A♡ )-labeled skeins” as above (cf. [22, 10, 15, 14]).
16.5. Proving Theorem 16.8.
Lemma 16.10. Given a map of cocartesian fibrations

                                C
                                            q
                                                          /D

                                    p
                                                 ~   p′
                                            T
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                           103


in which q itself is a cocartesian fibration, and a morphism f : s → t in T , the
transport functor f! : Cs → Ct sends qs -cocartesian edges to qt -cocartesian edges.
Proof. First, for any p-cocartesian edge α : x → y in C over a map f : s → t
in T we have that q(α) : q(x) → q(y) is p′ -cocartesian over f . To compare, we
take a q-cocartesian lift α′ : x → y ′ of q(α), have that α′ is p-cocartesian, and by
uniqueness of p-cocartesian lifts of f we obtain a 2-simplex

                                                  @y
                                           α                    ∼
                                                                     
                                       x                            / y′ .
                                                        ′
                                                   α

Since any isomorphism in C is q-cocartesian, the 2-of-3 property [58, 01TS] assures
us that α is q-cocartesian. So we see that any p-cocartesian edge in C is also
q-cocartesian.
   Considering now the cocartesian transformations Tf : ∆1 × Cs → C over f .
Recall that Tf evaluates to a p-cocartesian edge in C at each object x in the
fiber Cs , and hence to a p-cocartesian edge as well. It follows that, for each qs -
cocartesian edge β : x → u, which is just a q-cocartesian edge which lives in the
fiber, Tf produces a diagram
                                               (Tf )x
                                      x                     / f! (x)

                                  β                                   f! (β)
                                                           &         
                                      u                         / f! (v)
                                               (Tf )u

in C in which all map, save for possibly f! (β), are known to be q-cocartesian. We
again reference the 2-of-3 property for cocartesian edges to find that f! (β) is in fact
q-cocartesian.                                                                        □
  We now provide the proof of Theorem 16.8.
Warning 16.11. The proof of Theorem 16.8 is quite long. We note that this result
is only used in the terminal case E = ∗. So a superficial reading of the arguments in
the general setting will not hinder one’s ability to engage with subsequent materials.
Proof of Theorem 16.8. As the proof for general E is somewhat rambunctious, we
proceed in parts. We first consider the case of Bordnc
                                                    ∗ .
   I. The trivial case E ± = ∗: For each finite set I, any choice of ordering on I
provides an injective equivalence into the fiber
                                                   ∼
                                                  nc ⊗
                                  (Bordnc I
                                       ∗ ) → (Bord∗ )I .                              (49)
This is according to the explicit construction of the ∞-category (Bordnc
                                                                      ∗ )
                                                                         ⊗
                                                                           from
Definitions 4.8 and 8.4. Under such an identification the transport functor
                                                    f¯!
                         (Bordnc )⊗                                 / (Bordnc )⊗      (50)
                             O∗ I                                         O∗ J
                           incl                                                incl

                         (Bordnc
                              ∗ )
                                 I                                  / (Bordnc
                                                                           ∗ )
                                                                               J
                                               disj union
104                                      CRIS NEGRON


along a map f¯ : I → J in Fin∗ is given by the product functor on Bordnc     ∗ , which
we recall is the disjoint union operation (see Proposition 4.11). To be clear, we also
insert the empty surface in the j-th factor whenever the preimage f¯−1 (j) is empty.
    Let us take Θ = Θ∗ . For each finite set I we consider the collection ΘI of tu-
ples of colored merging bordisms in (Bordnc     I
                                             ∗ ) , and define the class of maps ΘI in
                                                                                 b
       nc ⊗                                                                          ⊗
(Bord∗ )I as those maps which are isomorphic to a map in Θ in Fun(∆ , (Bordnc
                                                               I          1
                                                                                  ∗ )I ).
                     I
(Here we identify Θ with a collection in the fiber via the injective equivalence (49).)
    Though the embedding (49) does depend on a choice of ordering, we note that
all such embeddings are naturally isomorphic via the apparent permutation isomor-
phisms, and so find that the class Θ b I does not depend on any choice of ordering.
We take now Θ  b the union of all of these fibers

                                    a
                                             b I ⊆ (Bordnc ⊗
                         Θ
                         b=                  Θ          ∗ ) [1].
                               I a fin set


   Since the class of colored merging bordisms is stable under disjoint union, by con-
struction, we see from the diagram (50) that each transport function f¯! : (Bordnc   ⊗
                                                                                  ∗ )I →
      nc ⊗                                                         nc ⊗
(Bord∗ )J sends Θ  b I into Θ
                            b J . So Θ
                                     b is a vertical class in (Bord∗ ) , in the sense of
Defintion 12.2. Furthermore, since Θ   b {0} is simply the closure of Θ up to isomor-
                 1       nc
phism in Fun(∆ , Bord∗ ), one sees from the diagrams


                          (Bordnc )⊗
                              O∗ I
                                             transport equiv
                         include
                                                          )
                           (Bordnc
                                ∗ )
                                   I                    / (Bordnc
                                                               ∗ )
                                                                  I
                                                =



that each Θ b I is identified with the pullback of Θ  b I ⊆ (Bordnc     I
                                                                     ∗ ) [1] along the
                                                        {0}
transport equivalence. Hence, Θ   b is the vertical class generated by Θ  b {0} , and by
                                                   nc ⊗ b −1
Proposition 12.7 the vertical localization (Bord∗ ) [Θ ] is symmetric monoidal.
   Since Θ
         b {0} is generated by Θ under compositions with isomorphisms, the natural
map Bordnc∗ [Θ
                −1
                   ] → Bordnc  b −1 ] is an equivalence. Hence, the proposed universal
                            ∗ [Θ   {0}
property for the localization is a consequence of Lemma 12.8. We now turn to the
general setting.
                          b E : Consider an arbitrary f rDisk-category E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗
   II. Defining the class Θ
and let q : (BordE ) → (Bordnc
                  nc ⊗              ⊗
                                 ∗ ) denote the corresponding cocartesian fibration
                                              b E ;I in (Bordnc ⊗
provided by the forgetful functor. Take Θ                    E )I the collection of qI -
cocartesian edges which are sent to maps in Θ    b I along the pulled back fibration

                                         ⊗        nc ⊗
                            qI : (Bordnc
                                      E )I → (Bord∗ )I .


                     b E ;I is stable under isomorphism in Fun(∆1 , (Bordnc ⊗
We note that each Θ                                                      E )I ) since
                                                           nc ⊗
     b I is stable under isomorphism in Fun(∆1 , (Bord∗ ) ). Take now Θ
each Θ                                                        I
                                                                             b E the
                                    nc ⊗
union of all of the ΘE ;I in (BordE ) .
                    b
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                                       105


   III. The class Θ
                  b E is stable under transport: Over any map of finite pointed sets
¯
f : I → J we have a diagram
                                                      f¯!
                         (Bordnc ⊗
                              E )I
                                                                    / (Bordnc
                                                                           E )
                                                                              ⊗
                                                                                        J

                            qI                                                    qJ
                                                                         
                         (Bordnc  ⊗
                               ∗ )I
                                                                    / (Bordnc  ⊗
                                                                            ∗ )J
                                                      f¯!

in Cat∞ . By our analysis in the case E ± = ∗ we understand that the bottom map
sends Θ          b J . Since transport for (Bordnc )⊗ sends qI -cocartesian edges to
        b I into Θ
                                                     E
qJ -cocartesian edges (Lemma 16.10) it follows that the functor f¯! : (Bordnc         ⊗
                                                                                   E )I →
       nc ⊗                                                                  nc
                                             b E is a vertical class in (BordE )⊗ .
(BordE )J sends Θ  b E ;I into Θ
                               b E ;J . Thus Θ

  IV. The class Θ
                b E is generated by Θ
                                    b E ;{0} : Let I be an arbitrary finite pointed set.
Considering transport over the inert projections ρ̄i : I → {0}, we have a diagram

                         (Bordnc ⊗
                              E )I
                                                      ρ̄!
                                                                    / (Bordnc
                                                                           E )
                                                                              I
                                                                                                  (51)
                                                      ∼

                            qI                                                     I
                                                                                  q{0}
                                                                          
                         (Bordnc  ⊗
                               ∗ )I
                                                      ρ̄!
                                                                    / (Bordnc   I
                                                                             ∗ ) .
                                                      ∼

By (III) we know that ρ̄! sends Θ             bI
                                  b E ;I into Θ
                                                E ;{0} , and by our analysis in the case
E = ∗ we understand that Θ
 ±                          b I is precisely the preimage of Θ b I under the transport
                                                                                            {0}
equivalence.
                                                    ⊗
    Now, for any map α : x → y in (Bordnc        E )I which has image in the product
  I              nc I
ΘE ;{0} ⊆ (BordE ) [1] we have qI (α) in ΘI . We want to show that α is in Θ
b                                             b                                b E ;I ,
which reduces to showing that α is qI -cocartesian. For this point, we can take a
cocartesian lift α′ : x → y ′ of qI (α) then lift the simplex

                                                   qI (y ′ )
                                                   ;
                                                                    =

                                                                               #
                            qI (x)                                           / qI (y)

along qI to get a simplex
                                                          ′
                                                     ?y
                                              α′                τ


                                      x                               / y
                                                      α
           ⊗
in (Bordnc
        E )I .
   Taking the image under ρ̄! we obtain a 2-simplex
                                                   ρ̄! (y ′ )                                     (52)
                                          ′
                                                    ;
                                 ρ̄! (α )                           ρ̄! (τ )

                                                                           #
                            ρ̄! (x)                                      / ρ̄! (y)
                                                    ρ̄! (α)
106                                            CRIS NEGRON


in which the two maps from ρ̄! (x) are q I -cocartesian, and hence in which all of
the edges are q I -cocartesian by the 2-of-3 property [58, 01TS]. By (non-strict)
commutativity of the diagram (51) we see that the 2-simplex (52) is sent to a
2-simplex of the form
                                           ′
                                        ?b
                                                         ∼

                                                            
                                        a                   /b
in (Bordnc   I
         ∗ ) . Since the lift of an isomorphism along a cocartesian fibration is a
cocartesian edge if and only if it is an isomorphism, it follows that ρ̄! (τ ) is an
isomorphism in (Bordnc         I
                           E ) . Finally, since ρ̄! is an equivalence we find that τ itself
is an isomorphism, is therefore qI -cocartesian, and by the 2-of-3 property again we
find that α is qI -cocartesian. Hence α is in Θ        b E ;I . This show that the class Θb E is
in fact generated by ΘE ;{0} .
                          b
   V. The universal property for Θ        b E -localization: We now understand that Θ     b E is
                                       b E ;{0} . Thus the localization (Bordnc    ⊗ b −1
the vertical class generated by Θ                                               E )  [ ΘE ] has
the proposed universal property for symmetric monoidal functors which invert the
generators Θ b E ;{0} in Bordnc  E . This follows by Lemma 12.8. So it suffices to show
that maps out of Bordnc      E which sends the subset ΘE to isomorphisms sends all
maps in Θ b E ;{0} to isomorphisms. For this it suffices, further, to show that every
map α : x → y in Θ    b E ;{0} fits into a diagram

                                                   α′        / y′
                                      x′                                                   (53)


                                                            / y
                                      x             α

in which α′ : x′ → y ′ is in ΘE and the vertical maps are isomorphisms.
   Consider the forgetful functor q0 = q{0} : Bordnc          nc
                                                      E → Bord∗ . By definition, any
map α : x → y in Θ b E ;0 is a q0 -cocartesian edge and the image q0 (x) → q0 (y) fits
into a diagram
                                            ᾱ′     / ȳ ′
                                 x̄′                                             (54)
                                  ∼
                                  =                                    ∼
                                                                       =
                                                        '         
                                 q0 (x)                      / q0 (y).
                                                   α
in which ᾱ′ is a colored merging bordism. Since q0 is a cocartesian fibration, and
hence an isofibration, we can lift the isomorphism x̄′ → q0 (x) to an isomorphism
x′ → x, from some unspecified object over x̄′ . We then take a cocartesian lift
α′ : x′ → y ′ of ᾱ′ to obtain a partial diagram
                                                    α′        / y′
                                      x′                                                   (55)
                                      ∼
                                      =
                                                             /& y.
                                          x         α

By solving some lifting problems along the cocartesian fibration q0 : Bordnc
                                                                           E →
Bordnc
    ∗  we  complete  this partial diagram to a diagram t : ∆ 1
                                                               × ∆ 1
                                                                     → Bord nc
                                                                            E of
             TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                          107


the form (53), and with q(t) : ∆1 × ∆1 → Bordnc      ∗ recovering (54). By the 2-of-3
property for cocartesian edges, we find that all edges in such a completion of (55)
are q0 -cocartesian. In particular, α′ : x′ → y ′ is in ΘE and the map y ′ → y is an
isomorphism. So we have the desired result, and observed the claimed universal
property, i.e. that restriction provides an equivalence
                                          
                            nc ⊗ b −1        ∼
                Fin∗ (BordE ) [ΘE ], G              Fin∗ (BordE ) , G
                                         ⊗                     nc ⊗   ⊗
           Funcc                             → Funcc
                                                                        
                                                                          Θ   E


at any symmetric monoidal ∞-category G        ⊗
                                                  → Fin∗ .                               □

                   17. Emergent (unmarked) field theories
   We extract from the derived theory LD : Bordnc   D → V ectpro-f in of Section 15–or
really its V ect-valued restriction LDf in –an unmarked field theory LDf in : Bordnc
                                                                                  3,2 →
h V ect. As explained in the preamble to Section 16, producing the theory LDf in
reduces to a somewhat delicate, hands-on analysis of the homotopy truncation
h Bordnc     −1
        ∗ [Θ∗ ].
   In human terms, we are claiming that after marking all surfaces by the unit
and washing out all homotopy relations, the values of the theory LDf in does not
actually depend on any choices of decorations on surfaces or bordisms.
17.1. Unit labeled bordisms. Let q : E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ be a f rDisk-category.
We consider the initial object ∅ in f rDisk⊗ and define the fibration of unit objects
in E ⊗ as the ∞-category
                          
                           the full subcategory in the fiber product
            Units(E ⊗ ) =           E∅⊗ ×Fun({0},E ⊗ ) Fun(∆1 , E ⊗ )
                                   spanned by q-cocartesian edges
                          

equipped with the isofibration
                                        ev        q
                           Units(E )⊗ −→
                                       1
                                         E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ .
Lemma 17.1. The structure map Units(E )⊗ → f rDisk⊗ is a trivial Kan fibration.
Proof. To ease notation take T = f rDisk⊗ . By [58, 01VK], the cocartesian fibra-
tion E ⊗ → T induces a trivial Kan fibration
                      Units(E )⊗ → E∅⊗ ×Fun({0},T ) Fun(∆1 , T ),
and since E∅⊗ is contractible the map E∅⊗ → {∅} over T is a trivial Kan fibration
as well. Hence the map
            E∅⊗ ×Fun({0},T ) Fun(∆1 , T ) → {∅} ×Fun({0},T ) Fun(∆1 , T )
is a trivial Kan fibration. Finally, since ∅ is initial in T , evaluation induces a trivial
Kan fibration
                        ev1 : {∅} ×Fun({0},T ) Fun(∆1 , T ) → T
[58, 06R2, 01KU]. As any composite of trivial Kan fibrations is a trivial Kan fibra-
tion, we obtain the desired result.                                                      □
   By Lemma 17.1 we observe the unique f rDisk-monoidal section f rDisk⊗ →
Units(E )⊗ of the structure map, and compose with the evaluation functor Units(E )⊗ →
E ⊗ to obtain a f rDisk⊗ -monoidal functor
                                unitq : f rDisk⊗ → E ⊗ .
108                                   CRIS NEGRON


We refer to this functor as the unit map.
                                                                        ⊗
  The unit map now determines, by pullback along the outgoing boundary ∂out :
     nc ⊗             ⊗                 nc ⊗       nc ⊗
(Bord∗ ) → f rDisk , a functor (Bord∗ ) → (BordE ) which is simultaneously
symmetric monoidal and a map cocartesian fibrations over (Bordnc ⊗
                                                              ∗ ) ,

                    (Bordnc
                         ∗ )
                            ⊗                           / (Bordnc
                                                               E )
                                                                  ⊗



                                 id
                                        &      x
                                       (Bordnc
                                            ∗ )
                                                 ⊗
                                                              .

Definition 17.2. For any f rDisk-category q : E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ we let unit⊗
                                                                        E denote
the pullback functor
           unit⊗         nc ⊗                       nc ⊗       nc ⊗
               E := (Bord∗ ) ×f rDisk⊗ unitq : (Bord∗ ) → (BordE ) .

Remark 17.3. What these unit functors do is fairly intuitive. Namely, any
f rDisk-category E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ admits unique “unit objects” 1t which are the
images of the transport functors 1t : ∗ ∼= E∅⊗ → Et⊗ along each (unique) mor-
                          ⊗
phisms ∅ → t in f rDisk . At the level of the underlying ∞-categories, the map
unitE : Bordnc
             ∗ → BordE labels each marked surface ζ : D × I → Σ by the unit
object 1I , and labels each bordism by the unique cocartesian map between units
1I and 1J .
17.2. LRT theories along the unit. In the case of the f rDisk-category Df⊗in →
f rDisk⊗ associated to the derived ∞-category of a modular tensor category A♡ ,
we restrict along the symmetric monoidal functor
                            unitDf in : Bordnc      nc
                                            ∗ → BordDf in

to obtain a field theory from the trivially labeled bordism category

                                                  ∗ → V ect.
                         LDf in ◦ unitDf in : Bordnc

Lemma 17.4. For any modular tensor category A♡ , the functor LDf in ◦ unitE
sends all colored merging bordisms to isomorphisms in V ect, and hence localizes to
a uniquely determined symmetric monoidal functor

                             Df in : Bord∗ [Θ∗ ] → V ect.
                                         nc  −1
                            Lunit

Proof. Since unitDf in is a map of cocartesian fibrations over Bordnc
                                                                   ∗ , it sends colored
merging bordisms in Bordnc  ∗ to colored merging   bordisms  in Bordnc
                                                                    Df in . Since LDf in
is obtained from LD via restriction, the result now follows from Corollary 16.9 and
Theorem 16.8.                                                                         □

   For this section, we are especially interested in the induced map on homotopy
categories
                            Df in : h Bord∗ [Θ∗ ] → h V ect,
                                          nc  −1
                         h Lunit
where we note that the target h V ect is the discrete derived category of linear
cochains. We claim, in fact, that the homotopy category h Bordnc   −1
                                                              ∗ [Θ∗ ] is identified
with the unlabeled 3-dimensional bordism category, and hence that h Lunit
                                                                     Df in provides
an unlabeled topological field theory in 3-dimensions. We argue the point below.
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                              109


17.3. Reductions in the homotopy bordism category. Our goal is to prove
that the forgetful functor h Bordnc      −1          nc
                                     ∗ [Θ∗ ] → Bord3,2 is an equivalence. We first es-
tablish a collection of relations for morphisms in the homotopy truncation h Bordnc    −1
                                                                                  ∗ [Θ∗ ].

Lemma 17.5.      (1) Any colored merging bordism Mτ : Σζ → Ση decomposes as
     a composite
                             Mτ = Mτ′ ′ ◦ Mτ′′′′
        where Mτ′ ′ is a special merging bordism and Mτ′′′′ is a color change bordism.
    (2) For any special merging bordism Mτ : Σζ → Ση , there is a bordism Mτ′ ′ :
        Ση → Σζ for which [Mτ ]−1 = [Mτ′ ′ ] in h Bordnc      −1
                                                       ∗ [Θ∗ ].
    (3) For any color change bordism Mτ : Σζ → Σζ ′ , and arbitrary Nω : Σζ → Σ′η
        there is a color change bordism Mτ′ ′ : Σ′η′ → Σ′η , and some other bordism
        Nω′ : Σζ ′ → Σ′η′ for which
                            [Nω ] ◦ [Mτ ]−1 = [Mτ′ ′ ]−1 ◦ [Nω′ ]
        in h Bordnc  −1
                 ∗ [Θ∗ ].

Proof. (1) By definition Mτ consists of a disjoint union of special merging bordisms
on some collection of components, and color change bordisms on others. Isolating
the relevant components provides the claimed factorization.
   (2) By definition (Definition 16.1) every special merging bordism admits a right
inverse in Bordnc                     ′                 ′
               ∗ . So there exists Mτ ′ with Mτ ◦ Mτ ′ = idΣη , and in the homotopy
category we get
                      [Mτ ]−1 = [Mτ ]−1 ◦ [Mτ ] ◦ [Mτ′ ′ ] = [Mτ′ ′ ].
  (3) Let Mτ′ ′ : Σζ → Σζ ′ be the unique color change bordism which changes all
negative markings to positive markings. Then we have
                                 Mτ′ ′ ◦ Nω = Nω′′ ◦ Mτ′′′′
where Mτ′′′′ : Σζ → Σζ ′′ changes all negative markings to positive markings and
Nω′′ is obtained from Nω by changing all negatively colored cylinders to positively
colored cylinders. Since Mτ : Σζ → Σζ ′ changes some select negative markings to
positive markings, we have Mτ′′′′ = Mτ′′′′′′ ◦ Mτ for the color change bordism which
changes the remaining negative markings on Σζ ′ to positives. Hence Nω′′ ◦ Mτ′′′′ =
Nω′ ◦ Mτ where Nω′ = Nω′′ ◦ Mτ′′′′′′ . We now have
        [Nω ] ◦ [Mτ ]−1 = [Mτ′ ′ ]−1 ◦ [Mτ′ ′ ] ◦ [Nω ] ◦ [Mτ ]−1 = [Mτ′ ′ ]−1 ◦ [Nω′ ]
in the homotopy category.                                                                  □

Lemma 17.6. Let ζ : D → Σ be a connected surface with a single positive (resp.
negative) marking, and κ : D′ → Σ be any auxiliary disk embedding which contains
the image of ζ in its interior. There are two smooth homotopies h1 , h2 : [0, 1]×D →
Σ with the following properties:
      • h10 = ζ and h2t = ζ at all times t ∈ [0, 1].
     • h1 is constant for t < 1/3 and t > 2/3, and for t ∈ [1/3, 2/3] it simultane-
       ously shrinks the image of ζ by a precomposition factor c−1√idD : D → D,
       for some c ≥ 1, and shifts the image of D linearly towards −1 ∈ D′ .
     • The terminal maps h11 , h21 : D → Σ have disjoint image.
110                                         CRIS NEGRON


Furthermore, for η : D × {1, 2} → Σ the resulting positively (resp. negatively)
marked surface with η|Dε = hε1 , and Mτεε : Σζ → Ση the resulting bordisms with
M ε = Σ × [0, 1] and
                      τ ε : D × [0, 1] → Σ × [0, 1], (z, t) 7→ (hεt (z), t),
we have [Mτ11 ] = [Mτ22 ] in the homotopy category h Bordnc  −1
                                                         ∗ [Θ∗ ].

Proof. The existence of such homotopies is clear. As for the latter claim, [Mτ11 ] =
[Mτ22 ], it suffices to find a bordism Nω : Ση → Σζ in Bord∗ which is a composition
of maps in Θ∗ and for which Nω ◦ Mτ11 = Nω ◦ Mτ22 . Indeed, such Nω : Ση → Σζ
becomes a unit in the localized homotopy category and we therefore have
             [Mτ11 ] = [Nω ]−1 ◦ [Nω ] ◦ [Mτ11 ] = [Nω ]−1 ◦ [Nω ] ◦ [Mτ22 ] = [Mτ22 ].
   In the case that Σζ is positively marked, we can take Nω to be a special merging
bordism. Explicitly, we can construct such Nω via a sequence of smooth homotopies.
First take y 0 : [0, 1] × D × {1, 2} → D × {1, 2} with y00 = id and which√ shrinks
                                                                  towards −1 in the
each disk by a factor of 1/3, then shifts the first disk linearly √
ambient disk D1 , and shifts the second disk linearly towards − −1 in D2 . We then
have the homotopy y 1 : [0, 1] × D × {1, 2} → Σ which applies hε on Dε in reverse
time, and we take y : [0, 1] × D × {1, 2} → Σ to be the composite
                              diag ×1                      1×y 0                      y1
        [0, 1] × D × {1, 2}     →       [0, 1]2 × D × {1, 2} → [0, 1] × D × {1, 2} → Σ.
For N = Σ × [0, 1] we then obtain ω and the function ω(z, t, i) = (y(t, z, i), t).
                                Ση                           Σζ




                                                   Nω

  It is easy to see that Nω : Ση → Σζ satisfies Nω ◦ Mτ22 = idΣζ , so that Nω is a
special merging bordism, and via a mild argument about bordisms obtained from
homotopies we find
                          Nω ◦ Mτ11 = idΣζ = Nω ◦ Mτ22 .
This gives the claimed equality in the homotopy category.
  In the case where Σζ is negatively marked, we first apply a color change bordism
Ση → Ση′ to change both negative indices to positive, then apply a special merging
bordism constructed exactly as above. This gives a bordism Nω : Ση → Σζ for
which
                                
                                 the unique color change bordism which
       Nω ◦ Mτ11 = Nω ◦ Mτ2′ =     exchanges the sole negative marking
                                   on Σζ with a positive marking.
                                

                                                                                           □

      We also record a basic fact about localization.
             TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                       111


Lemma 17.7. For any ∞-category C and class W in C [1] which contains all
identity maps, C [W −1 ] is equivalent to its full subcategory which is spanned by all
objects which are in the image of the the localization functor loc : C → C [W −1 ].
Furthermore, any morphism ξ : loc(x) → loc(y) in the localization is a composite
                                ξ = α1 w1−1 α2 w2−1 · · · αr wr−1                  (56)
of morphisms αi in C and wi in W .
Proof. Consider C ′ ⊆ C [W −1 ] the subcategory spanned by those objects in the
image of the localization functor, and all morphisms which are expressible as a
composite as in (56). It suffices to show that the map on homotopy categories
h C ′ → h C [W −1 ] is an equivalence.
   By the universal property of localization, the identity on C [W −1 ] factors through
the inclusion C ′ → C [W −1 ]. It follows that the inclusion is essentially surjective
and that the injection
                         π0 MapsC ′ (x, y) → π0 MapsC [W −1 ] (x, y)
is bijective. Hence the inclusion h C ′ → h C [W −1 ] is fully faithful as well.     □
17.4. Unmarked bordisms from unit labeled bordisms. We have the sym-
metric monoidal forgetful functors Bordnc             nc
                                           ∗ → Bord3,2 to the usual 3-dimensional
(non-compact, anomalous) bordism category of unmarked surfaces and unmarked
bordisms. Since this map forgets all internal decorations, it localizes to a symmetric
monoidal functor Bordnc      −1           nc
                        ∗ [Θ∗ ] → Bord3,2 . As the target of this localized functor
is discrete, we have the induced symmetric monoidal functor from the homotopy
truncation
                                             −1
                         f orget : h Bordnc
                                         ∗ [Θ∗ ] → Bord3,2 .
It is clear that this functor is essentially surjective. We are concerned with its
behavior on Hom sets.
Lemma 17.8. For positively marked surfaces Σζ and Σ′η , the map
                   π0 MapsBordnc
                              ∗
                                 (Σζ , Σ′η ) → Homh Bordnc [Θ−1
                                                             ∗ ]
                                                                 (Σζ , Σ′η )
                                                             ∗

is surjective.
Proof. By Lemmas 17.5 and 17.7 every map ξ : Σζ → Σ′η in h Bordnc       −1
                                                                    ∗ [Θ∗ ] is of the
form
                         ξ = [Mτ ]−1 [Nω ] : Σζ → Σ′η′ → Σ′η
where Mτ : Σ′η → Σ′η′ is a color change bordism. However, Σ′η contains no negative
markings, by assumption, so that Σ′η′ = Σ′η necessarily and Mτ = id. Thus ξ =
[Nω ], and we see that all morphisms in the localized category lift to Bordnc
                                                                           ∗ .     □
Theorem 17.9. The functor
                                                −1
                            f orget : h Bordnc            nc
                                            ∗ [Θ∗ ] → Bord3,2

is a symmetric monoidal equivalence.
Proof. Since we have inverted all color change bordisms and special merging bor-
disms we see that every object in Bordnc    −1
                                       ∗ [Θ∗ ] is isomorphic to a surface Σζ with
a single positive marking on each component. Hence each map on hom sets
                 f orget : Homh Bordnc [Θ−1
                                         ∗ ]
                                             (Σζ , Σ′η ) → HomBordnc
                                                                  3,2
                                                                      (Σ, Σ′ )     (57)
                                     ∗
112                                   CRIS NEGRON


is bijective if and only if it is bijective whenever Σζ and Σ′η carry a single positive
marking on each component. We fix two such surfaces.
   Via our definition of non-compact bordisms, it is clear that the map (57) is
surjective. For injectivity, consider two morphisms ξ, ξ ′ : Σζ → Ση with the same
image M : Σ → Σ′ in Bord3,2 . By Lemma 17.8 we have ξ = [Nτ ] and ξ ′ = [Nτ′ ′ ]
for bordisms Nτ , Nτ′ ′ : Σζ → Σ′η , and so can take N = N ′ = M . Now we have two
embeddings
                                      τ, τ ′ : Cyl → M
which agree in some collars around the boundary, and we want to show [Mτ ] = [Mτ ′ ]
in h Bordnc   −1
          ∗ [Θ∗ ].
   After applying homotopies in the interior of M , we can assume that τ and τ ′ have
disjoint image away from a collar around the incoming boundary Σ × [0, δ) → M .
By subsequently applying a homotopy in the collar we can assume further that Mτ
and Mτ ′ decompose as composites
                      Mτ = Mω ◦ Mτ11 and Mτ ′ = Mω ◦ Mτ22
where ω consists of two embeddings ω : Cyl ×{1, 2} → M with disjoint images, and
the Mτεε are obtained, at each component of the incoming boundary, via homotopy
as in the statement of Lemma 17.6:
          Σ                                              Σ


                                     τ                                          ω1

                                              7→


                                    τ′                                         ω2


                                                                        Mτεε         Mω


Since [Mτ11 ] = [Mτ22 ] in h Bordnc  −1
                                 ∗ [Θ∗ ], by Lemma 17.6, it follows that

                   [Mτ ] = [Mω ] ◦ [Mτ11 ] = [Mω ] ◦ [Mτ22 ] = [Mτ ′ ].
This shows that the map (57) is injective, and hence bijective. So we see that the
functor
                                            −1
                      f orget : h Bordnc
                                       ∗ [Θ∗ ] → Bord3,2
is both fully faithful and essentially surjective, and thus an equivalence.           □

17.5. Unmarked TQFTs. We can now take the field theory LunitDf in from Lemma
17.4 and apply homotopy truncation to obtain a symmetric monoidal functor from
the unlabeled bordism category
                                                             h Lunit
                                                                D
               LDf in : Bordnc       ∼       h Bordnc  −1
                                                              −→ h V ect.
                                                                 f in
                            3,2      =             ∗ [Θ∗ ]
                                  Thm 17.9

We recall that the homotopy category h V ect recovers the discrete derived category
of dg vector spaces h V ect = D(Vect), so that the target for this unmarked field
theory is completely familiar.
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                     113


Theorem 17.10. Consider a finite modular tensor category A♡ and take Df in =
Db (A♡                                              ♡
     f in ). Let C = CA♡ be the canonical coend in A . There is a symmetric
monoidal functor from the unmarked (anomalous) 3-dimensional bordism category

                            LDf in : Bordnc
                                         3,2 → D(Vect)


which takes the value LDf in (Σ) ∼
                                 = RHomA♡ (C ⊗g , 1) on any connected genus g
surface Σ.

Remark 17.11. When A♡ is semisimple, the theory LDf in already takes values
in the full subcategory Vect ⊆ V ect. Furthermore K (A♡ ) = D(A♡ ) in this case,
so that derived LRT is obtained directly from discrete LRT via localization. From
this fact, and the fact that discrete LRT restricted to Bordnc
                                                            A♡
                                                               recovers the theory
                                                                         f in

from [22], we see that LDf in is just the usual Reshetikhin-Turaev TQFT for A♡ in
the semisimple case.

   We conjecture that the 1-categorical theory which we’ve constructed above is, in
fact, a truncation of an unmarked theory which exists at the ∞-categorical level.

Conjecture 17.12. The truncated theory LDf in from Theorem 17.10 lifts to a
                                        3,2 → V ect.
symmetric monoidal functor LDf in : Bordnc

   We outline a proof which uses the hypothetical skein theoretic bordism category
from Section 2.

Idea of proof. In the (conjectural) skein theoretic realization of the bordism cate-
gory we’ll have a field theory LDf in : SkBordncDf in → V ect, by a variant of The-
orem 15.1. We then restrict along the unit ∗ → Df in to obtain a field theory
                     ∗ → V ect. But now, the forgetful functor SkBord∗ → Bord3,2
LDf in |unit : SkBordnc                                                 nc       nc

induces homotopy equivalences on mapping spaces since the ∞-category ∗ is (ob-
viously) contractible. Hence this forgetful functor is an equivalence, and we obtain
a unique symmetric monoidal functor LDf in : Bordnc   3,2 → V ect which completes a
diagram
                                                       LDf in
                                  unit /                          / V ect
                    SkBordnc
                          ∗                SkBordnc
                                                 Df in              9

                               f orget
                                             '
                                                         LDf in

                                             Bordnc
                                                 3,2                 .

                                                                                  □

17.6. Mapping class group actions in dimension 2. If we consider any nonempty
surface Σ (with chosen Lagrangian), we have the non-anomalous bordism category
Bord3,2 in which the oriented diffeomorphisms of the surface generate a subgroup
in the automorphism group

                            MCG(Σ) ⊆ AutBord (Σ),
114                                 CRIS NEGRON


by way of mapping cylinders. We take the pullback under the forgetful functor
from Bordnc
         3,2 to obtain a subgroup of anomalous automorphisms

                             ˜
                            MCG(Σ)           / AutBord (Σ)


                                                  
                            MCG(Σ)          / AutBord (Σ).

             ˜
The group MCG(Σ)    is a central extension of MCG(Σ) by Z which we call the
projective mapping class group. The following is an immediate consequence of
Theorem 17.10.
Corollary 17.13. For each connected genus g surface Σ, the derived linear maps
RHomA♡ (C ⊗g , 1) carry the natural structure of a representation for the projective
mapping class group,
                      ˜       → AutD(Vect) RHomA♡ (C ⊗g , 1) .
                                                                
                 ψ : MCG(Σ)
   One can compute these mapping class group actions directly by taking resolu-
tions of the unit. The process is exactly as outlined in Section 19.5 below, where
we discuss similar calculations for 3-manifold invariants.
Remark 17.14. As relayed in the introduction, mapping class group actions on
cohomology were already observed in works of Lentner, Mierach, Schweigert, and
Sommerhäuser [51], and Schweigert and Woike [72]. We have not checked, but
we fully expect that our mapping class group actions agree with those of [51, 72].
Let us also note that the mapping class group actions from [72] occur at the level
of the ∞-category V ect, and so provide an advancement of the particular actions
obtained in Corollary 17.13. This V ect-level action also suggests the existence of a
lifted theory as in Conjecture 17.12.

                                 18. Conjectures
   This paper has focused exclusively on formalizations of TQFTs for derived cate-
gories of modular tensor (1-)categories. However, we are fundamentally interested
in a space of homotopically flavored TQFTs for “modular ∞-categories”. We ap-
proach this general topic through a series of conjectures.
   In addition to our interest in homotopical Reshetikhin-Turaev type theories, we
have a special investment in couplings of topological field theories to moduli of local
systems. This kind of coupling is well-established in the physics literature, and we
discuss the topic in some detail in Sections 18.4 and 18.5 below.
18.1. 3-d TQFTs from modular ∞-categories.
Conjecture 18.1 (cf. Conjecture 17.12). For any modular ∞-category A , appro-
priately defined, there is an associated 3-dimensional TQFT
                                      A → V ectpro-f in
                             LA : Bordnc
whose state spaces, for any connected genus g surface Σ, admit a natural identifica-
               ∼
tion LA (Σx ) → MapsA (C ⊗g , mf x). Furthermore, this TQFT induces an unmarked
theory after labeling by the unit
                                           3,2 → V ect.
                              LAf in : Bordnc
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                      115


   There are two main issues here. The first is in the definition of a modular ∞-
category. Again, we might say succinctly that such a category is a 2-dimensional
TQFT which satisfies certain non-degeneracy conditions [62, 73]. Examples should
include derived categories of finite modular tensor (1-)categories, and derived cat-
egories of sheaves on compact symplectic varieties, possibly quantized [68, Section
9.2].
Remark 18.2. Though the ∞-category of sheaves D(X) on a projective symplectic
variety X has a strong t-structure, the R-matrix for the quantization [68] should
not respect the t-structure. So we do not think of D(X) as admitting a t-structure
when considered as a modular ∞-category.
  In the derived setting, we propose specifically that there is some way to construct
our theory LD for D = D(A♡ ) in a manner which operates directly at the level of
∞-categories. As a related point, we conjecture that the derived theories LD are
natural in functors between ∞-categories.
Conjecture 18.3. Consider finite modular tensor categories A♡ and B ♡ with re-
spective derived ∞-categories D = D(A♡ ) and D ′ = D(B ♡ ). Any map of balanced
monoidal ∞-categories F : D → D ′ , i.e. f r E2 -monoidal ∞-categories, induces a
symmetric monoidal transformation
                             LF : LD → LD ′ ◦ Bordnc
                                                  F

which, at the level of state spaces, recovers the natural maps
                                                      ⊗g
                   MapsD C ⊗g , mf x → MapsD ′ C ′ , mf F (x)
                                                              

induced by the functor F and a natural map between canonical algebras C ′ → F (C).
In particular, the field theory LD is a derived invariant.
   For a functor F which is not t-exact, establishing such naturality would pre-
sumably require an understanding of the theory LD directly at the homotopical
level.
Remark 18.4. We expect such non-t-exact functors to arise from Kazhdan-Lusztig
type equivalences at bad levels. See for example [61, Theorem 7.13].
18.2. Extension down to S 1 . The TQFT LD is paired with a “conjugate” theory
          D → V ect whose state spaces are given by the continuous duals
L′D : Bordnc
                                ∼
                       L′D (Σx ) → MapsD (C ⊗g ⊗ mf (x), 1)∗ ,
where the nc superscript in this case indicates a constraint on incomoing boundaries
and labels come from a f rDisk-category associated to the continuous duality −∗ :
               op ∼
D(A♡ pro-f in )   → D(A♡ ). (Compare with the original theory of [22], [50], and [20,
proof of Theorem 7.11].) Similarly, supposing that the theories LA from Conjecture
18.1 actually exist, we have the conjugate theory L′A .
Conjecture 18.5. Let A be a modular ∞-category. The conjugate theory L′A :
    3,2 → V ect extends down to a symmetric monoidal functor of (∞, 2)-categories
Bordnc

                                         3,2,1 → Prk
                               L′A : Bordnc
which takes values in the (∞, 2)-category of presentable V ect-module categories, and
for which L′A (S 1 ) = A .
116                                   CRIS NEGRON


   In the case of a derived ∞-category A = D(A♡ ), one can sketch the construction
of “most of” an extension for L′D –at least in principle–by following work of De
Renzi in the abelian setting [21] and applying various completion processes [56,
Proposition 5.5.8.22] [57, Corollary 1.4.4.5]. (See also [4, 50].) We omit further
details, for now.
   In the case of a derived ∞-category D(A♡ ), an obvious sub-conjecture here is
that D(A♡ ) appears as the circle value in a 2-dimensional TQFT.
Conjecture 18.6. Any finite modular ∞-category D(A♡ ) appears, along with its
E2 -structure, as the circle value in a 2-dimensional field theory
                                  L̄′D : Bord2,1 → Prk .
      We note that Conjecture 18.6 is not self-evident, though it may be accessible.
Remark 18.7. If we decide to conceptualize modular ∞-categories explicitly as
non-degenerate 2-dimensional field theories, then Conjectures 18.1 and 18.5 to-
gether assert that an extension up from dimension 2 to non-compact manifolds in
dimension 3 occurs if and only if the given 2-dimensional field theory satisfies a
finite number of checkable properties, and in particular that no additional struc-
tures are required. From the perspective of the cobordism hypothesis, say, such an
assertion seems immanently reasonable.
18.3. LRT bounding a 4-dimensional theory? In the semisimple setting we
have the 4-dimensional Crane-Yetter theory which is associated, modulo some de-
tails, to a given modular fusion category A♡ . This theory is invertible, and so
supports anomalous boundary theories [44]. It is shown in work of Haı̈oun [39]–
following proposals of Walker, Freed and Teleman [77, 78, 29]–that one can ob-
tain the (semisimple) Reshetikhin-Turaev theory for a modular fusion category A♡
as a boundary theory to 4-dimensional Crane-Yetter. One similarly obtains the
non-semisimple abelian theory LA♡ as a boundary to so-called non-semisimple
                                     f in
Crane-Yetter [7, 39].
    In the derived setting, considering D = D(A♡ ) for modular A♡ , the situation is
rather unclear. We expect the 4-dimensional theory obtained from D to be quite
a wild object, and in particular non-invertible. Specifically, the value on S 2 is
presumably identified with the E3 -center for D, which should be exceedingly non-
trivial in general. For example, in the case of a quantum group A♡ = (Repq G)small ,
all expectations are that the E3 -center should be an intricate category of sheaves on
the cone Ň of nilpotent elements in the Lie algebra for the Langlands dual group.
So the non-semisimple (derived) and semisimple settings seem quite dissimilar,
and one should think about whether the semisimple boundary intuition is actually
applicable when one works homotopically.
Question 18.8. Is there an extended 4-dimensional theory TD which recovers LD ,
or L′D , as a 3-dimensional boundary?
   As a slightly different, but maybe more fundamental set of questions, we can
investigate the 4-dimensional theory for D outright.
Question 18.9. To what extent can we describe the 4-dimensional theory associated
to D = D(A♡ ), where we consider the derived ∞-category as an object in the (∞, 4)-
category of E2 -monoidal ∞-categories and approach the issue–either philosophically
or materially–via the cobordism hypothesis [40, 44, 8, 7].
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                         117


   In particular, does the fully local topological theory for D extend up to dimension
3 (cf. [7, Theorem 1.2])? Is it, furthermore, a non-compact 4-dimensional theory?
Are its values on certain 3-manifolds definitively non-invertible? Is there an explicit
skein theory which describes its values on 3-manifolds (cf. Section 2)? Can we
describe factorization homology for D via a skein theory? Etc.
18.4. Coupling to local systems. In addition to the points discussed above, the
other (from our perspective) tangible issue which one is required to think about is
the coupling of 3-dimensional field theories to local systems. The following conjec-
ture is, as far as we can tell, a “fact” in the physics literature. See for example
[59, 35].
Conjecture 18.10. Let A be a modular ∞-category, and suppose a connected alge-
braic group H acts rationally on A via automorphisms which preserve the modular
structure. Suppose also that a certain extension problem for A has a solution (see
Conjecture 18.11). Then the unmarked TQFT LA : Bordnc       3,2 → V ect deforms nat-
urally along H-local systems. In particular, the state spaces LA (Σ) appear as the
trivial fiber of a naturally occurring dg sheaf LH
                                                 A (Σ) over LocSysH (Σ).

   In the case of a derived ∞-category, the extent to which LA deforms as a fully
functional, mathematically formal, topological field theory is a bit subtle. So, our
main ambition here is to “look at” Conjecture 18.10 through the lense of some
examples, and to extract some more explicit claims.
   Let us consider the case of quantum group representations. Here we can think
about the state spaces from the perspective of 2-dimensional conformal field theory,
via a bulk/boundary correspondence, at which point we conceptualize 2-d CFTs
through the theory of vertex tensor categories.
   From the perspective of the “logarithmic KL conjecture” we anticipate an equiv-
                                                     ∼
alence of modular tensor categories (Repq G)small → Wκ (G)-mod where Wκ (G) is
the logarithmic W -algebra associated to G at a prescribed level [52, 74, 53]. This
equivalence should be Ǧ-equivariant for the action of the Langlands dual group Ǧ
on Wκ (G)-mod induced by the natural action of Ǧ on Wκ (G) by VOA automor-
phisms. These Wκ (G) should furthermore be the associated boundary algebras for
a 3-dimensional physical theory associated to G [17, Section 6.2.2], and it is pro-
posed directly in [35, Section 2.1], for example, that this Ǧ-action is responsible for
the coupling of the topological theory LD to local systems (see also [28]).
   In categorical terms, one expects these kinds of deformed TQFT to be regulated
by an “H-crossed braided tensor ∞-category” A˜H which extends A , as in Turaev’s
HTQFTs [76].
Conjecture 18.11. Given an H-crossed braided extension A˜H of a modular ten-
sor ∞-category A , the associated topological field theory LA from Conjecture 18.1
deforms along local systems to produce a mathematically formal field theory LH  A
which is coupled to local systems.
   Returning to our particular logarithmic W -algebra, the Ǧ-extension of the cat-
egory of Wκ (G)-modules
                           Wκ (G)-mod → Wκ (G)-modtw
                                                  Ǧ

should be provided by the category of Ǧ-twists modules for W(G). Working directly
through the representation theory of the small quantum group, rather than through
118                                 CRIS NEGRON


a Kazhdan-Lusztig equivalence, we believe that the analogous Ǧ-crossed extension
                              (Repq Ǧ)small → DKq (G)
is realized by a variant of the De Concini-Kac module category. In this modified
De Concini-Kac category the Frobenius center in UqDK (g) is replaced by functons
on the Langlands–rather than Frobenius–dual group (cf. [17, 55]). We place special
emphasis on this case, as we expect the category DKq (G) to be of interest in both
quantum algebra and geometric representation theory.
Remark 18.12. If we are lucky, the desired category DKq (G) can be constructed
by applying some act of tensor categorical hoodoo to the recent “corrected” De
Concini-Kac quantum enveloping algebra of Losev, Tsymbaliuk, and Vu [55]. (Com-
pare with the corrected versions of small quantum groups at even order parameters
[18, 63, 19, 64].) Already they have produced stability for the De Concini-Kac alge-
bra across all orders in the quantum parameter, and their Ǧ-integrable subalgebra
Uqf in admits a central embedding O(Ǧ) → Uqf in from the algebra of functions on
the dual group. Hence the category of Uqf in -modules is naturally a sheaf over Ǧ.
What we are missing is the appropriate crossed tensor structure, and the relation
to small quantum groups.
Remark 18.13. The LocSysǦ -coupled theory for derived quantum group repre-
sentations lies, from a certain physics perspective, on the spectral side of a physical
Langlands duality. The automorphic side of this duality is a corresponding theory
which couples to BunG . See [46, 34, 35].
Remark 18.14. We expect the theory from Conjecture 18.10 to accept certain
types of markings, though the inclusion of such markings complicates the story.
18.5. What is a topological theory coupled to local systems, really? While
we cannot make a definitive statement in this regard, let us say a few words towards
the precise nature of the theory LH
                                  A from Conjecture 18.11.
   In considering a TQFT “coupled” to flat connections LH    A we anticipate the ex-
istence of a symmetric monoidal functor

                               A : H- Bord3,2 → V ect
                                          nc
                              LH
from an H-bordism category consisting of surfaces Σ equipped with a map of stacks
λΣ : Σ → BH and bordisms M with λM : M → BH, as in [76]. Here the
classifying stack is the sheaf of spaces with sections (BH)(Y ) = B(H(Y )), over
either an algebraic or analytic site, and each manifold is treated as the constant
sheaf. Equivalently, the objects and morphisms come equipped with a point on the
mapping stack λX : Spec(k) → LocSysH (X) = Maps(X, BH).
   In top dimension the resulting functions LH                                   2
                                                 A (Mλ \ a ball) : k → k ⊆ LA (S )
should vary smoothly over LocSysH (M ), and in dimension 2 the derived vector
spaces LH                                           H
          A (Σλ ) should assemble into a dg sheaf LA (Σ) over local systems. As for
the sheaf structure, for commutative algebras R in V ect we anticipate functorially
varying theories
                           A (R) : H- Bord3,2 (R) → Mod(R)
                                          nc
                         LH
for manifolds with specified R-families of local systems λX : Spec(R) → LocSysH (X),
which collectively assemble into a “sheaf of field theories” LHA.
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                       119


  To come back to the real world, we return the quantum group case A♡ =
(Repq G)small , D = D(A♡ ). If we restrict our attention only to the torus Ť ⊆ Ǧ
we obtain a theory with abelian connections

                                              3,2 → V ect.
                              LŤD : Ť - Bordnc
By all indications, this Ť -coupled theory is the derived (and sheafified) variant of
the CGP theory for the unrolled quantum group [6, 24]
   We note also that deformed theories over local systems were produced in 4-
dimensions for non-semisimple (non-derived) Crane-Yetter theories in work of Kin-
near [47]. Here, for the quantum group, one considers the 5-dimensional theory
associated to Rep Ǧ and takes Repq G as an invertible map in the 5-category of
E3 -monoidal 1-categories. This situation enriches the 4-dimensional theory for the
fiber Vect ⊗Rep Ǧ Repq G = (Repq G)small in sheaves over local systems.
   It is possible that an analogous approach can be taken in dimension 3 as well,
though we don’t currently see a clear line of argumentation in this direction.

                    19. Post-credit scenes in 3 dimension
   From the author’s perspective at least, this paper is done. We include here some
post-credit materials, where we discuss sporadic outputs of our theory in dimension
3.
   At the most immediate level, we obtain diffeomorphism invariants of 3-manifolds.
However, as we explain below, these 3-manifold invariants collapse to invariants
which are already calculable at the abelian level. In order to see higher information
in dimension 3, one can performing higher genus operation to a closed 3-manifold.
For one example, we explain how LDf in can be used to produce framed knot in-
variants by excising tori from a 3-sphere.

19.1. Invariants from bored 3-manifold. We fix a finite modular tensor cate-
gory A♡ with finite derived category Df in = D(A♡f in ). We consider the unmarked
TQFT
                           LDf in : Bordnc
                                        3,2 → D(Vect)
from Theorem 17.10, and fix a bordism Σ : ∅ → Σ in Bord3,2 for a surface Σ. So,
this is just a chosen “filling” of Σ. Let Σ̄ : Σ̄ → ∅ denote the orientation reversal.
   For any closed 3-manifold with a pair of oriented embeddings

                                       Σ                     Σ̄                  (58)
                          M̌ =
                                                $       z
                                                    M
we remove the interiors, and adopt signature defect 0, to obtain a non-anomalous
bordism Σ → Σ. By an abuse of notation we denote this bordism by M̌ : Σ → Σ
as well.
   We note that the bordism M̌ : Σ → Σ associated to such a configuration (58) only
depends on the isotopy class of the embedding Σ⨿ Σ̄ → M , up to a diffeomorphism.
Hence this bordism, considered as a map in Bordnc  3,2 , is stable under isotopies for
the input data (58). This follows by the isotopy extension theorem [67, 54]. So, for
example, when M is connected and Σ = S 2 the bordism M̌ is in fact independent
of the choice of embeddings completely. We record this point.
120                                    CRIS NEGRON


Lemma 19.1. Given a configuration as in (58), the resulting map M̌ : Σ → Σ′ in
Bordnc
    3,2 only depends on the isotopy class of the embedding Σ ⨿ Σ̄ → M .

  Taking M̌ as above, we have the induced morphism LDf in (M̌ ) : LDf in (Σ) →
LDf in (Σ) and we take cohomology to get a graded endomorphism
                      H ∗ LDf in (M̌ ) : H ∗ LDf in (Σ) → H ∗ LDf in (Σ).          (59)
In the event that Σ is connected and of genus g, this cohomology is identified with
extensions for A♡ , as in Theorem 17.10, and we equivalently obtain an endomor-
phism of cohomology
                   H ∗ LDf in (M̌ ) : Ext∗A♡ (C ⊗g , 1) → Ext∗A♡ (C ⊗g , 1).
   Now, if we recall how the theory LDf in is produced, we understand that it is
only determined up to a unique natural isomorphism. So we should only think of
the endomorphism (59) as determined up to conjugation. Hence we consider the
following.
Definition 19.2. Fix a finite modular tensor category A♡ . For any closed 3-
manifold with embeddings M̌ : Σ ⨿ Σ̄ → M from fillings of a given surface Σ, we
define
                         ∞
                         X
         Inv(A♡ |M̌ ) :=   det H n LDf in (M̌ ) − X · id tn ∈ O(A1k )[[t]],
                                                        
                            n=0

where O(A1k ) = k[X].
      The following is apparent.
Proposition 19.3. For each excised 3-manifold M̌ as above, the assignment
              Inv(−|M̌ ) : finite modular ⊗-cats → O(A1k )[[t]]
                          

is stable on equivalence classes, and hence defines an invariant of finite modular
tensor categories.
                                                                               ∼
Proof. If we have an equivalence of modular tensor categories A♡ → B ♡ then we
obtain an equivalence between the discrete LRT theories, in particular we have a
diagram
                         Bordnc
                                            LA
                                                        / V ectpro-f in
                             A                              8
                                   ∼
                                         $            LB

                                         Bordnc
                                             B

in SM∞ , and subsequent identification between the associated topological theories
            ∼
LD(A♡ )f in → LD(B ♡ )f in .                                                    □

   Of course, we conjecture that each operation Inv(−|M̌ ) is in fact a derived in-
variant for modular tensor categories. (See Conjecture 18.3.)
   We claim that the operation Inv(A♡ |−) also serves as a topological invariant,
at least to some extent. Below we record some basic information concerning the
endomorphisms LDf in (M̌ ), discuss the behaviors of Inv(A♡ |−) in low genus, then
explain how one can directly calculate this invariant via injective resolutions.
             TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                            121


19.2. Power series invariants and LDf in (S 2 )-linearity. By basic topological
considerations we understand that the sphere value LDf in (S 2 ) is a commutative
algebra and that each state space LDf in (Σ) for a connected surface is a module
over LDf in (S 2 ) in D(Vect). The multiplication on the sphere is obtained by boring
out the interiors of two small balls in a larger ball, and the action on LDf in (Σ) is
obtained by boring out the interior of a ball within the bordism Σ×[0, 1]. Under this
natural module structure, each bordism between connected surfaces N : Σ → Σ′
evaluates to a map of LDf in (S 2 )-modules under the field theory LDf in .
   Though we omit the details, we claim that under the identifications
         LD (S 2 ) ∼
             f in      = RHomA♡ (1, 1) and LD (Σ) ∼ f in = RHomA♡ (C ⊗g , 1)
                                             2
the natural algebra structure on LDf in (S ) agrees with the standard Yoneda prod-
uct on extensions, and the module structure agrees with the natural tensor action
of RHomA♡ (1, 1) on RHomA♡ (C ⊗g , 1).
   Now, it is a well-established conjecture that, for any finite tensor category, the
cohomology Ext∗A♡ (x, 1) of an arbitrary rigid object x is a finite module over
Ext∗A♡ (1, 1) [31, 27]. So, in any setting in which one can hope to compute anything,
each morphism
                                                      ∼
                     H ∗ LDf in (M̌ ) : H ∗ LDf in (Σ) → H ∗ LDf in (Σ)
for connected Σ is completely determined by its values in low-degree. As a conse-
quence, we expect the low degree coefficients
                    Inv(A♡ |M̌ ) = c0 (X) + c1 (X)t + c2 (X)t2 + · · ·
to carry the most important information.
19.3. Manifold invariants in genus 0.
Lemma 19.4. For Σ = S 2 , any choice of a connected closed 3-manifold M , and
arbitrary embedding M̌ : B 3 ⨿ B̄ 3 → M , the polynomial
                               Inv(A♡ |M ) := Inv(A♡ |M̌ )
is a diffeomorphism invariant of M .
Proof. This follows from the fact that the resulting bordism M̌ : S 2 → S 2 only
depends on the isotopy class of the given embedding (Lemma 19.1).             □
   Though this invariant is a natural by-product of the unmarked field theory LDf in ,
and so is worth considering in the abstract, it does not actually carry any informa-
tion from the higher cohomologies H >0 LDf in (S 2 ).
Proposition 19.5. For Σ = S 2 , the scalar term λM = Inv(A♡ |M )|X=t=0 deter-
mines the entire invariant Inv(A♡ |M ). In particular, we have
                                         X
                         Inv(A♡ |M̌ ) :=   (λM − X)dn tn
                                            n≥0

where dn = dim ExtnA♡ (1, 1).
Proof. Since H ∗ LDf in (M̌ ) is a H ∗ LDf in (S 2 )-module endomorphism of H ∗ LDf in (S 2 )
in the category of graded vector spaces, it is determined by its restriction to degree
zero
              H 0 LDf in (M̌ ) : H 0 LDf in (S 2 ) = k → H 0 LDf in (S 2 ) = k.
122                                       CRIS NEGRON


This restriction just returns a scalar λM , and we have H ∗ LDf in (M̌ ) = λM · idL(S 2 ) .
                                                                                       □
   We note that the scalar λM recovers the abelian (renormalized) Lyubashenko
invariant from [22]. In particular, we have
                 λM = LA♡ (M ) : LA♡ (S 2 ) = k → LA♡ (S 2 ) = k.
                            f in           f in                 f in

See Lemma 19.10 and Section 19.6 below.
19.4. Framed knot invariants in genus 1. Take a knot in 3-space ν : S 1 → R3 ,
which we may consider as a knot in S 3 which avoids the point ∞. We suppose the
differential ∂ν is non-vanishing, and assume ν comes equipped with an orthonormal
framing in which the first vector is the differential ∂ν/∂t. From this framing we
deduce an embedding from the solid torus ν ′ : T2 → R3 ⊆ S 3 where the center
of T2 traverses ν. We take another embedding µ : T̄2 → R3 ⊆ S 3 which wraps
around the exterior of ν ′ at an arbitrary time t ∈ S 1 . In this way we obtain an
assignment ν 7→ Šν3 from a framed knot S 2 → R3 to a bordism Š 3 : T 2 → T 2 .
Proposition 19.6. For any finite modular tensor category A♡ , the assignment
             Embedf r (S 1 , R3 ) → O(A1k )[[t]], ν 7→ Inv A♡ |Šν3 ,
                                                                   

from the space of smooth framed embeddings is continuous. In particular, Inv A♡ |Šν3
                                                                                                

is a framed knot invariant.
   We can consider, as a fairly explicit example, the category A♡ = Rep(uq ) of
small quantum group representations for SL2 at an odd order root of unity. We
assume, for the sake of simplicity, that ord(q) = 3. Here the Hochschild cohomology
H ∗ LDf in (T 2 ) ∼
                  = Ext∗uq (C, 1) is generated over the extensions Ext∗uq (1, 1) in degrees
0 and 1, and the self-extensions of the unit are identified with algebraic functions
Ext∗uq (1, 1) = O(N ) on the cone of nilpotent matrices in sl2 . We have, specifically,
four module generators for Ext∗uq (C, 1) in degree 0 and four generators in degree 1.
   Both cohomologies come equipped with natural PSL2 -actions and, as a PSL2 -
representation, we have
 Ext0uq (C, 1) = L(0) ⊗C (C2 ⊕ C2 ) and Ext1uq (C, 1) = (L(0) ⊕ L(2)) ⊗C C2 (60)
where PSL2 acts on the left hand factors [49, Section 5]. We claim that the map
H ∗ LDf in (Šν3 ) is PSL2 -linear [70], so that H 1 LDf in (Šν3 ) is specified by two 2 × 2
matrices Λ0 and Λ2 with eigenvalues λ0i and λ2i . Hence we obtain
                                          2
                                          Y
              Inv(uq |Šν3 ) = c0 (X) −       (X − λ0i )(X − λ2i )3 · t + O(t2 ).
                                          i=1

The coefficient c0 (X) can be calculated via the abelian theory LA♡ .
                                                                            f in


Remark 19.7. Obviously, the (unordered) pairs of scalars (λ01 , λ02 ) and (λ01 , λ02 )
are themselves framed knot invariants.
Remark 19.8. The dependence of the invariant Inv(A♡ |Šν3 ) on the framing is
precisely captured by the SL2 (Z)-action on Hochschild cohomology. Namely, pre-
composing H 1 LDf in (Šν3 ) with the action of the T matrix in SL2 (Z) produces the
endomorphisms
                         H 1 LDf in (Šν3 ) ◦ T n = H 1 LDf in (Šν|n
                                                                  3
                                                                      )
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                      123


associated to the new framing on ν obtained by introducing an n-th order twisting
around the image of ν. So the framed knot produces a tuple of power series
                 Invunf r (A♡ |Šν3 ) = Inv(A♡ |Šν|−
                                                  3
                                                      ) : Z → O(A1k )[[t]]
which is uniquely determined up to a translation in Z. In particular, any asymptotic
behaviors of this function produce unframed invariants.
Remark 19.9. The decomposition of (60) should be one of PSL2 (C) × SL2 (Z)-
representations, with PSL2 acting on the left factor and SL2 (Z) acting on the
right. The C2 factor in the first Hochschild cohomology is a twist of the standard
representation for SL2 (Z) by a nontrivial character, as is one of the C2 summands
in degree 0. See [49].
  Let us explain, finally, how one can calculate these invariants in practice.
19.5. Calculating Inv via resolutions. Though we won’t calculate any of the
above invariants explicitly, let us at least explain how one can calculate them. The
process is rather simple. Let us fix modular A♡ and closed connected M with
embeddings Σ → M ← Σ̄.
   Firt, take your favorite injective resolution 1 → Q of the unit in A♡ and endow
the surface Σ with a positive disk labeled by Q. Then produce a bordism
                                   M̌tube : ΣQ → ΣQ
in Bordnc
       A by connecting the markings via a single tube which traverses the interior
of M̌ arbitrarily. We then evaluate under discrete LRT to get an endomorphism of
cochains
                  LA (M̌tube ) : Hom∗A♡ (C ⊗g , Q) → Hom∗A♡ (C ⊗g , Q).
This endomorphism can be calculated, degree-by-degree, via the original abelian
LRT theory from [22]. Take cohomology to get an endomorphism
                H ∗ LA (M̌tube ) : Ext∗A♡ (C ⊗g , 1) → Ext∗A♡ (C ⊗g , 1).
Lemma 19.10. The endomorphisms H ∗ LA (M̌tube ) and H ∗ LDf in (M̌ ) are conju-
gate. Hence the coefficient of tn in Inv(A♡ |M̌ ) is calculated as the determinant of
the matrix H n LA (M̌tube ) − X · id.
  For the proof of this result we provide a more leisurely explanation below.
19.6. Justification for Lemma 19.10. Let us explain why this claim holds. First
note that we have a diagram
                                        h Bordnc
                                              Df in
                                         8              h LDf in
                                unit

                                        h LDf in unit            &
                     h Bordnc                                / D(Vect)
                           ∗                                   8

                              f orget
                                         &              LDf in

                                         Bordnc
                                             3,2

                                                                       ′
so that we can calculate LDf in (M̌ ) by lifting to a marked bordism M̌tube in Bordnc
                                                                                   ∗
along the forgetful functor. This just involves introducing arbitrary markings on the
                                                                         ′
bounding surfaces, though they should be the same markings so that M̌tube     remains
124                                     CRIS NEGRON


an endomorphism, and arbitrary cylinder embeddings connecting these markings
through M̌ . To simplify the situation we should assume that intersecting with the
                                                       ′
outgoing boundary reproduces the identity map ∂out (M̌tube ) = idI : D ×I → D ×I
in f rDisk.
   As for the map Bordnc∗ → BordDf in , we have the diagram

                                    Bordnc
                                        Units(Df in )
                        triv kan f ib

                         x                                   '
                   Bordnc
                       ∗
                                                          / Bordnc
                                                                D
                                           unit                  f in


                                    ′
so that, we can calculate unit(M̌tube  ) : ∆1 → Bord∗ , up to isomorphism, by first
lifting along the forgetful functor from Bordnc  Units(Df in ) then projecting down to
      nc
BordDf in . This can be done explicitly by marking both bounding surfaces by the
same choice of a unit object 1D in Df in , and all outgoing boundaries by the identity
morphism. This gives us a Df in -marked bordism Mtube    ′′              ′
                                                               = unit(M̌tube ). We note
that the particular choice of unit does not matter here, but the fact that all markings
are the same is important.
                                          ′′
    Now to calculate the value LDf in (M̌tube ) we have the identification
                                       ′′              ′′
                             LDf in (M̌tube ) = LK (RM̌tube )
where R is the (restricted) right adjoint R : Bordnc               nc
                                                      Df in → BordK . The bordism
    ′′
RM̌tube   is determined, up to conjugation by an isomorphism, as the ∗-marked
             ′
bordism M̌tube    now labeled by an arbitrary injective resolution Q of the unit 1K ,
along with identity morphisms at the boundary. To calculate this morphism we
can lift finally along the map Bordnc          nc
                                    A → BordK to get
                          ′′
                   LK (RM̌tube ) = LA (M̌tube ) up to conjugation,
                                 ′
where M̌tube is obtained from M̌tube  by labeling by Q at each marking, and the
identity at the outgoing boundaries. In total we find
                 H ∗ LDf in (M̌ ) = H ∗ LA (M̌tube ) up to conjugation.
We can therefore calculate the proposed determinants in the definition of the in-
variant Inv(A♡ |M̌ ) via H ∗ LA (M̌tube ).

                             Appendix A. About f rE2
   We discuss equivalences between maps in f rE2 , while paying special attention
to issues of smoothness. We then prove Proposition 7.1, which claims that the
inclusion Linf rE2 → f rE2 is an equivalence, and discuss related issues for bordism
categories. Finally, we provide the proofs of Lemmas 6.9 and 6.12 from the body
of the text. The reader might recall at this point our explicit construction of the
∞-operad f rE2 from Section 5.3.

A.1. The homotopy category h f rE2 . The following results are well-known to
experts. Corollary A.3, in particular, follow by an equivalence between the space of
smooth embeddings Embed(D × I, D) ⊆ Maps(D × I, D) and the space of framed
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                          125


configurations of points Conf fI r (D).1 We give some simple-minded proofs in any
case.
Lemma A.1. Any two oriented smooth embeddings f0 , f1 : D → D are homotopic
via a homotopy h : |∆1 | × D → D whose evaluation ht at each time t ∈ |∆1 | is a
smooth embedding. Furthermore, the homotopy h itself can be chosen to be smooth.
Proof. Consider an arbitrary smooth, oriented embedding f : D → D. Via the
                  z
homotopy f ( 1+t    ) : [0, 1] × D → D we may assume that f has image in the interior
                                                   z
to D. By applying the diffeomorphism 1−|z|             : Do → R2 we reduce to considering
embeddings f : D → R2 . We claim that any such f is homotopic to the standard
inclusion, and in particular that all oriented embeddings are homotopic.
    By translating we assume f (0) = 0, and consider the differential T0 f : R2 → R2 .
Since T0 f is a matrix with positive determinant, we can find a (smooth) path
A(t) : [0, 1] → GL2 (R) with A(0) = I2 and A(1) = (T0 f )−1 . Then by composing
A(t)f : [0, 1] × D → R2 we reduce to the case where T0 f = I2 .
    Now consider the open path
                                                                f (−tz)
                          ho : [−1, 0) × D → D, hot (z) =               .
                                                                   −t
We have
                                      ∂f (tz)
                       lim hot (z) =          |t=0 = T0 f (z) = I2 (z) = z.
                       t→0              ∂t
           o
Hence h (t) extends continuously to a homotopy h : [−1, 0]×D → D with h0 = idD .
To see that h is smooth, we have the alternate expression
                                       Z t
                                              ∂f             ∂f
                         f (−tz) = −       x (−uz) + y (−uz)du
                                         0    ∂x             ∂y
                                   Z 1
                                         ∂f              ∂f
                             = −t      x (−vtz) + y (−vtz)dv
                                    0    ∂x              ∂y
                                        Z 1
                                               ∂f             ∂f
                      ⇒ h(t, z) = −         x (−vtz) + y (−vtz)dv.
                                         0     ∂x             ∂y
    We now have a sequence of composable smooth homotopies h0 , . . . , hm : [0, 1] ×
D → D, for any choice of a smooth embedding f : D → D, with h00 = f and
hm1 = f∞ . Here f∞ is fixed to be the preimage of the identity D → D ⊆ R
                                                                                        2
                                    z         o       2
under the diffeomorphism 1−|z| : D → R . After choosing a smooth weakly
increasing function b(t) : [0, 1] → [0, 1] with b(t) = 0 in a neighborhood around 0 and
b(t) = 1 in a neighborhood around 1, we obtain a sequence of smooth homotopies
H l (t, z) = hl (b(t), z) who compose to a smooth homotopy
                      Hf = H m ◦ · · · ◦ H 0 : [0, m + 1] × D → D
between f and f∞ . For an arbitrary pair of smooth embeddings f0 , f1 : D →
D we now construct a smooth homotopy between f0 and f1 via the compositie
Hf−1
   1
     ◦ Hf0 .                                                              □
Proposition A.2. Suppose two maps f0 , f1 : D × If → D × J in f rE2 have the
same image f : I → J in Fin∗ . There is a smooth homotopy h : |∆1 | × D × I →
D × J with h0 = f0 and h1 = f1 , and for which the evaluation ht : D × If → D × J
at each t ∈ |∆1 | is a smooth embedding.
  1See for example this mathoverflow answer form Najib Idrissi.
126                                  CRIS NEGRON


Proof. It suffices to prove the result when J is a singleton and f : I → {±0} is
active, since we can independently resolve the problem for the preimages D × Ij of
the disks in the codomain one-by-one. Furthermore, after shrinking the images of
the disks, then translating if necessary, we may assume each of the images f0 (Di )
and f1 (Di′ ) are disjoint in D for each i and i′ in If . Then, by isolating each of the
pairs f0 (Di ) ∪ f1 (Di ) in disjoint neighborhoods τi : D ,→ D we reduce to the case
where I is a singleton. This reduces us to the situation considered in Lemma A.1,
where the problem was already resolved.                                               □
Corollary A.3. The forgetful functor f rE2 → Fin∗ induces an equivalence from
                                ∼
the homotopy truncation h f rE2 → Fin∗ .
Proof. Morphisms in the homotopy category are given by the connected com-
ponents in the mapping space Mapsf rE2 (I, J ). We have the forgetful functor
Mapsf rE2 (I, J ) → HomFin∗ (I, J ) which separates this mapping space into a dis-
joint union
                       Mapsf rE2 (I, J ) = ⨿f Mapsf rE2 (I, J )f
over f in HomFin∗ (I, J ). So it suffices to show that each space Mapsf rE2 (I, J )f
is connected. As two maps in this space f0 , f1 : D × If → D × J are connected by
a path if and only if there is a homotopy h : |∆1 | × D × If → D × J with h0 = f0
and h1 = f1 , the result follows by Proposition A.2.                              □
A.2. Linearly arrangements of disks.
Lemma A.4. The inclusion Linf rE2 → f rE2 is an equivalence.
Proof. The inclusion is essentially surjective, as Linf rE2 contains all objects.
Given any pair of finite colored sets I and J , we need only show that the inclusion
of mapping spaces
                       MapsLinf rE2 (I, J ) → Mapsf rE2 (I, J )
is a homotopy equivalence. For this we can consider the corresponding simplicial
category Linf rE2 in f rE2 and show that the inclusion
                        HomLinf rE2 (I, J ) → Homf rE2 (I, J )
is an equivalence (see [58, 02LN]). Since the subspace HomLinf rE2 (I, J ) is full in
Homf rE2 (I, J ) we need only show that the inclusion is surjective on connected
components. However, this is a consequence of Proposition A.2, which shows that
there is only one map in Homf rE2 (I, J ), up to homotopy, over each map of finite
colored sets I → J .                                                               □
  We similarly have the subcategory Linf rDisk⊗ in f rDisk⊗ which fits into a
pullback diagram
                         Linf rDisk⊗      / f rDisk⊗


                                                      
                              Linf rE2            / f rE2 .
Since the disjoint union functor Linf rDisk⊗ → f rE2 is an isofibration, the ex-
istence of such a pullback diagram tells us that the inclusion Linf rDisk⊗ →
f rDisk⊗ is an equivalence.
Lemma A.5. The inclusion Linf rDisk⊗ → f rDisk⊗ is an equivalence.
             TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                             127


A.3. Linear arrangements for bordisms.

Lemma A.6. Fix two smooth oriented embeddings f0 , f1 : D × I → D. There is a
smooth homotopy h : |∆1 | × Cyl ×I → D, and subsequent homotopy

              H : |∆1 | × Cyl ×I → Cyl, H(s, z, t, i) 7→ (h(s, z, t, i), t),

which satisfies the following:
      • There exists ε > 0 for which h(s, z, t, i) = h(s, z, t′ , i) whenever t and t′ are
        simultaneously in the neighborhood [0, ε), or in (1 − ε, 1].
      • h(0, z, t, i) = h(s, z, 0, i) = f0 (z, i) for all s and t.
      • h(1, z, 1, i) = f1 (z, i).

Proof. Take µ : |∆1 | × D × I → D a smooth homotopy which has µ0 = f0 , µ1 = f1 ,
and for which µt is a smooth embedding at all t in |∆1 |. Such a homotopy µ exists
by Proposition A.2. Let b : [0, 1] → R be a smooth, weakly increasing function for
which b(t) is of constant value 0 in a neighborhood of 0 and of constant value 1 in
a neighborhood of 1. Let c : [0, 1] → R be the identity c(s) = s. Take now

              h : |∆1 | × Cyl ×I → D and H : |∆1 | × Cyl ×I → Cyl
                                                                                    
defined by h(s, z, t, i) = µ(c(s)b(t), z, i) and H(s, z, t, i) = µ(c(s)b(t), z, i), t .    □

Proposition A.7. Consider any ∗-marked surfaces Σζ and Σ′η , and bordism Mf :
Σζ → Σ′η in Bord∗ . Let f0 = ∂out (Mf ) : D × I → D × J be the corresponding map
in f rE2 , and take t : I → J its image in Fin∗ . For any other map f1 : D × I → J
                                                       ∼
in f rE2 over t, there is an isomorphic bordism Mf → Mf ′ in MapsBord∗ (Σζ , Ση )
with ∂out (Mf ′ ) = f1 .

Proof. Consider the case where Σ′ = Σ, η : D × J → Σ are disk which collectively
contain the image of ζ : D × I → Σ, M = Σ × [0, 1], and

                                     f : Cyl ×I → M

is constant in the linear factor of Cyl = D × [0, 1]. So, f is explicitly the map
f (z, t, i) = f0 (z, i).
     For each j in J we have the corresponding embedded cylinder ηbj : Cylj → M ,
ηbj (t, z) = (t, η(t, z)), and we intersect with this cylinder to obtain a map

                                  fbj : Cyl ×Ij → Cylj

which is constant in the linear factor, fbj (z, t, i) = f0 (z, i), where we now restrict to
z in D × Ij ⊆ D × I. By Lemma A.6 and Proposition A.7 we can find, for each j,
a smooth homotopy

                           H j : |∆1 | × Cyl ×Ij → Cylj → M

whose terminal map H1j : Cyl ×Ij → M intersects with the outgoing boundary disk
to reproduce f1 |D×Ij , and which together provide an isomorphism

                                 H : |∆1 | × Cyl ×I → M
128                                 CRIS NEGRON


between Mf and Mf ′ in MapsBord∗ (Σζ , Ση ). (Here f ′ = H1 .) This homotopy
provides, in particular, a diagram of the form

                                            Ση
                                        >
                                   Mf              id


                              Σζ                        / Ση ,
                                            Mf ′


which determines such an isomorphism in the mapping space.
   In the case of a general bordism Mf : Σζ → Σ′η , we can cut Mf along its outgoing
collar to decompose it as a composite Mf = Ng ◦ Me where

                                    Ng : Σ′ξ → Σ′η
                                                                           ∼
is of the type considered above. We then have an isomorphism H : Ng → Ng′ of
the prescribed form which composes to provide the desired isomorphism (Me )∗ H :
     ∼
Mf → Mf ′ .                                                                   □

Corollary A.8. For any f rDisk-category E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗ the projection

                     Linf rDisk⊗ ×f rDisk⊗ Bord⊗       ⊗
                                               E → BordE

is an equivalence of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories.

Proof. It suffices to show that the underlying map on ∞-categories is an equiva-
lence. Consider the case of the trivial famed pair

                       Linf rDisk ×f rDisk Bord∗ → Bord∗ .                     (61)

The left-hand ∞-category is the subcategory in Bord∗ consisting of all marked
surfaces, and bordisms Mf : Σζ → Σ′η whose outgoing map ∂out (Mf ) lies in
Linf rDisk. Equivalently, the fiber product is the nerve of the simplicial sub-
category LinBord∗ in Bord∗ containing all objects, and whose mapping complexes

                   HomLinBord∗ (Σζ , Ση ) ⊆ HomBord∗ (Σζ , Ση )

are the full subspaces spanned by all bordisms Mf with ∂out (Mf ) in Linf rE2 . The
corresponding inclusions of mapping complexes are clearly fully faithful, and by
(the proof of) Proposition A.7 they are essentially surjective. Hence each inclusion
is a homotopy equivalence, and the corresponding functor on homotopy coherent
nerves is an equivalence [58, 01Q1].
   For a general f rDisk-category, we have a pullback diagram

                     Linf rDisk ×f rDisk BordE                   / BordE


                                                                    
                     Linf rDisk ×f rDisk Bord∗                   / Bord∗

in which the map BordE → Bord∗ is a cocartesian fibration, and hence an isofi-
bration. Since the bottom projection is an equivalence, it follows that the top
projection is an equivalence as well.                                         □
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                           129


A.4. Proof of Lemma 6.12.

Proof of Lemma 6.12. By Theorem 6.8, we have an equivalence of f rDisk-categories
     ∼
E ⊗ → Env(E ⊙ ) for some f rE2 -monoidal ∞-category E ⊙ . So it suffices to prove
the result in the case of such an envelope E ⊗ = Env(E ⊙ ).
   For π : f rDisk⊗ → f rE2 the disjoint union functor, and any map f˜ : s → t in
f rDisk⊗ with image f = π(f˜) : I → J , we have the diagram
                                            f˜!
                          Es⊗                            / Et⊗
                                  ρ!                               ρ!
                                       $                                $
                          =                               =
                                                                            / EJ
                                           :E
                                                I
                                                         induced              :
                                 ρ!                              ρ!
                          EI⊙                            / E⊙                 .
                                            f!                J

So it suffices to show that the transport functor f! along an arbitrary map f : I → J
in f rE2 is expressible as a composite of projections onto select factors, transition
maps, products, and unit maps.
   Write out f explicitly as a disk embedding f : D × If → D × J . We have
that f factors as an inert projection ρf : I → If composed with a coloring of
the identity f0 : If → I0 , then composed with an active map f1 : I0 → J which
preserves colors. Transport along the inert projection simply recovers the projection
E I → E If , and transport along the colored identity just applies the transition
functor d : E − → E + in the relevant factors. So that we may assume f itself is
active and color preserving, i.e. is defined by a disk embedding f : D × I → D × J
which sends positive disks to positive disks, and negative disks to negative disks.
   Now, by Corollary A.3, f is isomotopic to a composite sequence f ≃ ιfn . . . f0
where each fr : D × I r → D × I r+1 is just the identity D → D on all disks save
for two components Dir ⨿ Di′r , and on these two components we apply the linear
disk embedding D ⨿ D → D, z 7→ 13 z ± 12 . The map ι : D × I n → D × J is defined
by an inclusion of colored sets I n → J .
   Composing ι with the inert projection ρj : J → {0} onto an index j in the
complement J \ im(I n ) recovers the zero map I l n → ∅ → {0}. From this one
                                          n
sees that the transport functor ι! : E I → E J just inserts the unit ∗ → E ± at all
                                                                        r       r+1
excess factors. Transport along each fi applies the product E I → E I               on the
associated factors. Taking mf = ι! (fn )! · · · (f0 )! , we obtain the desired diagram

                                       EI⊗
                                                    f!
                                                         / E⊗
                                                              J


                                                           
                                           EI            / EJ.
                                                    mf

                                                                                        □

A.5. Proof of Lemma 6.9.

Proof. We first show that the inherited map L ⊗ → Fin∗ is a cocartesian fibration.
Let z be an object in L ⊗ with images t = (I, µ) and K in f rDisk⊗ and Fin∗ ,
respectively. Consider a map f¯ : K → L in Fin∗ . We claim, in particular, that any
130                                       CRIS NEGRON


cocartesian lift α : z → z ′ of f¯ to E ⊗ has z ′ in L ⊗ , and hence that α lines in L ⊗
as well.
   First, lift f¯ to the cocartesian edge f : t = (I, µ) → t′ = (If¯, f¯µ) in f rDisk⊗ .
Here If¯ is the primage of the specified subset Kf¯ along the map µ : I → K and f
is explicitly given by the diagram

                                D × If¯
                                                          id          / D × If¯

                               µ|If                                             f¯µ|I ¯
                                                                                         f
                                                                            
                                   Kf¯                                    / L.
                                                           f¯


For the separations t̃ = (I, idI ) and t̃′ = (If¯, idIf¯), and any index i in If¯, we have
the diagram

                                  ti o^                                         /t
                                             ρi
                                                           t̃

                                          ρi
                                                                              
                                                           t̃′              / t′ .

Here ti is just the singleton {±0} with color color(i) and ρi is the inert projection.
These diagrams imply diagrams for the transport functors

                                Et⊗
                                                           f!
                                                                                 / E⊗
                                                                                    ′t

                                     πi ρ!                                 πi ρ!
                                                      !           }
                                                          E   ±


which, taken together, provide a diagram

                               Et⊗
                                                           f!
                                                                                 / E⊗
                                                                                    ′t

                                  πf¯ρ!                                    ρ!
                                                  !                   }
                                                          E If¯                      .

(Here πf¯ is the projection E I → E If¯.) From this we conclude that f! sends Lt⊗
into Lt⊗                                              ⊗
        ′ . Evaluating at our original object z in Lt , we observe a cocartesian edge
                                               ⊗
z → f! (z) in L ⊗ over f : t → t′ in f rDisk , and hence over f¯ : K → L as well.
   We’ve now shown that the induced map L ⊗ → Fin∗ is a cocartesian fibration
and that the inclusion L ⊗ → E ⊗ is a map of cocartesian fibrations over Fin∗ . To
conclude symmetric monoidality, we need to show that that transport along the
inert projections ρ̄k : K → {0} provide an equivalence LK⊗ → L{0}     K
                                                                        .
             ⊗                       ⊗       Q ⊗
   Since LK and L{0} are full in EK and k E{0} , this functor inherits fullness from
                      K

fullness of the corresponding functor for the ambient category E ⊗ . So we need only
verify essential surjectivity. For this choose any tuple of objects (zk : k ∈ K) in
L{0}
   K
      and consider its image (tk : k ∈ K) in f rDiskK .
   Each tk is just a tuple of colored disks, and taking the disjoint union we obtain an
object t in the fiber f rDisk⊗ K with inert projections ρi : t → tk . Writing t = (I, µ),
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                             131


we can argue as above to observe a diagram
                             Lt⊗                                     /              ⊗
                                                                                k Ltk
                                                                         Q


                                       ρ!
                                                !            {
                                                                 Q
                                                                     k ρ!

                                                    L   I


where the mapsQto L are both equivalences. Hence transport provides an equiv-
                       I
             ∼
alence Lt⊗ → k Lt⊗     k
                         , and there is an object z in Lt⊗ which admits cocartesian
edges ϱk : z → zk over the projections ρk : t → tk . Composing to Fin∗ , we have
cocartesian edges ϱk over the inert projections ρ̄k : K → {0}. By uniqueness of
cocartesian edges itQ follows that the tuple (zk : k ∈ K) is in the essential image of
the functor LK⊗ → k L{0}    ⊗
                              , as required.
   Finally, as for stability of L ⊗ under isomorphism, choose an isomorphism α :
z → w in E ⊗ . Let f : t = (I, µ) → s = (J , ν) be the image of α in f rDisk⊗ and
note that f is an isomorphism as well. Hence f is defined by a collection of disk
embeddings Di → Dj , each of which is homotopic to the identity (see Lemma A.1),
and we have a diagram
                                   Et⊗
                                                        f!
                                                                         / Es⊗

                                   ∼                                            ∼
                                                                           
                                   EI                                / EJ
where the bottom map sends the i-th factor in E I identically to the π0 (f )(i)-th
factor in E J . Since α is a cocartesian lift of f , we have f! (t) ∼
                                                                    = w in the fiber Es⊗ ,
                                                        ⊗
and from the above diagram it follows that z is in Lt if and only if w is in Ls⊗ . □

           Appendix B. Framed pairs from balanced categories
   We construct a canonical f rE2 -monoidal ∞-category q : E ⊙ → f rE2 associated
to a map of balanced monoidal categories d : E − → E + . As a preliminary point,
we recall how one constructs an (uncolored) f r E2 -monoidal ∞-category from any
balanced monoidal category. Pulling back along the disjoint union functor, we
obtain a corresponding f rDisk-category E ⊗ = Env(E ⊙ ) → f rDisk⊗ .
B.1. Framed E2 -algebras from balanced categories. We consider the stan-
dard operad f r E2 of (uncolored) disk embeddings. This operad is defined via a
corresponding simplicial operad f rE2 , exactly as in Section 5.3, but without col-
ors. So, objects are finite sets, morphisms f : I → J are oriented disk embeddings
f : D × If → D × J, 2-simplices are generally non-commuting diagrams

                                                    ?J                                  (62)
                                            f                    g

                                                                         
                                   I                                     /K
                                                        h

whose underlying maps of finite pointed sets commute ḡ f¯ = h̄, and which are
equipped with a homotopy σ : |∆1 | × D × Ih̄ → D × K between gf and h. As in
the colored setting, we have the non-full subcategory
                                       Linf r E2 → f r E2
132                                  CRIS NEGRON


spanned by all objects and linear disk arrangements f : D × If¯ → D × J. The same
arguments employed in the colored case tell us that this inclusion is an equivalence.
   From any 2-simplex σ : ∆2 → Linf r E2 as in (62) the underlying homotopy
traces out a framed braid [σ] = (β, n) in Brf r (gf ) which transaltes between the
orderings on the subsets Ik ⊆ I specified by the two maps gf and h. This framed
braid is defined exactly as in Section 7.1. The following is well-known, and can be
obtained from a calculation of the 2-categorical truncation π1 Linf rE2 via framed
braids. See for example [71, Definition 7.1, Propositions 7.4 and 7.6] (cf. [30,
Proposition 6.2.2]).

Proposition B.1. Any balanced monoidal (1−)category B has an associated func-
tor FB : Linf r E2 → Cat with the following values:
      • FB (I) = B I .
      • For f : I → J in Linf r E2 , FB (f ) = mf : B I → B J .
      • For a 2-simplex σ as in (62), with associated framed braid (β, n),
                                                     ∼
                         FB (σ) = ζβ,n : mg mf ∼
                                               = mgf → mh .

   Here mf : B I → B J applies of the product functors B Ij → B in each factor,
where each Ij is ordered by the given map f as in (23), and ζβ,n is defined via the
braid group action on the multiplication functors ml : B I → B K provided by the
braiding on B and the twist, as in Section 5.6,

                              ζβ,n = β ◦ mgf (θn ) ◦ assoc .

We sketch a proof.

Sketch proof. We have the simplicial operad LinConf f r whose objects are finite
pointed sets, and maps are linear embeddings of disks f : D × If¯ → D × J.
An n-simplex in the mapping complex Hom(I, J) consists of the choice of a map
f¯ : I → J in Fin∗ , choices of linear disk embeddings fr over f¯ for each 0 ≤ r ≤ n,
and the choice of an n-simplex σ̄ : ∆n → j∈J Conf fIjr (D) in the space of framed
                                             Q

embeddings of points Ij → D for which σ̄r = fr |{0}×Ij at each index r. Composition
is defined as in f rE2 .
    We apply the homotopy category functor on the mapping complexes to obtain
a strict 2-category h2 LinConf f r . The objects in this 2-category are finite pointed
sets, maps are linear disk embeddings as above, and 2-morphisms (β, n) : f → f ′
are choices of framed braids which translate between the orderings on the preimages
Ij → {j} provided by the initial disk embedding f : D × If → D × J and the target
embedding f ′ : D × If → D × J.
    Remembering only the centers of disks and their inherited framings gives a for-
getful functor Linf rE2 → LinConf f r and taking the homotopy truncation provides
a map of simplicial operads Linf rE2 → h2 LinConf f r . We apply the nerve to ob-
tain a map of ∞-operads Linf r E2 → h2 Lin Conf f r , where the latter simplicial set
is described entirely by is 0, 1 and 2-simplices as in Lemma 3.24.
    We have the well defined assignment of 0, 1 and 2-simplices F̄B [d] : h2 Lin Conf f r [d] →
Cat[d] as prescribed in the statement, and it is a practical matter to check that these
assignments define a map of simplicial sets F̄B , via Lemma 3.24. We compose with
the projection from Linf r E2 to obtain the promised map FB .                          □
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                          133


   We note that the functor FB extends uniquely to a functor from the ambient
category f r E2 .
Lemma B.2. For any balanced monoidal category B, there is a unique functor
FB′ : f r E2 → Cat which completes a strictly commuting diagram

                           Linf r E2
                                                FB
                                                              / Cat
                                                                <
                                                          ′
                                                %        FB
                                                f r E2
Proof. Since the map Linf r E2 → f r E2 is an injective equivalence the restriction
functor
                      Fun(f r E2 , Cat∞ ) → Fun(Linf r E2 , Cat)
is a equivalence which is also an isofibration [58, 01F3]. It follows that the projection
from the fiber
                    {FB } ×Fun(Linf r E2 ,Cat) Fun(f r E2 , Cat) → ∗
is also an equivalence. In particular the above fiber, which classifies such completing
functors, is a contractible Kan complex.                                                □
Definition B.3. For any balanced monoidal category we let
                                Z
                          B⊙ =       FB′ → f r E2
                                       f r E2

denote the cocartesian fibration determined by the functor FB′ : f r E2 → Cat ⊆
Cat∞ from Proposition B.1 and Lemma B.2.
   Explicitly, B ⊙ is defined by pulling back the universal fibration PCat∞ → Cat∞
along the map FB′ . In particular, from the diagram in Lemma B.2, the pullback
along the inclusion Linf r E2 → f r E2 recovers the fibration
                                                          Z
                 B ⊙ |Linf r E2 = B ⊙ ×f r E2 Linf r E2 =          FB .
                                                                Linf r E2
Also the transport functors along maps f : I → J in Linf r E2 recover the product
functors mf : B I → B J . It is therefore clear that the given fibration realizes B ⊙ as
a f r E2 -monoidal ∞-category [57, Definition 2.1.2.13]. We describe B ⊙ explicitly
in Section B.2 below.
B.2. Describing the fibration B ⊙ → f r E2 . Consider a balanced monoidal cat-
egory B and let B ⊙ → f r E2 be the associated fibration from Definition B.3. By
definition, B ⊙ is the pullback of the universal fibration PCat∞ → Cat∞ along the
composite of FB′ with the inclusion Cat → Cat∞ . Taking PCat = Cat×Cat∞ PCat∞
we now obtain B ⊙ as the pullback
                         B ⊙ = f r E2 ×Cat PCat               / PCat


                                                                
                                  f r E2                      / Cat.

So, to describe B ⊙ it suffices to describe the ∞-category PCat.
   Explicitly, we have the homotopy coherent nerve N(Cat) and the undercategory
N(Cat)∗/ → N(Cat). (The simplicial set N(Cat) is an (∞, 2)-category, not an
134                                       CRIS NEGRON


∞-category, though the point is irrelevant for us.) The ∞-category PCat can be
identified with the fiber product
                             PCat = Cat ×N(Cat) N(Cat)∗/
[58, 0213].
   Now, since the simplicial category Cat is a strict 2-category, its homotopy co-
herent nerve can be described explicitly in accordance with Lemma 3.24. This
explicit description yields an explicit description of the simplices of the slice cate-
gory N(Cat)∗/ , and hence of PCat.
   Precisely, objects in PCat are categories equipped with a chosen object x : ∗ →
C. Morphisms are functors F : C → C ′ equipped with a map between the chosen
objects α : F (x) → x′ , and 2-simplices are triples of functors Fij : Ci → Cj with a
choice of natural isomorphism ξ : F12 F01 → F02 which produces a diagram

                            F12 F01 (x0 )
                                             F12 α01
                                                         / F12 (x1 )                    (63)
                                  ξ                              α12
                                  
                              F02 (x0 )                     / x 2
                                               α02

for the chosen objects xi and morphisms αij . A general n-simplex consists of a
choice of pointed categories xi : ∗ → Ci , functors Fij : Ci → Cj , morphisms
αij : Fij (xi ) → xj , and natural isomorphisms ξijk : Fjk Fij → Fik for all 0 ≤ i <
j < k ≤ n which complete diagrams (63) at all such triples, and which also satisfy
the compatibility
                ξjkl (idFkl ◦ ξijk ) = ξijl (ξjkl ◦ idFij ) : Fkl Fjk Fij → Fil
at all quadruples 0 ≤ i < j < k < l ≤ n. The cocartesian edges in PCat,
along the universal fibration PCat → Cat, are precisely those pairings of a functor
                                                  ∼
F : C → C ′ with an isomorphism α : F (x) → x′ between the chosen objects.
    Pulling back along the functor FB : Linf r E2 → Cat, which is precisely the
portion of the functor FB′ which we understand, we obtain an explicit description of
the restriction B ⊙ |Linf r E2 . Objects in B ⊙ |Linf rE2 are choices of a finite colored set
I and an objects x in the exponent B I , and morphisms α : {x, I} → {y, J} consist
of the choice of a map f : I → J in Linf r E2 and a map α : mf (x) → y in B J . A
general n-simplex σ : ∆n → B ⊙ |Linf r E2 consists of an n-simplex σ̄ : ∆n → f r E2 ,
which specifies a linear disk arrangement fij : D × Ifiij → D × I j and homotopies
σ̄ijk : fjk fij → fik , and a choice of the following data:
                              i
     • An object xi in B I for each index 0 ≤ i ≤ n.
     • A choice of morphism αij : xi → xj for each i ≤ j.
These data are required to produce a diagram
                                             mjk αij
                           mjk mij (xi )                 / mjk (xj )

                             ζijk                                αjk
                                 
                             mik (xi )                      / x k
                                               αik

whenever i < j < k and to produce equalities
               ζjkl (idmkl ◦ ζijk ) = ζijl (ζjkl ◦ idmij ) : mkl mjk mij → mil
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                       135


whenever i < j < k < l, where mij = mfij and ζijk : mjk mij → mik is the
transformation specified by the framed braid extracted from the homotopy σ̄ijk .
R It is a general fact that the transport functors for the cocartesian fibration
 K
    F → K associated to a functor F : K → Cat∞ recover the functors F (f ) :
F (s) → F (t) determined by F [58, 027]. In particular, the product functors
mf : B I → B J are recovered as transport for the fibration B ⊙ → f r E2 , along
any map in Linf r E2 . Taking ρi : I → {0} the inert maps in f r E2 , i.e. the tauto-
logical identifications ρi : D × {i} → D, we have that the transport functor along
ρi is simply the projection mρi = pi : B I → B. Hence transport along the inert
projections recovers the identity map ρ! : BI⊙ = B I → B I . We therefore see that
B ⊙ → f r E2 is in fact a f r E2 -monoidal ∞-category.
Proposition B.4. For any balanced monoidal category B, the cocartesian fibration
B ⊙ → f r E2 from Definition B.3 is a f r E2 -monoidal ∞-category. Furthermore,
for each map f : I → J in Linf r E2 , the transport functor along f recovers the
associated product functor mf : B I → B J .
B.3. f rE2 -monoidal ∞-categories from balanced functors. Given a balanced
monoidal functor d : E − → E + we have the associated fibration p : Ed → ∆1
obtained from the weighted nerve of d. Specifically, Ed is the (1-)category whose
fibers over 0 and 1 are E − and E + respectively, and whose maps from the negative
to positive fiber are
                          HomEd (x, y) = HomE + (d(x), y).
Note that there are no maps from the positive to negative fiber.
   The balanced structure on d endows Ed with the unique structure of a balanced
monoidal category so that the two inclusions E ± → Ed are maps of (non-unital)
balanced monoidal categories, with trivial tensor compatibility, and with the prod-
uct between the fibers given by
  x ⊗ y = d(x) ⊗ y and y ⊗ x = y ⊗ d(x) whenever x is over 0 and y is over 1.
The unit for this category is 1 = 1E − , and the associator between the fibers is
provided by the monoidal structure on d.
Remark B.5. The inclusion E − → Ed is unital while the inclusion from E + is
non-unital. Indeed, the unit for E + is sent to the object 1E + in (Ed ){1} , and this
object admits a distinguished p-cocartesian morphism 1 → 1E + provided by the
                        ∼
unit structure d(1E − ) → 1E + on d.
  We have the associated fibration qd : Ed⊙ → f r E2 from Definition B.3 which
admits two apparent maps of operads
                          (E − )⊙        / E⊙ o        (E + )⊙
                                            d

                                            qd
                                    q−   $  z    q+
                                         f r E2           .
We pull back along the forgetful functor f rE2 → f r E2 to get a cocartesian fibration
f rE2 ×f r E2 Ed⊙ → f rE2 .
Definition B.6. Given a map d : E − → E + between balanced monoidal (1-
)categories and associated fibration qd : Ed⊙ → f r E2 , we take
                              E ⊙ ⊆ f rE2 ×f r E2 Ed⊙
136                                  CRIS NEGRON


the full subcategory whose fibers are the colored exponents EI⊙ = E I ⊆ EdI . We
consider E ⊙ along with the inner fibration q : E ⊙ → f rE2 given by restricting the
cocartesian fibration f rE2 ×f r E2 Ed⊙ → f rE2 to E ⊙ .
   We note that E ⊙ is stable under isomorphism in f rE2 ×f r E2 Ed⊙ , so that the
map q : E ⊙ → f rE2 is in fact an isofibration.
   Recall that each f : I → J in Linf rE2 determines an associated colored product
mf : E I → E J , and the corresponding map f¯ : I → J in Linf r E2 determines an
uncolored product mf¯ : EdI → EdJ . Given such f in Linf rE2 and x in the fiber
EI⊙ = E I , we define the map 1f : x → mf (x) in E ⊙ over f which we recall is
defined by an underlying map 1f : mf¯(x) → mf (x) in EdJ as follows:
      • For each negatively colored index j ∈ J , we have that the j-th components
        agree mf¯(x)j = mf (x)j and we take (1f )j : mf¯(x)j → mf (x)j to be the
        identity (1f )j = idmf (x)j .
      • For each positively colored index j ∈ J whose preimage Ij also contains a
        positive index, we again have mf¯(x)j = mf (x)j and take (1f )j = idmf (x)j .
      • For each positively colored index j ∈ J whose preimage Ij contains no
        positive indices, we have mf (x)j = mf¯(dIj x)j , where dIj applies d at each
        index in Ij ⊆ I, and we let (1f )j : mf¯(x)j → mf (x)j be the map in Ed
                                                        ∼
        given by the natural isomorphism d(mf¯(x)j ) → mf¯(dIj x)j = mf (x) given
        by the monoidal structure on d.
Proposition B.7. For any balanced monoidal functor d : E − → E + , the associated
isofibration q : E ⊙ → f rE2 from Definition B.3 is a cocartesian fibration which
gives E ⊙ the structure of a f rE2 -monoidal ∞-category. Furthermore, for each
f : I → J in Linf rE2 and x in E ⊙ , the map 1f : x → mf (x) is a q-cocartesian
edge over f .
Proof. Call a map f : I → J in f rE2 consistently colored if the preimage Ij of
each positive index j in J is nonempty and contains a positive index i. Since this
property is determined by the underlying morphism of finite pointed colored sets,
we see that such consistency is stable under isomorphisms of maps in f rE2 .
    For consistently colored f : I → J in Linf rE2 we note that the uncolored
product mf¯ : EdI → EdJ for Ed sends E I into E J , and in fact recovers the colored
product mf : E I → E J under restriction. Hence for any x in E I ⊆ EdI the
distinguished cocartesian lift 1f : x → mf (x) in Ed⊙ provided by the identity on
mf (x) is already in E ⊙ . For general consistently colored f ′ : I → J in f rE2
we have mf ′ ∼ = mf for some consistently colored f in Linf rE2 , so that again the
cocartesian lift x → mf ′ (x) in Ed⊙ lies in E ⊙ , by fullness of E ⊙ and stability under
isomorphism.
    Now, by a color change map in f rE2 we mean a map ω : I → I ′ in f rE2 which
maps to idI : I → I ′ = I in f r E2 . We note that every map f ′ in f rE2 is a
composite f ′ = f ωu of consistently colored maps f and u, and a color change map
ω. Here u is just an inclusion D × I 0 → D × I 1 induced by an inclusion of sets
I 0 → I 1 in which all added indices in I 1 are negatively colored. So, via the 2-of-3
property for cocartesian edges [58, 01TS], it suffices to show that each color change
map admits a q-cocartesian lift.
                                                               ′
    For a color change map ω : I → I ′ let dω : E I → E I be the functor which is
the identity at each index i with color(i) = color(ωi), and which applies d at each
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                          137


index i with color(i) = − color(ωi). (This map dω is equal to the colored product
mω over ω.) For x in E I take 1ω : x → dω (x) the map over ω in Ed⊙ which is just
the identity on each factor. We claim that 1ω is q-cocartesian.
                                                                                    ′
    Consider an n-simplex τ : ∆n → f rE2 , with specified objects I r , maps frs      :
  r      s                           ′ ′       ′             ′
I → I , and homotopies τrst : fst frs → frt . Suppose f01 is a color change map
  ′                                   ′                                ′
f01  = ω : I 0 → I 1 , so that each f0s admits a strict factorization f0s = f0s ω for a
                                                      ′
uniquely specified map f0s . In fact, taking frs = frs when r > 0, the n-simplex σ
specifies a corresponding n-simplex ν with maps frs and the same higher data, as
this higher data is purely topological, i.e. has nothing to do with colorings.
    For τ as above we consider a lifting problem

                                     Λn0
                                             σ̄     / E⊙                            (64)
                                                      <

                                                      
                                     ∆n           / f rE2
                                             τ

in which σ̄|∆{0,1} = 1ω : x0 → dω (x0 ) = x1 . The horn σ̄ is specified by maps
αrs : m′rs (xr ) → xs which complete diagrams
                                            m′st αrs
                          m′st m′rs (xr )                   / m′st (xs )

                            ζrst                                     αst
                                 
                            m′rt (xr )                          / x t
                                              αrt

where m′rs = mfrs    ′  and ζrst is the transformation specified by the framed braid
(βrst , nrst ) associated to the homotopy τrst . Each m′0s factors as m0s dω for m0s =
mf0s , and taking mrs = m′rs for r > s we obtain a corresponding horn µ̄ : Λn0 → E ⊙
specified by the objects yr with y0 = dω (x0 ) = x1 and yr = xr for all r > 0, the
same maps αrs , and the same natural transformations ζrst . Note that α01 = idx1
here.
   The horn µ̄ fits into a lifting problem

                                     Λn0
                                             µ̄
                                                    / E⊙
                                                      <

                                                      
                                     ∆n           / f rE2
                                             ν

and since idx1 is q-cocartesian we can solve this lifting problem to produce an n-
simplex µ : ∆n → E ⊙ . The two layers of data, and third order compatibilities
which specify this n-simplex specify an n-simplex σ : ∆n → E ⊙ which solves the
original lifting problem (64). The generic existence of such solutions verifies that
1ω is q-cocartesian.
    As for the claim that 1f : x → mf (x) is always a cocartesian lift of f in Linf rE2 ,
this is validated immediately in the case where f is consistently colored. For f ′ :
I ′ → J not consistently colored we have a factoring f ′ = f ωu where u is induced
by an inclusion I ′ → I in which all added indices are negative, ω is a color change
map, and f is consistently colored. We can specifically take
               I ′′ = {j ∈ J : j positive with empty preimage in I ′ },
138                                   CRIS NEGRON


recolor this set negatively −I ′′ , and take I = I ′ ⨿ −I ′′ . We then have the cocarte-
sian lift of f ′ given as the composite map
                       1f ◦ 1ω ◦ 1u : x → z → dω (z) → mf dω (z)
                                           ′
where z in E I is obtained from x in E I by inserting a copy of 1E − at each index
in −I ′′ . The object mf dω (z) differs from mf ′ (x) only at the indices in I ′′ ⊆ J ,
                                              ∼
and we have the isomorphism ξ : mf dω (z) → mf ′ (x) in E J which just applies the
isomorphism d(1E − ) ∼ = 1E + at all such indices. The isomorphism ξ is a cocartesian
lift of its image idJ in f rE2 so that we obtain the new cocartesian lift
                          1f ′ = ξ ◦ 1f ◦ 1ω ◦ 1u : x → mf ′ (x)
of f ′ along q, as desired.                                                           □

Proposition B.8. Let d : E − → E + be a balanced monoidal functor. For any map
f : I → J in Linf rE2 the associated colored product functor
                                     mf : E I → E J
is the transport functor for q : E ⊙ → f rE2 along f .
Proof. When f is consistently colored, in the sense that Ij contains a positive index
whenever j is positive in J , then the colored product is obtained by restricting the
corresponding uncolored product on Ed . Since the uncolored product is reproduced
via transport along f for Ed⊙ → f r E2 , it follows that the colored product is also
recovered via transport along f . (Here we are using the fact that the map 1f : x →
mf (x) is a cocartesian lift of f in both E ⊙ and Ed⊙ .)
   For a color change map ω : I → I ′ , i.e. a map over the identity in f r E2 , recall
that mω : E I → E J just applies d at all indices where the color changes from
negative to positive. We have the uniquely specified cocartesian transformation
                                   Tω : ∆1 × E I → E ⊙
with Tω |{0} = id, Tω |{1} = mω , Tω (0 < 1, α : x → y) = mω (α) : x → mω (y). Note
that for each x in E I this transformation has Tω |∆1 ×{x} : ∆1 → E ⊙ equal to the
q-cocartesian edge 1ω . Hence, restricting along {1} → ∆1 , we see that mω provides
the transport functor for E ⊙ along ω.
    For general f ′ : I0 → J which is not consistently colored we have a factorization
  ′
f = f ωu for color change ω, f consistently colored, and u induced by an inclusion
I0 → I1 . Here we can take I1 obtained from I0 by adding in those indices in J
which are positively colored but have vanishing preimage, and negating the colors
on these indices. Note that u is consistently colored. Since composites of transport
functors are transport functors, we find that the composite mf mω mu : E I → E J
is a transport functor along f ′ .
    The functor mf mω mu inserts a copy of d(1E − ) at each index j in I, and
the structural isomorphism d(1E − ) ∼    = 1E + induces a natural isomorphism ξ :
            ∼
mf mω mu → mf ′ which composes with the cocartesian transformations to produce
a cocartesian lift
                           ξ ◦ Tf ◦ Tω ◦ Tu : ∆1 × E I → E ⊙
                               f
of the map ∆1 × E I → ∆1 → f rE2 . This transformation realizes mf ′ as another
transport functor along f ′ in E ⊙ .                                         □
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                         139


   Proposition B.8 tells us, in particular, that transport along the inert projections
ρi : I → {±0} recovers the identity map on the colored exponent ρ! = id : EI⊙ =
EI → EI .
Corollary B.9. For any balanced monoidal functor d : E − → E + , the associated
cocartesian fibration q : E ⊙ → f rE2 gives E ⊙ the structure of a f rE2 -monoidal
∞-category.
  We now record the proof of Proposition 7.1, for the sake of completeness.
Proof of Proposition 7.1. Define the f rDisk-monoidal ∞-category E ⊗ → f rDisk⊗
as the envelope of the f rE2 -monoidal ∞-category E ⊙ → f rE2 constructed above.
                                                                              □

             Appendix C. Module categories and inner-Homs
   We cover basics information regarding module categories over symmetric monoidal
∞-categories. As a primary point of interest, we calculate inner-Homs for the action
of V ectpro-f in on Dpro-f in . For this section one does need to have some familiarity
with ∞-operads, and we refer the reader to [57, Sections 2.1.1 and 2.1.2] for the
details.
C.1. ∞-Categories of cocartesian fibrations. For any ∞-category T and co-
cartesian fibrations qi : Ci → T we have the complexes
                   FunT (C0 , C1 ) = {q0 } ×Fun(C0 ,T ) Fun(C0 , C1 )
of functors over T , and consider the full subcategory FunccT (C0 , C1 ) spanned by
those maps which preserve cocartesian edges. Since the map (q1 )∗ : Fun(C0 , C1 ) →
Fun(C0 , T ) is an inner fibration [58, 01BV], the fiber FunT (C0 , C1 ) is an ∞-
                                         T (C0 , C1 ).
category, as is the full subcategory Funcc
   The composition operations on the ambient complexes Fun(⋆, ⋆) restrict to pro-
vide composition operations for Funcc  T , so that we obtain a simplicial category
Cocart(T ) which is enriched in ∞-categories. Applying the associated Kan com-
plex functor on mapping complexes, then applying the homotopy coherent nerve,
we obtain an ∞-category Cocart(T ) = N(Cocart(T )+ ).
   We note that pulling back along any map w : S → T provides a functor
Cocart(T ) → Cocart(S ) between Cat∞ -enriched categories, so that we obtain a
pullback functor
                            w∗ : Cocart(T ) → Cocart(S ).
                                                                                 ⊗
Definition C.1. Given an ∞-operad O ⊗ → Fin∗ , the ∞-category MonO        ∞ is
the full subcategory in Cocart(O ⊗ ) spanned by O-monoidal ∞-categories. In the
particular case O ⊗ = Fin∗ we take
                                 SM∞ := MonFin
                                           ∞ .
                                              ∗



C.2. Module categories over symmetric monoidal ∞-categories.
Definition C.2. Let Mod denote the subcategory of Fin∗ (see Section 5.1) con-
sisting of all finite colored sets I and all morphisms f : I → J which satisfy the
following:
     (a) Every positively colored index in the specified subset If ⊆ I is sent to a
         positively colored index in J .
140                                  CRIS NEGRON


      (b) For each positively colored j in J , the preimage Ij = f −1 (j) is nonempty
          and contains precisely one positively colored index.
We consider Mod as a category over Fin∗ via the forgetful functor Mod → Fin∗ .
Remark C.3. Condition (a) in Definition C.2 is redundant, in the sense that it is
already included in the notion of morphisms for Fin∗ .
Lemma C.4. The forgetful functor Mod → Fin∗ gives Mod the structure of an
∞-operad.
Proof. Any inert map ρ̄ : I → J in Fin∗ specifies a bijection from the specified
                  ∼
                  =
subset I ′ = Iρ̄ → J. For any coloring I of I we have the corresponding colored
subset I ′ and coloring J of J induced by the given bijection. We thus obtain the
colored lift ρI : I → J of ρ̄ which is observed directly to be cocartesian over ρ̄. As
the coloring of J is canonically determined by the coloring of I and the map ρ̄ in
Fin∗ , we have the associated transport functor
                             ρ̄! : ModI → ModJ , I 7→ J ,
with cocartesian transformation Tρ̄ : ∆1 × ModI → Mod provided by the ρI .
The remaining requirements from [57, Definition 2.1.1.10]l are now also observed
directly.                                                                     □

   We note that there is a unique section i : Fin∗ → Mod of the forgetful func-
tor which sends each finite pointed set I to I along with its complete negative
coloring. This section is a map of ∞-operads, in the sense that it preserves inert
edges. In particular, any Mod-monoidal ∞-category pulls back along i to produce
a symmetric monoidal ∞-category.
Definition C.5. Let F ⊗ → Fin∗ be a symmetric monoidal ∞-category. A module
category over F is a Mod-monoidal ∞-category M ⊗ → Mod which is equipped
with an equivalence of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories

                         F⊗
                                      ξ
                                                    / Fin∗ ×Mod M


                                     "    x
                                     Fin∗                   .
The underlying ∞-category for an F -module category is the fiber over the positive
                 ⊗
singleton M = M{+0}  , and a map of F -module categories F : M ⊗ → N ⊗ is a
map of Mod-monoidal categories equipped with a choice of a diagram
                                          F |Fin∗
                   Fin∗ ×ModfM ⊗                        / Fin∗ ×Mod N ⊗
                                                              8
                                 ∼                      ∼

                                          F   ⊗

in SM∞ .
Remark C.6. We are abusing notation, as we should really be speaking of F ⊗ -
module categories, or even q-module categories for the given fibration q : F ⊗ →
Fin∗ .
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                         141


  For any F -module ∞-category M , we have the action functor
                                actM : F × M → M
which is produced via transport along the unique active map {−1, +0} → {+0} in
Mod.
                                                                             ∼
Remark C.7. Any equivalence of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories F ⊗ → Fin∗ ×Mod M ⊗
realizes the fiber product as an initial object in the undercategory (SM∞ )F ⊗ / [58,
02J2]. For (SM∞ )init F ⊗ / the full subcategory spanned by initial objects, we can
define the ∞-category of F -module categories formally as the fiber product
                     F ⊗ - mod = (SM∞ )init
                                       F ⊗ / ×SM∞ Mod∞ .
                                                     Mod


Since the subcategory of initial objects is contractible [58, 02HM] and since the
forgetful functor (SM∞ )F ⊗ / → SM∞ is a left fibration [45] [58, 018F], the above
fiber product is equivalent to the homotopy fiber product {F ⊗ } ×htop
                                                                   SM∞ Mod∞ .
                                                                             Mod


C.3. Module ∞-categories from discrete module categories. Let S be a
discrete symmetric monoidal category and M be a discrete module category over
S, in the usual 1-categorical sense of the term. (See for example [26, Definition
7.1.1].) We construct the corresponding cocartesian fibration M ⊗ → Mod whose
objects consist of a choice of finite colored set I, a linear ordering on the negatively
                                                                    −1            −1
colored indices in I, and a choice of an object x in M I = S color (−) × M color (+) .
Morphisms α : x → x′ consist of a map f : I → J in Mod and, for each j in J , a
choice of map xIj → x′j in S or M where
                                             O
                                      xIj =      xi .
                                            i∈Ij

Here the product is ordered via the chosen ordering on Ij when j is negative, and
otherwise is taken in the unique ordering which extends the given ordering on the
negative indices and takes the positive index in Ij to be maximal. In this way
any module category in the 1-categorical sense becomes a module category in the
∞-categorical sense.
Definition C.8. By a finitely generated linear abelian category A♡ we mean a
presentable, compactly generated, abelian category whose compact objects are pre-
cisely the finite length objects, and for which
              dim HomA♡ (x, y) < ∞ whenever x and y are compact.
   We note that any finitely generated linear abelian category is a module category
over Vect. Indeed, we might take this as our definition of linearity. For our purposes,
however, we want to consider actions of the pro-finite category Vectpro-f in .
   The linear action on A♡ completes to an action of Vectpro-f in on A♡   pro-f in which
is defined by the expected formula
                               v 0 ⊗ x0 = lim vλ0 ⊗k x0µ .
                                          ←−
                                           λ,µ

(See Sections 7.3 and 7.4 for basic information on pro-finite completion.) The
action of Vectpro-f in on A♡
                           pro-f in now extends to an action of unbounded cochains
142                                  CRIS NEGRON


Ch(Vectpro-f in ) = Ch(Vect)pro-f in on Apro-f in = Ch(A♡ )pro-f in , which is again
given by the expected formula
                                                        Y
        v ⊗ x = the complex with degree n subobject             v n1 ⊗ x n2 .
                                                          n1 +n2 =n

Hence we obtain a Ch(Vect)pro-f in -module category of unbounded cochains over
A♡
 pro-f in .

Proposition C.9. For any finitely generated linear abelian category A♡ , the cor-
responding category Apro-f in of pro-finite cochains admits the natural structure of
a module ∞-category k A⊗  pro-f in → Mod over the symmetric monoidal ∞-category
         ⊗
Ch(Vect)pro-f in → Fin∗ .

C.4. Inner-Homs. For symmetric F and an F -module category M ⊗ → Mod
we have the action map actM : F × M → M . Hence, for any Hom-functor
HM : M op × M → K an we have the corresponding sequence

                      F op × M op × M → M op × M → K an

given by composing the action with HM . Via adjunction this specifies a map

      act∨ : M op × M → Fun(F op , K an), (m, m′ ) 7→ {x 7→ HM (x ⊗ m, m′ )}.

Remark C.10. Recall that a Hom functor HM is simply a “bi-functorialization”
of the mapping spaces

                 MapsM (x, x′ ) = {x, x′ } ×Fun(∂∆1 ,M ) Fun(∆1 , M ).

Such bifunctors are obtained by straightening the twisted arrow fibration TW(M ) →
M op × M . See [58, 03K1, 03K6].

  Recall the Yoneda embedding F → Fun(F op , K an), which is an equivalence
onto the full subcategory spanned by representable functors [58, 03NF, 03M5].

Definition C.11. An F -module category M is said to admit inner-Homs if there
is a bifunctor Maps : M op × M → F which completes a diagram

                                       :F
                             Maps                Y on

                                                      &
                     M op × M                   / Fun(F op , K an)
                                            ∨
                                        act

in Cat∞ .

    Clearly inner-Homs exist if and only if each functor act∨ (x, x′ ) = HM (− ⊗ x, x′ )
is representable. Furthermore, in this case the representing functor Maps is uniquely
determined up to a contractible space of choices. For us, existence of inner-Homs
over all of M is a bit too much to ask for. So we consider the following.

Definition C.12. An F -module category M is said to admit restrictive inner-
Homs, relative to a specified full subcategory Mf in in M , if there is a bifunctor
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                            143


Maps : Mfopin × M → F which completes a diagram

                                        :F
                             Maps                    Y on

                                                           &
                    Mfopin × M                       / Fun(F op , K an)
                                    act∨ |M op ×M
                                             f in


in Cat∞ .
  We note that the full subcategory Mf in is not assumed to be an F -module
subcategory, so that the restriction of act∨ is obtained from the sequence
                                        act ×1               H
                   F op × Mfopin × M                M
                                         → M op × M → K an.

Lemma C.13. For any finitely generated linear abelian category A♡ , the Ch(Vect)pro-f in -
module category Apro-f in admits restrictive inner-Homs, relative to the subcategory
Af in of finite length bounded cochains. Furthermore, these inner-Homs are given
by the standard cochain Homs
                              Maps(x, y) = Hom∗A (x, y).
  In the above expression x is finite and bounded, and y is expressed as a limit
y = limα yα of finite yα . Hence the Homs are naturally topologized via the limit
    ←−
expression
                         Hom∗A (x, y) = lim Hom∗Af in (x, yα ).
                                        ←−
                                             α

Proof. All categories under consideration are discrete, so that the standard set-
valued Hom functors provide ∞-categorical Hom functors. Also, for x in Af in the
topological product v ⊗ x = v ⊗
                              b k x agrees with the usual product v ⊗k x. Hence the
result follows by the standard adjunction
                                    ∼
            HomApro-f in (v ⊗ x, y) → HomCh(Vect)pro-f in (v, Hom∗A (x, y))
                                 f 7→ (ν 7→ f (ν, −)).
                                                                                         □
C.5. Localizations of module ∞-categories. One should recall at this point
the general theory of vertical localization outlined in Section 12.1.
Proposition C.14. Let M ⊗ → Mod be an F -module category and W − ⊆ F ,
W + ⊆ M , be classes of maps which are stable under isomorphism and which are
preserved by the monoidal product and action functors
                         F × F → F and F × M → M .
                                                                                      color(i)
                                                                             Q
For each finite colored set I, let WI be the preimage of the product class    i∈I W
under the transport equivalence
                                                 ∼
                                    ρ! : MI⊗ → M I                                    (65)
and take W = ∪I WI ⊆ M [1]. The collection W forms a vertical class over Mod
                            ⊗

and, for WFin∗ the class in F ⊗ generated by W − , the localization M ⊗ [W −1 ] →
                                                                          −1
Mod is a module category over the symmetric monoidal ∞-category F ⊗ [WFin    ∗
                                                                               ]→
Fin∗ .
144                                 CRIS NEGRON


   Before offering a proof, let us try to make sense of the statement. We have the
                                                                  ∼
structural equivalence of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories F ⊗ → Fin∗ ×Mod M ⊗
                                                     ∼     ⊗
so that, in particular, we have an equivalence F → M{−0} . Hence the colored
exponents admit uniquely determined equivalences
                                     ∼
                                M I → F I− × M I+ ,
where I± are the subsets of ±-colored indices in I, and trasport therefore specifies
an equivalence
                                      ∼
                                 MI⊗ → F I− × M I+ .
So our definitions of WI and W make sense.
  Now, supposing that W is in fact vertical over Mod, in particular that the fibers
WI are stable under transport, we have the pullback class WFin∗ in the fiber product
Fin∗ ×Mod M ⊗ which pulls back to a class of maps in F ⊗ along the structural
equivalence
                                    ∼
                                F ⊗ → Fin∗ ×Mod M ⊗ .
We also call this class WFin∗ , by an abuse of notation.
                                                  −1
  By Proposition 12.7, the localization F ⊗ [WFin    ∗
                                                       ] → Fin∗ is in fact symmetric
monoidal and hence we obtain an equivalence of symmetric monoidal ∞-categories
              −1     ∼                   −1       ∼
        F ⊗ [WFin∗
                   ] → (Fin∗ ×Mod M ⊗ )[WFin∗
                                              ] → Fin∗ ×Mod (M ⊗ [W −1 ]),
where the second equivalence follows by Proposition 12.3. So we observe that
                                                    −1
M ⊗ [W −1 ] is in fact a module category over F ⊗ [WFin∗
                                                         ], provided W is vertical
over Mod.
Proof of Proposition C.14. One sees directly that all maps in Mod are obtained as
(products of) composites of inert maps and the generating active maps {−1, −0} →
{−0} and {−1, +0} → {0}. Hence stability of all WI under transport follows by
stability of W − under the product on F and stability of W − ×W + under the action
functor for M . According to the requirements of Definition 12.2–or more directly
the hypotheses of Proposition 12.1–we have that W is vertical along the fibration
M ⊗ → Mod. The fact that the fibers (M ⊗ [W −1 ])I are identified with the colored
                  −1
products (M [W{−0}   ])I via transport, and hence that M ⊗ [W −1 ] is realized as a
Mod-monoidal category, follows by the fiber calculation of Proposition 12.1 (iv).
   There is a structural equivalence
                               −1     ∼
                    ξW : F ⊗ [WFin∗
                                    ] → Fin∗ ×Mod (M ⊗ [W −1 ])
induced by the analogous equivalence for M ⊗ , which we obtained precisely as out-
lined above. So we see that the localization M ⊗ [W −1 ] carries the natural structure
           −1
of an F [WFin ∗
                ]-module category in this setting.                                  □

Lemma C.15. Let A♡ be a finitely generated linear abelian category and Apro-f in
be the category of pro-finite cochains. The product and action functors,
               Ch(Vect)pro-f in × Ch(Vect)pro-f in → Ch(Vect)pro-f in
and
                     Ch(Vect)pro-f in × Apro-f in → Apro-f in ,
preserve both homotopy equivalences and quasi-isomorphisms, in each factor. Fur-
thermore, the classes of homotopy equivalences and quasi-isomorphisms agree in
Ch(Vect)pro-f in .
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                                   145


Proof. We can proceed abstractly, but let us make things very concrete. We
can identify A♡ with the category Corep(Λ) of comodules over a coalgebra Λ
[75, Theorem 5.1]. For Λ′ the co-opposite coalgebra, we have the equivalence
                    ∼
−∗ : Corep(Λ′ )op → Corep(Λ)pro-f in provided by linear duality, which then ex-
tends to a duality equivalence at the level of cochains
                                             ∼
                                Ch(Λ′ )op → Ch(Λ)pro-f in ,                                   (66)

just as in Sections 7.3 and 7.4. The inverse is provided by the continuous dual.
   This equivalence intertwines the Ch(Vect) action on the left with the Ch(Vect)pro-f in
action on the right, in the sense that we have a diagram

            Ch(Vect)op × Ch(Λ′ )op
                                         ∼       / Ch(Vect)pro-f in × Ch(Λ)pro-f in


                                                                
                   Ch(Λ′ )op
                                         ∼                / Ch(Λ)pro-f in .

   As with any equivalence of abelian categories, duality is additive and exact, and
in particular commutes with cohomology. Hence the equivalence (66) identifies
homotopy equivalence in the source category with homotopy equivalence in the
target category, and similarly preserves quasi-isomorphisms. So, the fact that the
usual action
                            Ch(Vect) × Ch(Λ′ ) → Ch(Λ′ )
preserves homotopy equivalence and quasi-isomorphisms implies that the pro-finite
action also preserves homotopy equivalence and quasi-isomorphisms (see also Propo-
sition 7.10). Considering the case Λ = k, we see that the product on Ch(Vect)pro-f in
similarly preserves these classes of maps, and that homotopy equivalence agrees with
quasi-isomorphisms in Ch(Vect)pro-f in since they agree in Ch(Vect).               □

Corollary C.16. Let A♡ be a finitely generated linear abelian category. The pro-
finite homotopy and derived ∞-categories Kpro-f in = K (A♡  pro-f in ) and Dpro-f in =
      ♡
D(Apro-f in ) are naturally module categories over V ectpro-f in . Furthermore, the
action maps for Kpro-f in and Dpro-f in fit into commuting diagrams

                                Ch(Vect)pro-f in × Apro-f in


                     u                                                  )
    V ectpro-f in × Kpro-f in            Apro-f in                V ectpro-f in × Dpro-f in

                     u                                                   )       
            Kpro-f in                                                         Dpro-f in

in Cat∞ .

Proof. Immediate from Proposition C.14 and Lemma C.15.                                          □
                 ⊗                       ⊗
   We let k Kpro-f  in → Mod and k Dpro-f in → Mod denote the fibrations for the
V ectpro-f in -module categories Kpro-f in and Dpro-f in , respectively. By the universal
146                                             CRIS NEGRON


property of (vertical) localization we have a diagram
                                                         ⊗
                                                      k Apro-f in



                                y                                                %
                          ⊗
                      k K pro-f in
                                                                              / kD ⊗
                                                                                  pro-f in

in ModMod
      ∞ . This diagram pulls back to a diagram

                                               Ch(Vect)⊗
                                                       pro-f in



                      u                                                                 )
       Fin∗ ×Modk K ⊗                                                             / Fin∗ ×Modk D ⊗
                    pro-f in                                                                     pro-f in

in SM∞ , which then localizes to a diagram
                                                 V ect⊗
                                                      pro-f in
                                    ∼                                         ∼

                       v                                                             (
         Fin∗ ×Modk K ⊗                                                       / Fin∗ ×Modk D ⊗
                      pro-f in                                                               pro-f in .

This is all to say, the localization functor Kpro-f in → Dpro-f in is V ectpro-f in -linear.
C.6. Calculating inner-Homs under advantageous localization.
Proposition C.17. Suppose that an F -module ∞-category M admits restrictive
inner-Homs, relative to a full subcategory Mf in ⊆ M . Let W − and W + be classes
of maps in F and M , respectively, which satisfy the hypotheses of Proposition
C.14, and suppose that for each x in Mf in the functor
                                    MapsM (x, −) : M → F
sends maps in W to maps in W − . Then the localized module category M [(W + )−1 ]
                  +

admits restrictive inner-Homs over F [(W − )−1 ], relative to the full subcategory
spanned by the image of Mf in under localization, and the inner-Hom functors
are calculated via localization. More precisely, for each x in Mf in the functors
MapsM [(W + )−1 ] (loc(x), −) is the unique one which completes a diagram

                                               M [(W + )−1 ]
                                                  9
                                        loc                     Maps(loc(x),−)

                                                                          %
                          M                                               / F.
                                                 Maps(x,−)


Proof. Take S = W − and T = W + . The action maps for M and its localization
fit into a diagram

                       F ×M
                                              loc×loc
                                                            / F [S −1 ] × M [T −1 ]


                                                                        
                          M                                         / M [T −1 ]
                                                loc
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                        147


so that, for any x in M , the localization of the action map
                      loc ◦ (− ⊗ x)[S −1 ] : F [S −1 ] → M [T −1 ]
is isomorphic to the action − ⊗ loc(x). Hence, to say that we have restrictive inner-
Homs relative to the full subcategory M [T −1 ]f in spanned by the image of Mf in is
to say that, for each x in Mf in , the localization of the functor − ⊗ x : F → M
admits a right adjoint. (See [58, 045S].)
    For x in Mf in , the functor − ⊗ x specifies a cocartesian fibration
                                       q : Z → ∆1
with fibers Z0 = F and Z1 = M and transport recovering −⊗x. The specification
of MapsM (x, −) as right adjoint to −⊗x tells us that the fibration q is also cartesian
with cotransport recovering MapsM (x, −). (The fibration q : Z → ∆1 can be
explicitly constructed by the weighted nerve [58, 025X, 02FN].)
   Take U ⊆ Z [1] the union of the collections U0 = S and U1 = T and consider
the weighted nerve q ′ : Z ′ → ∆1 of the localized action functor. Since U is vertical
for q, considered both as a cocartesian fibration and a cartesian fibration, we have
the vertical localization Z [U −1 ] → ∆1 and the diagram

                             Z
                                                   loc                /Z′         (67)
                                                                       ;
                                                              ′
                                       i                  i
                                            #
                                           Z [U −1 ]

                                                 
                                               ∆1
in which i′ is an equivalence of cocartesian fibrations, by Proposition 12.1 (iv) and
[58, 028B].
    By Proposition 12.1, the cocartesian, or dually cartesian localization promised
in Proposition 12.1 is obtained by taking any localization F : Z → Z [U −1 ] which
is equipped with an isofibration to ∆1 which fits into a strictly commuting diagram

                             Z
                                               F          / Z [U −1 ]

                                  q                      qU
                                                   {
                                               1
                                           ∆                          .
In particular, the vertical localization Z [U ] → ∆1 is simultaneously cartesian
                                                         −1

and cocartesian. From the equivalence i′ : Z [U −1 ] → Z ′ in (67) we therefore
deduce that q ′ : Z ′ → ∆1 is both cocartesian and cartesian as well, and that the
map Z → Z ′ induced by the diagram

                              F
                                               −⊗x
                                                                     /M

                            loc                                           loc
                                                                      
                           F [S −1 ]                              / M [T −1 ]
                                           −⊗loc(x)

in Cat∞ is a map of both cocartesian and cartesian fibrations. It follows that the
functor − ⊗ loc(x) admits a right adjoint Mloc(x) and that the right adjoint fits into
148                                     CRIS NEGRON


a diagram
                                             Maps(x,−)
                               M                            /F                      (68)
                             loc                               loc
                                                              
                            M [T −1 ]                    / F [S −1 ]
                                              Mloc(x)

[58, 02FN]. Thus Mloc(x) is obtained from the functor Maps(x, −) via localization.
   We now have that the functor − ⊗ loc(x) admits a right adjoint whenever x is in
Mf in , and we conclude that the functor − ⊗ x′ : F [S −1 ] → M [T −1 ] admits a right
adjoint whenever x′ is in the full subcategory M [T −1 ]f in spanned by the image of
Mf in . So the functor
                   M [T −1 ]op
                            f in × M [T
                                        −1
                                           ] → Fun(F [S −1 ]op , K an)
                          (x′ , x′′ ) 7→ {z 7→ HM (z ⊗ x′ , x′′ )}
has image in the full subcategory of representable functors, and so the F [S −1 ]-
module category M [T −1 ] admits restrictive inner-Homs.
  For x′ = loc(x) in M [T −1 ]f in , the inner-Homs
                    MapsM [T −1 ] (loc(x), −) : M [T −1 ] → F [S −1 ]

are right adjoint to the action functor − ⊗ loc(x). We therefore find
                                            
                                    loc(x     the functor obtained from
       MapsM [T −1 ] (loc(m), −) = M      =
                                              MapsM (x, −) via localization,
by a consideration of the diagram (68).                                                □
Corollary C.18. For any finitely generated linear abelian category A♡ , the cate-
gory Kpro-f in = K (A♡  pro-f in ) admits restrictive inner-Homs, relative to the subcat-
egory Kf in of finite length bounded complexes. Furthermore, for each finite complex
x, the inner-Homs
                        MapsK              (x, −) : K → V ectpro-f in
                                pro-f in

are obtained from Hom-complexes Hom∗A (x, −) via localization.
C.7. Inner-Homs in the derived setting. Our aim in this subsection is to prove
the following.
Proposition C.19. For a finitely generated linear abelian category A♡ which has
enough compact injectives, the V ectpro-f in -module ∞-category Dpro-f in = D(A♡
                                                                               pro-f in )
admits restrictive inner-Homs, relative to the subcategory Df in of complexes with
finite length, bounded cohomology.
   Recall that a complex x in Apro-f in = Ch(A♡pro-f in ) is called K-injective if the
Hom-complex Hom∗Apro-f in (−, x) preserves quasi-isomorphisms. One similarly de-
fines K-projective complexes. Note that K-injectives and K-projectives are stable
under homotopy equivalence.
Lemma C.20. The full subcategory Inj Kpro-f in of K-injectives in Kpro-f in is
stable under the action of V ectpro-f in , and hence forms a V ectpro-f in -module sub-
category in Kpro-f in .
            TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                          149


Proof. Via duality and localization, it suffices to show that the subcategory Proj B
of K-projectives in B = Ch(B ♡ ) is stable under the action of Ch(Vect), for any
finitely generated abelian category B with enough compact projectives. However,
this is clear as any linear cochain complex v is homotopy equivalent to its cohomol-
ogy H ∗ (v). Hence the product with a K-projective v ⊗ P is homotopy equivalent
to a possibly-infinite sum of shifts of P . Since the class of K-projectives is stable
under arbitrary sums and shifting, we have that v ⊗ P is in fact K-projective.
   We consider the fibration k K ⊗                                                ⊗
                                  pro-f in → Mod and the full subcategory k Inj K pro-f in
        ⊗                                                      ⊗
in k K pro-f in spanned by those objects in the fibers (k K pro-f in )I which map to
objects in V ectI− × Inj K I+ under the transport equivalence
                              ∼                          I                 I
              (k K ⊗
                   pro-f in )I → (k K pro-f in ) = V ectpro-f in × Kpro-f in .
                                                I        −            +



Stability of Inj Kpro-f in under the action of V ectpro-f in tells us that the fibers
(k Inj K ⊗                                                                            ⊗
          pro-f in )I are stable under transport, and hence that the sequence k Inj K pro-f in →
     ⊗                                                               ⊗
k K pro-f in → Mod is a cocartesian fibration which gives k Inj K pro-f in the structure
of a Mod-monoidal ∞-category. Furthermore we have the equivalence
                     ∼                     ⊗                           ⊗
        V ect⊗
             pro-f in → Fin∗ ×Mod (k Inj K pro-f in ) = Fin∗ ×Mod (k K pro-f in ),

so that the inclusion k Inj K ⊗              ⊗
                              pro-f in → k K pro-f in is an inclusion of V ectpro-f in -
module ∞-categories.                                                                 □
Lemma C.21. If A♡ has enough compact injectives, then the category Apro-f in =
Ch(A♡ )pro-f in has enough K-injectives.
   Of course, by enough K-injectives we mean that every object x admits a quasi-
isomorphism x → I(x) into a K-injective complex.
Proof. As in the proof of Lemma C.15, we can find a finitely generated linear abelian
category B ♡ with (B ♡ )op ∼
                           = A♡
                              pro-f in and B
                                             op ∼
                                                = Apro-f in , for B = Ch(B ♡ ). By our
hypotheses B ♡ has enough compact projectives, and therefore enough projectives.
It follows that B has enough K-projectives (cf. [25, Lemma 13.3]), and by duality
Apro-f in has enough K-injectives.                                                  □
   Existence of enough K-injectives tells us that the full subcategory Inj Kpro-f in
spanned by K-injectives in Kpro-f in is a reflective [58, 02F5]. We therefore ap-
ply standard results for reflective subcategories–as in Section 14.3–to see that the
derived ∞-category Dpro-f in is identified with the subcategory of K-injective com-
plexes in Kpro-f in , and that the localization functor Kpro-f in → Dpro-f in is defined
via an application of functorial K-injective resolutions.
Corollary C.22. Suppose A♡ has enough compact injectives. The inclusion Inj Kpro-f in →
Kpro-f in admits a left adjoint L : Kpro-f in → Inj Kpro-f in which realizes Inj Kpro-f in
as a localization of Kpro-f in along the class of quasi-isomorphisms. In particular,
the composite functor

                                          4 Kpro-f in
                                                              )
                     Inj Kpro-f in                           / Dpro-f in

is an equivalence, and the localization functor Kpro-f in → Dpro-f in admits a fully
faithful right adjoint R : Dpro-f in → Kpro-f in which is an equivalence onto the full
subcategory of K-injectives.
150                                      CRIS NEGRON


Proof. This is a special case of [58, 02FD, 02FE, 04JL].                                       □

Remark C.23. In general, the category Apro-f in will have enough K-projectives,
and one can construct the derived ∞-category Dpro-f in via K-projective resolutions.
For us the injective setting is more relevant.
      We can now prove our main result.

Proof of Proposition C.19. We have the linear functor k K ⊗                      ⊗
                                                                  pro-f in → k D pro-f in which
                                      ⊗              ⊗
restricts to a linear functor k Inj K pro-f in → k D pro-f in whose fibers are equivalence,
and hence which is an equivalence of V ectpro-f in -module categories [58, 028C]. So
it suffices to show that Inj Kpro-f in admits restrictive inner-Homs relative to the
subcategory of complexes with finite cohomology.
   Any complex x with finite cohomology admits a pair of quasi-isomorphisms
x → x′ ← x′′ in which x′′ is a bounded complex of finite length objects. (To
see this one can check the analogous claim in the dual category Ch(B ♡ ) for B ♡ =
(A♡          op
   pro-f in ) , where the result is standard.) Since Hom-complexes with K-injective
target preserve quasi-isomorphisms, and since the action of V ectf in preserves quasi-
isomorphisms by Lemma C.15, we have a natural isomorphisms of functors
            HK       (− ⊗ x, y) ∼
               pro-f in          = HK         (− ⊗ x′′ , y) : V ectpro-f in → K an
                                         pro-f in


whenever y is in Inj Kpro-f in . (Here HKpro-f in is a Hom functor for the homotopy
∞-category.) By Corollary C.18 the functor HKpro-f in (− ⊗ x′′ , y) is representable,
and hence HKpro-f in (− ⊗ x, y) is representable. Thus Inj K admits the proposed
inner-Homs.                                                                        □

      From the proof we also deduce a formula for the inner-Homs.
Proposition C.24. Suppose A♡ admits enough compact injectives, and let R :
Dpro-f in → Kpro-f in be right adjoint to the localization functor loc : Kpro-f in →
Dpro-f in . The V ectpro-f in -module category Dpro-f in admits restrictive inner-Homs,
relative to the full subcategory Df in spanned by the image of Kf in under localization,
and for any x in Kf in there is a natural isomorphism
                     Maps                     ∼ Maps
                                  (loc(x), −) =              (x, R−)
                           Dpro-f in                      Kpro-f in

in Fun(V ectpro-f in , K an).

                                        References
 [1] D. Ayala and J. Francis. Factorization homology of topological manifolds. J. Topol.,
     8(4):1045–1084, 2015.
 [2] B. Bakalov and A. A. Kirillov. Lectures on tensor categories and modular functors, volume 21.
     American Mathematical Society Providence, RI, 2001.
 [3] S. Barkan, R. Haugseng, and J. Steinebrunner. Envelopes for algebraic patterns. Algebr.
     Geom. Topol., 25(9):5319–5388, 2025.
 [4] B. Bartlett, C. L. Douglas, C. J. Schommer-Pries, and J. Vicary. Modular categories as
     representations of the 3-dimensional bordism 2-category. preprint arXiv:1509.06811.
 [5] A. Beliakova and M. De Renzi. Kerler–Lyubashenko functors on 4-dimensional 2-
     handlebodies. Int. Math. Res. Not., 2024(13):10005–10080, 2024.
 [6] C. Blanchet, F. Costantino, N. Geer, and B. Patureau-Mirand. Non-semi-simple TQFTs,
     Reidemeister torsion and Kashaev’s invariants. Adv. Math, 301:1–78, 2016.
 [7] A. Brochier, D. Jordan, P. Safronov, and N. Snyder. Invertible braided tensor categories.
     Algebr. Geom. Topol., 21(4):2107–2140, 2021.
              TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                                151


 [8] A. Brochier, D. Jordan, and N. Snyder. On dualizability of braided tensor categories. Compos.
     Math., 157(3):435–483, 2021.
 [9] A. Brochier and L. Woike. A classification of modular functors via factorization homology.
     Geom. Topol., 30(6):2157–2216, 2026.
[10] J. Brown and B. Haı̈oun. Skein categories in non-semisimple settings. Sel. Math., 32(2):34,
     2026.
[11] D.-C. Cisinski. Higher categories and homotopical algebra, volume 180. Cambridge University
     Press, 2019.
[12] D.-C. Cisinski and H. K. Nguyen. The universal coCartesian fibration. preprint
     arXiv:2210.08945.
[13] J.-M. Cordier and T. Porter. Vogt’s theorem on categories of homotopy coherent diagrams. In
     Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, volume 100, pages 65–90.
     Cambridge University Press, 1986.
[14] F. Costantino, N. Geer, B. Haı̈oun, and B. Patureau-Mirand. Skein (3 + 1)-TQFTs from
     non-semisimple ribbon categories. SIGMA, 22:034, 2026.
[15] F. Costantino, N. Geer, B. Patureau-Mirand, and A. Virelizier. Non compact (2 + 1)-TQFTs
     from non-semisimple spherical categories. preprint arXiv:2406.08956.
[16] K. Costello. The A-infinity operad and the moduli space of curves. available online
     arXiv:0402015.
[17] T. Creutzig, T. Dimofte, N. Garner, and N. Geer. A qft for non-semisimple tqft. Adv. Theor.
     Math. Phys., 28(1):161–405, 2024.
[18] T. Creutzig, A. M. Gainutdinov, and I. Runkel. A quasi-Hopf algebra for the triplet vertex
     operator algebra. Commun. Contemp. Math., 22(03):1950024, 2020.
[19] T. Creutzig and M. Rupert. Uprolling unrolled quantum groups. Commun. Contemp. Math.,
     24(04):2150023, 2022.
[20] A. Czenky and C. Negron. Cochain valued TQFTs from nonsemisimple modular tensor cat-
     egories. preprint arXiv:2507.17169.
[21] M. De Renzi. Extended TQFTs from non-semisimple modular categories. Indiana University
     Mathematics Journal, 70(5):1769–1811, 2021.
[22] M. De Renzi, A. M. Gainutdinov, N. Geer, B. Patureau-Mirand, and I. Runkel. 3-dimensional
     TQFTs from non-semisimple modular categories. Sel. Math. New Ser., 28(2):42, 2022.
[23] M. De Renzi, N. Geer, and B. Patureau-Mirand. Renormalized hennings invariants and 2 + 1-
     TQFTs. Comm. Math. Phys., 362(3):855–907, 2018.
[24] M. De Renzi, N. Geer, and B. Patureau-Mirand. Nonsemisimple quantum invariants and
     TQFTs from small and unrolled quantum groups. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 20(7):3377–3422,
     2020.
[25] V. Drinfeld. DG quotients of DG categories. J. Algebra, 272(2):643–691, 2004.
[26] P. Etingof, S. Gelaki, D. Nikshych, and V. Ostrik. Tensor categories, volume 205. American
     Mathematical Soc., 2015.
[27] P. Etingof and V. Ostrik. Finite tensor categories. Mosc. Math. J, 4(3):627–654, 2004.
[28] B. L. Feigin and S. D. Lentner. Coupling a vertex algebra to a large center. AAMP, 16(1):17,
     2026.
[29] D. S. Freed and C. Teleman. Relative quantum field theory. Comm. Math. Phys., 326(2):459–
     476, 2014.
[30] B. Fresse. Homotopy of operads and Grothendieck-Teichmüller groups. Part 1, volume 217
     of Mathematical Surveys and Monographs. American Mathematical Society, 2017.
[31] E. M. Friedlander and A. Suslin. Cohomology of finite group schemes over a field. Invent.
     Math., 127(2):209–270, 1997.
[32] J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, and C. Schweigert. TFT construction of RCFT correlators I: partition
     functions. Nucl. Phys. B, 646(3):353–497, 2002.
[33] A. M. Gainutdinov, S. Lentner, and T. Ohrmann. Modularization of small quantum groups.
     preprint arXiv:1809.02116.
[34] D. Gaiotto. S-duality of boundary conditions and the geometric Langlands program. In
     String-Math 2016, volume 98 of Proc. Symp. Pure Math., pages 139–180. American Mathe-
     matical Soc., 2018.
[35] D. Gaiotto. Twisted compactifications of 3d N = 4 theories and conformal blocks. J. High
     Energy Phys., 2019(2):61, Feb 2019.
152                                     CRIS NEGRON


[36] N. Garner, N. Geer, and M. B. Young. B-twisted Gaiotto–Witten theory and topological
     quantum field theory. Comm. Math. Phys., 406(2):29, 2025.
[37] N. Geer and B. Patureau-Mirand. Quantum topology via modified traces: From semisimple
     to non-semisimple. American Mathematical Soc., to appear.
[38] N. Geer and M. B. Young. Three dimensional topological quantum field theory from
     Uq (gl(1|1)) and U (1|1) Chern–Simons theory. Adv. Math, 460:110044, 2025.
[39] B. Haı̈oun. Non-semisimple WRT at the boundary of Crane-Yetter. preprint
     arXiv:2503.20905.
[40] R. Haugseng. The higher Morita category of En -algebras. Geom. Topol., 21(3):1631–1730,
     2017.
[41] R. Haugseng and J. Kock. ∞-operads as symmetric monoidal ∞-categories. Publ. Mat.,
     68(1):111–137, 2024.
[42] F. Hebestreit, G. Heuts, and J. Ruit. A short proof of the straightening theorem. Trans. Am.
     Math. Soc., 12(19):697–747, 2025.
[43] V. Hinich. Dwyer-kan localization revisited. Homology Homotopy Appl., 18(1):27–48, 2016.
[44] T. Johnson-Freyd and C. Scheimbauer. (op)lax natural transformations, twisted quantum
     field theories, and “even higher” Morita categories. Adv. Math, 307:147–223, 2017.
[45] A. Joyal. Quasi-categories and kan complexes. J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 175(1-3):207–222, 2002.
[46] A. Kapustin and E. Witten. Electric-magnetic duality and the geometric Langlands program.
     preprint arXiv:0604151.
[47] P. Kinnear. Non-semisimple Crane-Yetter theory varying over the character stack. preprint
     arXiv:2404.19667.
[48] I. Kriz and J. P. May. Operads, algebras, modules and motives. Société mathématique de
     France, 1995.
[49] A. Lachowska and Y. Qi. Remarks on the derived center of small quantum groups. Sel. Math.,
     27(4):68, 2021.
[50] T. Lagiotis. Non-compact 3D TQFT and non-semisimplicity. preprint arXiv:2512.23698.
[51] S. Lentner, S. N. Mierach, C. Schweigert, and Y. Sommerhäuser. Hochschild cohomology,
     modular tensor categories, and mapping class groups I, volume 44. Springer Nature, 2023.
[52] S. D. Lentner. Quantum groups and Nichols algebras acting on conformal field theories. Adv.
     Math, 378:107517, 2021.
[53] H. Li and S. Sugimoto. A Lie algebraic pattern behind logarithmic CFTs. preprint
     arXiv:2409.07381.
[54] E. L. Lima. On the local triviality of the restriction map for embeddings. Comment. Math.
     Helv., 38(1):163–164, 1963.
[55] I. Losev, A. Tsymbaliuk, and T. Vu. On De Concini-Kac forms of quantum groups. preprint
     arXiv:2601.06696.
[56] J. Lurie. Higher topos theory. Princeton University Press, 2009.
[57] J. Lurie. Higher algebra. www.math.ias.edu/ lurie/papers/HA.pdf, 2017.
[58] J. Lurie. Kerodon. https://kerodon.net, 2024.
[59] N. Marcus. The other topological twisting of N = 4 Yang-Mills. Nucl. Phys. B, 452(1-2):331–
     345, 1995.
[60] R. McRae. On rationality for C2 -cofinite vertex operator algebras. preprint
     arXiv:2108.01898.
[61] R. McRae and J. Yang. The non-semisimple Kazhdan-Lusztig category for affine sl2 at ad-
     missible levels. Proc Lond Math Soc, 130(4):e70043, 2025.
[62] L. Müller and L. Woike. Cyclic framed little disks algebras, Grothendieck–Verdier duality
     and handlebody group representations. Q. J. Math., 74(1):163–245, 2023.
[63] C. Negron. Log-modular quantum groups at even roots of unity and the quantum Frobenius
     I. Comm. Math. Phys., 382(2), 2021.
[64] C. Negron. Quantum Frobenius and modularity for quantum groups at arbitrary roots of 1.
     J. Reine Angew. Math., 2026(388):1–65, 2026.
[65] T. Nikolaus and P. Scholze. On topological cyclic homology. Acta Math., 221(2):203–409,
     2018.
[66] V. Ostrik and A. Utiralova. A non-semisimple Witt class. preprint arXiv:2602.10519.
[67] R. S. Palais. Local triviality of the restriction map for embeddings. Comment. Math. Helv.,
     34(1):305–312, 1960.
              TQFTS FROM DERIVED QUANTUM GROUP REPRESENTATIONS                                153


[68] J. Roberts and S. Willerton. On the Rozansky–Witten weight systems. Algebr. Geom. Topol.,
     10(3):1455–1519, 2010.
[69] I. Runkel. On topological field theory construction of correlators (talk at institut pascal).
     recordings available online (youtube), 2025.
[70] A. Sajan. in progress.
[71] P. Salvatore and N. Wahl. Framed discs operads and Batalin–Vilkovisky algebras. Q. J.
     Math., 54(2):213–231, 2003.
[72] C. Schweigert and L. Woike. Homotopy coherent mapping class group actions and excision
     for hochschild complexes of modular categories. Adv. Math, 386:107814, 2021.
[73] J. Steinebrunner. 2-dimensional TFTs via modular ∞-operads. preprint arXiv:2506.22104.
[74] S. Sugimoto. On the Feigin–Tipunin conjecture. Sel. Math., 27(5):86, 2021.
[75] M. Takeuchi. Morita theorems for categories of comodules. J. Fac. Sci. Univ. Tokyo, 24,
     1977.
[76] V. Turaev. Homotopy field theory in dimension 3 and crossed group-categories. arXiv preprint
     math/0005291, 2000.
[77] K. Walker. On Witten’s 3-manifold invariants. unpublished, 1991.
[78] K. Walker. TQFTs [early incomplete draft] version 1h. unpublished, 2006.
[79] C. A. Weibel. An introduction to homological algebra, volume 38. Cambridge university press,
     1995.
[80] E. Witten. Introduction to cohomological field theories. Internat. J. Modern Phys. A,
     6(16):2775–2792, 1991.

   Department of Mathematics, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
90007
   Email address: cnegron@usc.edu
