                                            Towards the Impossibility of Imperfectly Complete Key Agreement
                                                                      in the QROM
                                                        Fuyuki Kitagawa∗1 , Ryo Nishimaki†1 , Ági Villányi‡2 , Takashi Yamakawa§1
                                                                                        1
                                                                                          NTT, Tokyo, Japan
                                                                  2
                                                                      Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
arXiv:2608.17610v1 [quant-ph] 18 Aug 2026




                                                                                             Abstract
                                                      We make progress towards the impossibility of imperfectly complete quantum-computation,
                                                  classical-communication (QCCC) key agreement by constructing the first unconditional attacks
                                                  on quantum key agreement in the following restricted settings.
                                                      In the two-message setting, we assume that Alice makes only classical queries to the oracle in
                                                  the first round and that her message to Bob is classical, but otherwise both parties may perform
                                                  arbitrary quantum computation, make quantum queries, and send a quantum state in the second
                                                  round. Our attack and analysis are based on the heavy-query learning techniques from Austrin
                                                  et al. (CRYPTO 2022) and the reprogramming techniques of Katz and Sela (arXiv 2401.14319).
                                                      In the round-independent setting, we show that the attack of Barak and Mahmoody (CRYPTO
                                                  2009; J. Cryptology 2017) can be extended to multiple rounds when Alice and Bob share classical
                                                  communication and make only classical queries in all but the final round. In both settings, the
                                                  attacker is computationally unbounded and makes poly(λ) queries to recover the key whenever
                                                  each honest query bound is at most poly(λ) and the valid agreement probability is inverse-
                                                  polynomial. As a consequence, we rule out imperfectly correct quantum public-key encryption
                                                  for classical messages whose length is bounded by a polynomial in λ in the QROM when key
                                                  generation has classical oracle access, even if encryption, decryption, and the ciphertext are
                                                  quantum. In particular, the one-bit case applies to the imperfectly correct PKE obtained from
                                                  two-round OSP by Bartusek and Khurana (CRYPTO 2025) whenever the classical OSP sender
                                                  makes only classical random-oracle queries.


                                            Contents
                                            1 Introduction                                                                                             2
                                              1.1 Our Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        3
                                              1.2 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       5
                                              1.3 Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           6
                                              1.4 Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         6
                                              1.5 Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         7

                                            2 Technical Overview                                                                                       7
                                              2.1 The Two-Message Attack and QPKE Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                  7
                                              2.2 The Multi-Round Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           8
                                              ∗
                                                fuyuki.kitagawa@ntt.com
                                              †
                                                ryo.nishimaki@ntt.com
                                              ‡
                                                agivilla@mit.edu
                                              §
                                                takashi.yamakawa@ntt.com


                                                                                                  1
3 Preliminaries                                                                                      8
  3.1 Random Oracles and Query Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          8
  3.2 Partial Oracles and Reprogramming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        9
  3.3 External Lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10
  3.4 Public Key Cryptography with Quantum Parties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          11
       3.4.1 Two-Message Key Agreement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        11
       3.4.2 Multi-Round Key Agreement with a Classical-Query Prefix . . . . . . . . . .            12
       3.4.3 Quantum Public-Key Encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        14

4 Conditional Resampling and Heavy-Query Learning                                              15
  4.1 The Heavy-Query Attacker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
  4.2 The Conditioned View of the First Round . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

5 Reprogramming Attacks                                                                             17
  5.1 The Two-Message attacker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    17
  5.2 The Multi-Round Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    23
      5.2.1 Classical Views of the Prefix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     23
      5.2.2 The Barak–Mahmoody Learner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          24
      5.2.3 Conditioned Prefix Resampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       27
      5.2.4 The Multi-Round attacker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      28

6 Applications                                                                                      34


1    Introduction
Merkle studied key agreement as a way for two parties with no shared secret to communicate securely
over an insecure channel. His puzzle protocol allows the two parties to establish a key while requiring
a passive eavesdropper to make quadratically more queries to a random oracle [Mer78]. Subsequent
work showed that, for classical protocols, this quadratic gap is optimal under both perfect and
imperfect completeness. Impagliazzo and Rudich ruled out a super-polynomial gap [IR89], and
Barak and Mahmoody proved a tight quadratic upper bound, including when the honest parties
need not agree with certainty [BMG17].
    It is natural to ask whether these results can be extended to the quantum setting, in which
parties are allowed to make queries to the oracle in superposition. This is known as the quantum
random-oracle model (QROM) [BDF+ 11] and quantum variants of Merkle’s approach, and key
agreement in the QROM more broadly, have been studied in several works [BS08, BHK+ 19]. The
model we consider in this work was introduced by Austrin et al. [ACC+ 22] as quantum-computation,
classical-communication (QCCC). In a QCCC protocol, the parties may perform arbitrary quantum
computation, retain quantum states, and query the random oracle in superposition, but every
message they exchange is classical.
    In 2018, Hosoyamada and Yamakawa asked whether QCCC key agreement in the QROM
can achieve a super-polynomial gap between the query complexities of the honest parties and the
eavesdropper [HY18, Section 6]. Assuming perfect completeness, Austrin et al. gave an unconditional
quadratic-query classical attack when one party is classical [ACC+ 22]. For general QCCC protocols,
their Polynomial Compatibility Conjecture yields a classical attack whose query complexity is
polynomial in the honest parties’ query bounds; unconditionally, they obtained an attack using
exponentially many queries.



                                                  2
    Li, Li, Li, and Liu subsequently obtained unconditional attacks in a sequence of increasingly
general, perfectly complete settings. They first treated QPKE with classical-query key generation,
while also proving a separate imperfect-correctness result for oracle-free decryption [LLLL24]. They
then allowed logarithmically many quantum key-generation queries unconditionally and formulated
a conjecture for the general case [LLLL25]. Their later work removed both restrictions for perfectly
complete QPKE with classical keys and either classical or quantum ciphertexts [LLLL26a]. Most
recently, they gave an unconditional, round-independent attack on every perfectly complete QCCC
key-agreement protocol. The honest parties may query the oracle in superposition in every round,
while the eavesdropper makes only classical queries [LLLL26b].
    What remains open is imperfectly complete QCCC key agreement when the honest parties
may make arbitrary quantum queries. Even a classical-query attack in this setting would face
a serious obstacle identified by Austrin et al. Their Simulation Conjecture asserts, informally,
that a classical algorithm whose query complexity is polynomial in the oracle’s input length can
approximate the acceptance probability of any quantum algorithm with the same type of query
bound, on most random oracles. It follows from the Aaronson-Ambainis conjecture on influential
variables of bounded low-degree polynomials [AA14]. Austrin et al. showed that, if the Simulation
Conjecture is false, then there exists an imperfectly complete QCCC protocol secure against every
classical eavesdropper whose query complexity is polynomial in the security parameter. A fully
general classical attack would therefore require substantial progress on this simulation problem. The
barrier leaves room, however, for quantum-query attacks and for attacks that restrict the honest
parties’ quantum queries. We pursue both possibilities in this work.
    Before this work, no unconditional impossibility result was known for imperfectly correct QCCC
key agreement in the QROM with unrestricted quantum oracle access, even for two-message protocols.
The two-message setting also captures quantum public-key encryption (QPKE) through a standard
key-agreement protocol: Alice sends her public key, Bob responds with an encryption of a uniformly
random bit, and Alice recovers the shared bit by decrypting. If the ciphertext is quantum, then the
second message in this protocol is quantum as well. Bouaziz-Ermann et al. extended the conjectural
approach to this more general setting [BEGVV24]. Our two-message result gives an unconditional
attack when Alice’s first-stage oracle queries and first message are classical, and therefore addresses
an open case not covered by the perfectly complete impossibility results.

1.1   Our Results
We prove unconditional attacks that do not assume perfect completeness, where the attacker is a
query-bounded, computationally unbounded party.
   For a key-agreement protocol Π, let

                                     αΠ (λ) := Pr[KA = KB ̸= ⊥]

denote its valid agreement probability. Our bounds are meaningful whenever αΠ is nonnegligible.
Thus they apply in a substantially broader regime than negligible completeness error: the honest
parties need only agree on a valid key with inverse-polynomial probability, rather than with
probability 1 − negl(λ).
   We begin with two-message protocols. Before sending the first message, Alice queries the oracle
only classically, although her remaining computation and retained state may be quantum. Bob
may return a quantum message, and both Bob and Alice’s final algorithm may query the oracle in
superposition. Let qA,1 , qB , and qA,2 bound the number of queries in Alice’s first stage, Bob’s stage,
and Alice’s final stage, respectively.


                                                   3
Theorem 1.1 (Two-message attack, informal). Let Π be a protocol of the form above with valid
agreement probability α > 0. There is a computationally unbounded quantum attacker that recovers
Bob’s key with probability greater than α/2 using

                                   qA,1 max{1, 2qB + qA,2 }4
                                                                      !
                                 O                           + qA,2
                                             α4

random-oracle queries. Its queries before Bob’s response are classical; its queries after intercepting
the response may be quantum.

    Consequently, no family of such protocols with honest query bounds at most poly(λ) and
inverse-polynomial valid agreement is secure against computationally unbounded attackers making
poly(λ) queries. If Alice is entirely classical and Bob’s response is classical, the attack is a passive
classical eavesdropping attack.
    In the multi-round setting, we allow for a classical-communication prefix of arbitrary length.
The parties may run quantum algorithms and store quantum states, but all oracle queries made
before the final round must be classical. Bob next sends one possibly quantum message, and Alice
performs her final computation. These last two stages may query the oracle in superposition. Let
qA,pre and qB,pre bound the parties’ total prefix queries, and let qB,q and qA,fin bound their final-stage
queries.

Theorem 1.2 (Multi-round attack, informal). Let Πmr be a protocol of the form above with valid
agreement probability α > 0. There is a computationally unbounded online quantum attacker that
recovers Bob’s key with probability greater than α/2 using

                    max{1, qA,pre } max{1, qB,pre } max{1, 2qB,q + qA,fin }6
                                                                                        !
                  O                                                          + qA,fin
                                             α6

random-oracle queries. Its queries during the classical prefix are classical, and the bound has no
additional dependence on the number of prefix rounds.

    As an application, we consider quantum public-key encryption for classical messages whose
length is bounded by a polynomial in λ. The public and secret keys are classical, and key generation
has classical oracle access. Encryption, decryption, and the ciphertext itself may be quantum.

Theorem 1.3 (QPKE attack, informal). No QPKE scheme for classical messages whose length
is bounded by a polynomial in λ, with classical-query key generation, negligible correctness error,
and honest query bounds at most poly(λ), is query-bounded IND-CPA secure. In fact, for every
polynomial p, there is a computationally unbounded quantum attacker making poly(λ) queries whose
IND-CPA advantage is at least
                                        1     1
                                          −      − negl(λ).
                                        2 p(λ)
    Moreover, the multi-round theorem gives an interactive key-generation variant of QPKE. Namely,
suppose that ordinary key generation is replaced by an arbitrary classical-communication setup
phase between the decrypting and encrypting parties. The parties may perform quantum local
computation and retain quantum states, but both make only classical random-oracle queries during
this phase. Viewing the setup as the classical prefix and the challenge ciphertext as Bob’s final
message, the multi-round attack applies without any dependence on the number of setup rounds.
The reduction fixes two distinct messages and turns the scheme into key agreement in the natural
way. Alice generates and sends the public key; Bob encrypts one of the two messages and takes its

                                                    4
                         Oracle access
   Result                                        Correctness                   Status
                Gen          Enc         Dec
[ACC+ 22]        Q            Q          Q         perfect     Conjectural
[BEGVV24]        Q            Q          –         perfect     Conjectural
[LLLL24]         C            Q          Q         perfect     Unconditional
[LLLL24]         C            Q          –        imperfect    Unconditional
[LLLL25]      Q (log.)        Q          Q         perfect     Unconditional for O(log λ) Gen queries;
                                                               conjectural otherwise
[LLLL26a]        Q            Q          Q         perfect     Unconditional
This work        C            Q          Q        imperfect    Unconditional

Table 1: Comparison of QPKE impossibility results in the QROM. Here C and Q denote classical
and quantum random-oracle access, respectively, and – denotes oracle-free decryption. The two
rows for [LLLL24] separate its perfect-correctness result from its imperfect-correctness result, which
requires oracle-free decryption.


index as his key; Alice decrypts and recovers the index. Recovering Bob’s key is therefore equivalent
to guessing which message was encrypted.
    Finally, we obtain the following corollary.

Corollary 1.4 (Two-round OSP consequence, informal). The PKE obtained from a negligibly
incorrect two-round OSP protocol by the transformation of Bartusek and Khurana is not query-
bounded IND-CPA secure in the QROM, provided that the classical OSP sender makes only classical
random-oracle queries and the honest query bounds are polynomial.

1.2   Discussion
We note that our key-agreement model and security notion are different from prior work. In
classical random-oracle key agreement, a passive eavesdropper can copy the public transcript
and is commonly required to be unable to recover an honest party’s key [BMG17]. Here Bob’s
final message may be quantum and therefore cannot in general be copied. Moreover, unlike the
Classical Communication One Quantum Message (CC1QM) security notion of Bouaziz-Ermann
et al. [BEGVV24, Definition 3.1], our success condition asks only that the attacker recover Bob’s
key. It does not require the attacker to provide Alice with a replacement state that makes her
output the same non-abort key. Thus our attack objective is weaker, while security against our
interception key-recovery experiment is correspondingly stronger: every successful CC1QM attack
yields a successful interception key-recovery attack, but the converse need not hold. This does not
by itself break the full CC1QM condition for a quantum final message. It is nevertheless sufficient
for our QPKE application, because the IND-CPA challenge ciphertext is transferred to the attacker
and need not be returned to Alice.
    Moreover, our result crucially relies on the fact that the early oracle queries are classical. Once
the complete classical query-answer transcript is fixed, the party’s residual state depends only on
that transcript, while all unqueried oracle values remain uniform. This makes it possible to resample
a conditioned view and then apply random reprogramming. With quantum queries, a party may
instead be entangled with many oracle values in superposition, and there is no classical transcript
that both determines the residual state and leaves the remaining oracle values independent and
uniform. Measuring the query register generally changes the execution, while keeping it coherent


                                                  5
does not yield the classically sampled reprogramming set needed by Lemma 3.4. Extending our result
to quantum queries in the prefix would therefore require novel techniques for handling quantum
oracle interactions, and we leave this as future work.

1.3   Acknowledgements
This research was conducted while AV was a summer intern at NTT Social Informatics Laboratories
in Tokyo. AV is very grateful to NTT and the organizers of the internship for the opportunity and
their generous hospitality.
    We acknowledge the use of AI in the production of this paper. The proof ideas for the two-round
setting were human-generated, while GPT-5.6 Sol Extra-Hard Thinking assisted in formalizing.
When attempting to generalize to the multi-round setting, GPT-5.6 Sol Extra-Hard Thinking
formalized an attack by extending Barak-Mahmoody. The authors take full responsibility for the
correctness of this work.

1.4   Related Work
Oblivious state preparation. Bartusek and Khurana introduced oblivious state preparation
(OSP). They showed that two-round OSP implies one-bit CPA-secure PKE with classical key
generation, decryption, keys, and ciphertexts, but quantum encryption [BK25, Theorem 7.9]. They
also reduced OSP to perfectly complete key agreement, thereby ruling out perfectly correct OSP in
the QROM [BK25, Corollary 7.7]. In their relativizing OSP-to-PKE transformation, the classical
OSP sender becomes the key generator. Our theorem therefore attacks the resulting PKE even
when its correctness error is negligible rather than zero, provided that the sender queries the random
oracle classically.

Quantum public-key encryption. Under the Polynomial Compatibility Conjecture, Bouaziz-
Ermann et al. handled protocols with a final quantum message. Their result assumes perfect
completeness and no oracle queries by Alice after she receives that message, so its QPKE application
requires oracle-free decryption [BEGVV24]. Our two-message theorem instead permits imperfect
completeness and quantum oracle queries in Alice’s final computation, at the cost of requiring
classical queries in her first stage.
    Li et al. proved a complementary sequence of QPKE impossibility results. Their first paper
unconditionally rules out perfectly complete QPKE with classical keys and ciphertexts when key
generation has classical oracle access. It separately rules out imperfectly correct, classical-key
QPKE with possibly quantum ciphertexts in any oracle model, provided that decryption is oracle-
free [LLLL24]. Their next paper allows logarithmically many quantum key-generation queries
unconditionally and gives a conjectural result beyond that range [LLLL25]. Their 2026 result
removes both the conjecture and the key-generation restriction for perfectly complete QPKE with
classical keys and either classical or quantum ciphertexts [LLLL26a]. Our result keeps the classical-
query restriction on key generation, but allows imperfect correctness and unrestricted quantum
oracle queries by encryption and decryption.

Many-round key agreement. In a recent preprint, Li et al. give an unconditional attack
against perfectly complete, arbitrary-round QCCC key agreement with unrestricted quantum oracle
queries [LLLL26b]. All communication in their model is classical, and their eavesdropper makes
only classical queries. Our multi-round theorem makes a different tradeoff: it tolerates imperfect



                                                  6
completeness and a final quantum message, but it requires classical oracle access during the prefix
and uses a quantum attacker after the prefix.

1.5   Organization
Section 2 explains the two attacks and the QPKE application. Section 3 defines the query model,
partial oracles, and the key-agreement and QPKE security notions, and recalls the external lemmas
used in the proofs. Section 4 constructs the heavy-query learner for the two-message setting and
defines Alice’s conditioned first-round view. Section 5 proves the two-round and multi-round
theorems. Finally, Section 6 derives the classical-eavesdropping, QPKE, and OSP consequences.


2     Technical Overview
2.1   The Two-Message Attack and QPKE Application
We consider two-round key agreement in the QROM with the following syntax. Both Alice and Bob
are quantum algorithms but Alice may make only classical queries to the oracle and her message
to Bob must be classical. Alice first makes at most qA,1 queries to the random oracle H to obtain
query, answer pairs TA , and sends her message m1 to Bob, retaining a residual state SA . Bob then
makes his queries to H, outputs a key KB and then sends his possibly quantum message ψ to Alice,
who then outputs a key KA .
     Eve proceeds as follows. After receiving Alice’s first message m1 , Eve looks for an input that
is likely to occur in the transcript of Alice’s first round, conditioned on m1 and all oracle answers
Eve has learned so far. Whenever this conditional probability exceeds δ, Eve queries the input and
adds the answer to a partial oracle h, where h is defined such that it agrees with H on all points
in its domain, which we denote by Dom(h). We stop the procedure after qA,1 /δ 2 queries; the
probability of reaching this cutoff is at most δ. If this learning phase is successful, then every point
outside Dom(h) appears in a fresh conditioned Alice transcript with probability at most δ.
     Although Alice’s queries in the first round are classical, she may retain a quantum state. However,
once Alice’s message and full query transcript are fixed, her residual state depends only on those
classical random variables, while all unqueried oracle values remain uniform. Conditioned on (m1 , h),
Eve can therefore prepare a distribution over Alice’s views, which we denote by ωm1 ,h , and use it to
sample a new view
                                             (TA′ , SA
                                                     ′
                                                       ) ← ωm1 ,h .
Eve then intercepts Bob’s response Ψ and runs Alice’s final algorithm on SA        ′ and Ψ, using a

reprogrammed oracle H[TA′ ], which is defined to agree with TA′ on all points inside of Dom(TA′ ), and
with H everywhere else.
    The analysis of the two-message attack combines two ingredients. The first ingredient is the
heavy-query bound of Austrin et al. [ACC+ 22, Lemma 3.4], in the form recalled by Katz and
Sela [KS24, Lemma 4], which lets Eve learn the heavy inputs before we invoke reprogramming. The
second is the random reprogramming lemma in the form stated by Katz and Sela [KS24, Lemma 3].
The lemma bounds the effect of reprogramming an oracle on a random set: if each point belongs to
that set with probability
                       √ at most δ, then the acceptance probability of a q-query quantum algorithm
changes by at most 2q δ.
    The QPKE application uses the standard reduction from QPKE to key agreement used in prior
QROM impossibility work [BEGVV24, LLLL24]. Alice generates (pk, sk) and sends pk. Fix two
distinct messages m0 , m1 . Bob chooses a uniform bit b, encrypts mb , and takes b as his key; Alice
decrypts and maps m0 , m1 back to their indices. The resulting agreement probability is at least

                                                   7
the scheme’s minimum correct-decryption probability. In the IND-CPA game, Eve preprocesses
pk, treats the challenge ciphertext as Bob’s response, and uses its recovered key as the guess for b.
Interception success p therefore yields IND-CPA advantage at least p − 1/2. Because the ciphertext
is transferred rather than copied, encryption, decryption, and the ciphertext may all be quantum.
Only key generation needs classical oracle access.

2.2   The Multi-Round Attack
For the multi-round result, we treat the entire classical-query prefix as an auxiliary classical protocol.
The parties’ local computations and residual states may be quantum, but their messages and
oracle queries during the prefix are classical. Since we do not impose a computational bound, an
exact simulator can sample these classical actions from their induced distributions and record the
corresponding conditional residual states. We can therefore apply the Barak–Mahmoody learner
to the simulated classical views and then map its guarantees back to the parties’ actual query
transcripts and residual quantum states [BMG17].
    Conditioned on the public transcript m and the partial oracle h learned by Eve, the parties’
prefix views are close to the product of their marginals, and no input outside Dom(h) is likely to
appear in Alice’s prefix query transcript. This product guarantee does not yet include the random
oracle used in the final round. Since every prefix query is classical, after the two query transcripts are
fixed, the unqueried oracle values remain uniform and the residual states have no further dependence
on them. We use this fact to sample independent prefix views together with a consistent oracle
and show that the resulting state is close to the real conditioned state. These steps are given in
Sections 5.2.1 to 5.2.3.
    Eve can then sample a fresh Alice prefix view, intercept Bob’s final message, and run Alice’s
final computation from the sampled residual state. Since the learner’s query bound depends only on
the total numbers of prefix queries made by Alice and Bob, the attack has no additional dependence
on the number of prefix rounds.


3     Preliminaries
Let λ ∈ N be the security parameter, and let n, ℓ : N → N>0 be functions bounded above by a
polynomial in λ. Define

                   Xλ = {0, 1}n(λ) ,     Yλ = {0, 1}ℓ(λ) ,    Hλ = {H : Xλ → Yλ }.

For any finite set R, we write r ← R for a uniformly random element of R. In particular, H ← Hλ
denotes a uniformly random function. When λ is clear, we omit the subscript. When representing
the sampled oracle by a classical register, H has orthonormal basis {|H⟩H : H ∈ H}. For a probability
mass function or subprobability mass function π, we write

                                       Supp(π) := {z : π(z) > 0}

for its support.

3.1   Random Oracles and Query Algorithms
Definition 3.1 (Oracle quantum algorithms). A quantum oracle algorithm Q = {Qλ }λ∈N is a
family of quantum circuits. We write I for its input register, X for its n(λ)-qubit query register,



                                                    8
Y for its ℓ(λ)-qubit response register, and Z for all remaining work registers. The circuit family
depends only on λ. For H ∈ Hλ , a query applies the unitary

                               UH |x⟩X |y⟩Y |z⟩Z = |x⟩X |y ⊕ H(x)⟩Y |z⟩Z .

The algorithm alternates oracle-independent operations with applications of UH . For fixed λ, let
q(Qλ ) denote its worst-case number of oracle queries; we sometimes abbreviate this to q(Q).
   An algorithm has classical oracle access if each query is made on a classical input x, the answer
H(x) is returned classically, and the ordered list of query-answer pairs can be recorded without
changing the execution. The rest of the computation and the residual state may be quantum.

    We use the standard classical-quantum representation of a state that is classical on one register.
If C is a classical register with finite alphabet C and S is a quantum register, then

                                       ρCS =
                                               X
                                                     p(c)|c⟩⟨c|C ⊗ σS|c ,
                                               c∈C

where p is a probability distribution and, whenever p(c) > 0, σS|c is the normalized state of S
obtained by measuring C in the computational basis and observing c. Explicitly, writing Pc = |c⟩⟨c|C ,

                                         p(c) = Tr[(Pc ⊗ IS )ρCS ]

and, for p(c) > 0,
                                           TrC [(Pc ⊗ IS )ρCS (Pc ⊗ IS )]
                                  σS|c =                                  .
                                                       p(c)

3.2    Partial Oracles and Reprogramming
Definition 3.2 (Partial oracle). For any λ ∈ N, fix X = Xλ , Y = Yλ , and H = Hλ . A partial oracle
is a function h : Dom(h) → Y, where Dom(h) ⊆ X . We denote the size of h by |h| = | Dom(h)|. We
write h ⪯ H when a full oracle H ∈ H extends h, meaning that H(x) = h(x) for every x ∈ Dom(h).
Define
                                    H(h) = {H ∈ H : h ⪯ H}.
Two partial oracles h and τ are consistent if they agree on the intersection of their domains. For
consistent h and τ , define
                              H(h, τ ) = {H ∈ H : h ⪯ H, τ ⪯ H}.
The notation H ← Unif(H(h)), and similarly H ← Unif(H(h, τ )), means that H is sampled
uniformly from the indicated set.

    An ordered transcript τ = ((x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xt , yt )) is consistent when xi = xj implies yi = yj . A
consistent transcript defines the partial oracle τ (xi ) = yi . Repeated queries may be retained in the
ordered list, while Dom(τ ) denotes the set of distinct queried points. We write |τ | = t for the length
of the ordered list, including repetitions.

Definition 3.3 (Reprogrammed oracle). For an oracle H and a consistent transcript τ (equivalently,
a partial oracle), define
                                          τ (x), x ∈ Dom(τ ),
                                        (
                             H[τ ](x) =
                                          H(x), x ∈ / Dom(τ ).



                                                        9
For another internally consistent transcript τ ′ , which need not be consistent with τ , successive
reprogramming is defined so that the second transcript overwrites the first on their common domain:
                                             
                                             τ (x),    x ∈ Dom(τ ′ ),
                                              ′
                                             
                          H[τ ][τ ′ ](x) =    τ (x),    x ∈ Dom(τ ) \ Dom(τ ′ ),
                                             
                                                        x∈/ Dom(τ ) ∪ Dom(τ ′ ).
                                             
                                             H(x),


3.3   External Lemmas
Below we recall the two prior results used in our reprogramming attack.
   The first is the random reprogramming lemma in the form used by Katz and Sela [KS24,
Lemma 3], itself a restatement of a result by Alagic et al. [ABKM22, Lemma 3].

Lemma 3.4 (Random reprogramming lemma). Let D be a distinguisher in the following game.

 1. D outputs a full function F0 : X → Y and a possibly inefficient randomized classical algorithm
    C whose output is a partial function R. Let

                                        ε = max Pr [x ∈ Dom(R)].
                                               x∈X R←C


 2. The challenger samples R ← C, sets F1 = F0 [R], chooses b ← {0, 1}, and gives D quantum
    oracle access to Fb .

 3. The oracle access is removed. The challenger reveals the random coins used by C, and D outputs
    a bit.

If D makes at most q challenge-oracle queries, then
                                                                             √
                     |Pr[D outputs 1 | b = 1] − Pr[D outputs 1 | b = 0]| ≤ 2q ε.

    The restriction that C is classical is deliberate. Its only role is to sample the classical partial
function R, and the game later reveals the random coins used for that sample. In our applications,
C samples a classical query transcript, while D separately prepares any residual quantum state
conditioned on the revealed transcript. Thus C never simulates Alice’s quantum state. Allowing C
itself to retain quantum state would also require a different game interface, since revealing classical
random coins would no longer specify its complete internal state.
    The second is the following heavy-query counting lemma of Austrin et al. [ACC+ 22, Lemma 3.4],
in the form recalled by Katz and Sela [KS24, Lemma 4].

Lemma 3.5 (Heavy-query bound). Let L, z1 , x1 , . . . , zq , xq be correlated random variables, where L
ranges over subsets of a universe U, each xi ∈ U, and the xi ’s are pairwise distinct. Conditioned on
a history z1 , x1 , . . . , zi , call xi δ-heavy if

                                     Pr[xi ∈ L | z1 , x1 , . . . , zi ] ≥ δ.

Let S be the set of δ-heavy points among the xi ’s. Then

                                                            E[|L|]
                                               E[|S|] ≤            .
                                                              δ



                                                       10
3.4     Public Key Cryptography with Quantum Parties
We now define the protocols used throughout the paper. We note that the two-message model
in Definition 3.6 is close to the CC1QM model of Bouaziz-Ermann et al. [BEGVV24], with one
additional restriction: before sending her first message, Alice has only classical oracle access.

3.4.1     Two-Message Key Agreement
Definition 3.6 (Two-message key agreement with a classical first message). A two-message key-
agreement protocol with a classical first message and a possibly quantum response is a tuple of oracle
quantum algorithms Π = (A1 , B, A2 ) with the following syntax relative to Hλ .

  • AH1 (1 ) has classical oracle access and outputs (TA , M1 , SA ). Here M1 is a classical first
          λ

    message, SA is Alice’s residual register, and TA is the complete ordered classical query-answer
    transcript of A1 .

  • B H (1λ , M1 ) has quantum oracle access and outputs a possibly quantum message register Ψ and
    a classical key KB ∈ Kλ ∪ {⊥}.

  • AH
     2 (1 , SA , Ψ) has quantum oracle access and outputs a classical key KA ∈ Kλ ∪ {⊥}.
         λ


Other than access to the common random oracle, Alice and Bob initially share no state or correlated
randomness. We assume worst-case bounds

                             |TA | ≤ qA,1 ,     q(B) ≤ qB ,      q(A2 ) ≤ qA,2 .

The protocol is the following experiment, denoted by RealΠ (1λ ):

  1. Sample H ← Hλ .

  2. Run (TA , M1 , SA ) ← AH
                            1 (1 ), and send the classical message M1 to Bob.
                                λ


  3. Run (Ψ, KB ) ← BH (1λ , M1 ), and send the message register Ψ to Alice.

               2 (1 , SA , Ψ).
  4. Run KA ← AH   λ


The valid agreement probability is

                                   αΠ (λ) :=      Pr     [KA = KB ̸= ⊥].
                                               RealΠ (1λ )

We use the following notions of completeness and security for such a protocol:

 (i) Completeness. The protocol has completeness error ϵc (λ) if

                                               αΠ (λ) ≥ 1 − ϵc (λ).

      We say the protocol is correct if ϵc is negligible.

(ii) Security. The protocol is interception key-recovery secure, as defined in Definition 3.8, if, for
     every polynomially query-bounded attacker E,

                                                 Π,E (λ) ≤ negl(λ).
                                              AdvIntKR                                             (1)



                                                       11
Definition 3.7 (Intercepting attacker). An intercepting-attacker is a pair E = (E1 , E2 ). Its first
stage receives Alice’s classical message, may query the oracle before Bob generates his response,
and outputs a possibly quantum state ZE . Its second stage receives ZE together with Bob’s message
register and outputs a guess for the classical key.

Definition 3.8 (Interception key-recovery experiment). Let E = (E1 , E2 ) be any polynomially
query-bounded intercepting-attacker: its computation may be unbounded, but its two stages together
make at most poly(λ) random-oracle queries. The experiment IntKRΠ,E (1λ ) is:

 1. Sample H ← Hλ .

 2. Run (TA , M1 , SA ) ← AH
                           1 (1 ) and reveal M1 to E1 .
                               λ


 3. Run ZE ← E1H (1λ , M1 ).

 4. Run (Ψ, KB ) ← BH (1λ , M1 ) and transfer Ψ to E2 .

 5. Run K ∗ ← E2H (1λ , ZE , Ψ). The experiment outputs 1 iff K ∗ = KB ̸= ⊥.

Define
                                   Π,E (λ) := Pr[IntKRΠ,E (1 ) = 1].
                                AdvIntKR                    λ



3.4.2     Multi-Round Key Agreement with a Classical-Query Prefix
We also consider protocols with an arbitrary classical-communication prefix. During the prefix,
both parties query the oracle only classically, although their other computations and residual states
may be quantum. In the final round, Bob sends a possibly quantum message, after which Alice
performs her final computation. This communication pattern is similar to the CC1QM pattern
of Bouaziz-Ermann et al. [BEGVV24, Definition 11], except that we additionally require classical
oracle access during the prefix.

Definition 3.9 (Multi-round key agreement with a classical-query prefix). A key-agreement protocol
with a classical prefix and one final possibly quantum message is a tuple of oracle quantum algorithms

                                 Πmr = (Ai )ri=1 , (Bi )r−1
                                                                       
                                                        i=1 , Bq , Afin .

Here r ≥ 1 is the number of messages that Alice sends during the classical prefix. To simplify the
indexing, we assume that Alice sends both the first and last prefix messages. The honest experiment,
denoted RealΠmr (1λ ), is:

 1. Sample H ← Hλ . Alice and Bob begin in an oracle-independent product state ρA,0 ⊗ ρB,0 .

 2. For i = 1, . . . , r, Alice runs Ai on her current residual register and the public transcript so
    far, makes only classical oracle queries, sends a classical message M2i−1 , and retains her new
    residual register. If i < r, Bob proceeds analogously: he runs Bi , makes only classical oracle
    queries, sends a classical message M2i , and retains his new residual register.

 3. Let
                                          M = (M1 , . . . , M2r−1 )
    be the complete classical prefix transcript. Let TA and TB be the complete ordered query-answer
    transcripts accumulated by Alice and Bob during the prefix, and let SA and SB be their residual
    quantum registers at its end.

                                                   12
  4. Bob runs
                                        (Ψ, KB ) ← BqH (1λ , M, SB ),
    where Ψ is a possibly quantum message register and KB ∈ Kλ ∪ {⊥} is classical.

  5. After receiving Ψ, Alice runs
                                              fin (1 , M, SA , Ψ).
                                        KA ← AH     λ


    Here KA ∈ Kλ ∪ {⊥} is classical.

Write
                             qA,pre := max |TA |,             qB,pre := max |TB |,
and let qB,q and qA,fin bound the quantum-oracle queries made by Bq and Afin , respectively. The
valid agreement probability is

                                αΠmr (λ) :=       Pr        [KA = KB ̸= ⊥].
                                              RealΠmr (1λ )

We use the following notions of completeness and security for such a protocol:

 (i) Completeness. The protocol has completeness error ϵc (λ) if

                                              αΠmr (λ) ≥ 1 − ϵc (λ).

    We say the protocol is correct if ϵc is negligible.

(ii) Security. The protocol is online interception key-recovery secure, as defined in Definition 3.10,
     if, for every computationally unbounded attacker E making at most poly(λ) random-oracle
     queries, restricted to classical queries during the prefix but allowed quantum queries after
     receiving Ψ,
                                        AdvIntKR,mr
                                            Πmr ,E  (λ) ≤ negl(λ).                                 (2)

Definition 3.10 (Online interception experiment). The experiment IntKRmr
                                                                      Πmr ,E (1 ) proceeds as
                                                                               λ

follows.

  1. Sample H ← Hλ and initialize the parties and Eve.

  2. Run the honest classical prefix. After each public message, activate Eve on the transcript so
     far and its retained state; during these activations Eve may make classical oracle queries and
     update its state.

  3. Run BqH on Bob’s residual register. Transfer its message register Ψ to Eve and retain Bob’s
     key KB .

  4. Eve may make quantum oracle queries and outputs a classical key guess K ∗ . The experiment
     outputs 1 iff K ∗ = KB ̸= ⊥.

Define
                              AdvIntKR,mr
                                 Πmr ,E   (λ) := Pr[IntKRmr
                                                         Πmr ,E (1 ) = 1].
                                                                  λ




                                                       13
3.4.3    Quantum Public-Key Encryption
We consider classical public and secret keys, classical messages whose length is bounded by a
polynomial in λ, and possibly quantum encryption, decryption, and ciphertexts. We allow imperfect
correctness but require Gen to query the random oracle only classically. Our security experiment
is the corresponding query-bounded IND-CPA experiment: the attacker may perform unbounded
computation but is charged for its oracle queries. When Gen, Dec, and the ciphertext are classical
but Enc may be quantum, the µ(λ) = 1 case is exactly the PKE syntax used by Bartusek and
Khurana [BK25, Definition 7.8].

Definition 3.11 (QPKE with classical-query key generation). Let µ : N → N be any polynomial-time
computable function satisfying 1 ≤ µ(λ) ≤ p(λ) for some polynomial p, and let Mλ = {0, 1}µ(λ) . A
quantum public-key encryption scheme Σ = (Gen, Enc, Dec) for the message spaces {Mλ }λ∈N , in the
QROM with oracle family Hλ , has the following syntax.

  • (pk, sk) ← GenH (1λ ) outputs a classical public key and secret key. The algorithm has classical
    random-oracle access, and its complete ordered query-answer transcript can be recorded as TGen .

  • C ← EncH (1λ , pk, m), for m ∈ Mλ , uses quantum random-oracle access and outputs a possibly
    quantum ciphertext register C.

  • m
    b ← DecH (1λ , sk, C) uses quantum random-oracle access and outputs m
                                                                        b ∈ Mλ ∪ {⊥}.

Write qGen , qEnc , and qDec for the respective worst-case query bounds. Define the minimum correct-
decryption probability

            αΣ (λ) := min Pr DecH (1λ , sk, C) = m :
                               
                      m∈Mλ

                                H ← Hλ , (pk, sk) ← GenH (1λ ), C ← EncH (1λ , pk, m) .
                                                                                      


The scheme has correctness error ϵc (λ) if αΣ (λ) ≥ 1 − ϵc (λ).

Definition 3.12 (Query-bounded IND-CPA security). For a two-stage attacker D = (D0 , D1 ), the
experiment INDΣ,D (1λ ) is:

  1. Sample H ← Hλ and (pk, sk) ← GenH (1λ ).

  2. Run (ZD , m0 , m1 ) ← D0H (1λ , pk), where ZD is a possibly quantum state and m0 , m1 ∈ Mλ .

  3. Sample b ← {0, 1}, run C ← EncH (1λ , pk, mb ), and transfer C to D1 .

  4. Run b′ ← D1H (1λ , ZD , C). The experiment outputs 1 iff b′ = b.

Define
                                                                        1
                            AdvIND-CPA (λ) := Pr[INDΣ,D (1λ ) = 1] −      .
                               Σ,D
                                                                        2
The scheme is query-bounded IND-CPA secure if this advantage is negligible for every computationally
unbounded attacker making at most poly(λ) random-oracle queries. This differs from standard
computational IND-CPA only in the attacker’s resource bound. Because encryption is public, the
experiment does not need a separate encryption oracle.




                                                  14
4     Conditional Resampling and Heavy-Query Learning
4.1      The Heavy-Query Attacker
The following procedure is the findTranscript heavy-query attacker of Katz and Sela [KS24,
Section 3 and Lemma 5] adapted to our setting. Its cutoff analysis is precisely their application of
the heavy-query counting bound of Austrin et al. [ACC+ 22].
   Throughout this subsection, probabilities are taken over

                                 H ← H,         (TA , M1 , SA ) ← AH
                                                                   1 (1 ).
                                                                       λ


For a first-message value m1 and a partial oracle h, let

                                      Em1 ,h := {M1 = m1 , h ⪯ H}.

Whenever Pr[Em1 ,h ] > 0, define

                                 pm1 ,h (x) := Pr[x ∈ Dom(TA ) | Em1 ,h ].                             (3)

Define
                          Heavyδ (m1 , h) := {x ∈ X \ Dom(h) : pm1 ,h (x) > δ}.
Fix a total order ≺ on X .

                  δ (1 , m1 )
Algorithm 1: LearnH   λ

Input: Security parameter 1λ , first message m1 , oracle access to H, threshold δ, and bound qA,1 .
Output: A partial
                  oracle h or ⊥.
Nmax ← qA,1 /δ 2 ; h ← ∅
while Heavyδ (m1 , h) ̸= ∅ do
   if | Dom(h)| ≥ Nmax then return ⊥
   Let x be the ≺-least point in Heavyδ (m1 , h)
   Query H(x) and set h ← h ∪ {x 7→ H(x)}
end while
return h
    A pair (m1 , h) is reachable if

                                Pr[M1 = m1 , LearnH
                                                  δ (1 , m1 ) = h] > 0.
                                                      λ


    As in the Katz-Sela attacker, fixing the order ≺ makes every next query a deterministic function
of (m1 , h). Hence, for every reachable pair (m1 , h) and every oracle H,

                                       δ (1 , m1 ) = h
                                  LearnH   λ
                                                           ⇐⇒      h ⪯ H.

We refer to this equivalence as the deterministic-output property of Learn.

4.2      The Conditioned View of the First Round
For every reachable pair (m1 , h), let ωm1 ,h denote the conditional state of Alice’s view after the first
round (TA , SA ) given Em1 ,h . Write

                                      µm1 ,h (τ ) = Pr[TA = τ | Em1 ,h ]



                                                     15
for its transcript marginal. Explicitly, for every τ with µm1 ,h (τ ) > 0, let σm1 ,τ be the corresponding
conditional state of SA given (M1 , TA ) = (m1 , τ ). Then

                             ωm1 ,h =                   µm1 ,h (τ )|τ ⟩⟨τ |TA ⊗ σm1 ,τ .
                                            X

                                             τ:
                                        µm1 ,h (τ )>0


The notation (TA′ , SA ′ ) ← ω
                               m1 ,h means that we prepare a new instance of this state: sample
τ ← µm1 ,h , place τ in TA , and prepare SA
                          ′               ′ in the state σ
                                                          m1 ,τ . By the deterministic-output property,
the events Em1 ,h and {M1 = m1 , Learnδ (1 , m1 ) = h} coincide for every reachable pair.
                                        H λ


Lemma 4.1 (Katz-Sela heavy-query attacker). For every 0 < δ < 1, with probability at least 1 − δ
                                                 δ (1 , M1 ) outputs a partial oracle h =
over the real execution of the first round, LearnH   λ                                  ̸ ⊥. On every
nonabort execution,                                  l         m
                                         | Dom(h)| ≤ qA,1 /δ 2

                 / Dom(h),
and, for every x ∈
                                           Pr
                                      ′ ,S ′ )←ω
                                                        [x ∈ Dom(TA′ )] ≤ δ.
                                    (TA   A     M1 ,h


Proof. The argument is a restatement, in our notation, of the proof of Katz and Sela [KS24,
Lemma 5]; we include it explicitly for completeness. The residual register SA plays no role in the
counting argument and is simply prepared together with its sampled transcript.
    The second claim is immediate upon successful termination: Heavyδ (M1 , h) = ∅, and the
displayed probability is exactly pM1 ,h (x).
    We now bound the abort probability.      If qA,1 = 0, the attacker returns the empty partial oracle.
Assume qA,1 > 0, and let Nmax = qA,1 /δ 2 . Let L = Dom(TA ). Let N ≤ Nmax be the number of
                                   

real queries issued by the attacker before it returns or aborts. On abort, N = Nmax ; successful
termination with N = Nmax is also allowed.
    To apply Lemma 3.5 with a fixed-length sequence, set z1 = M1 . For each real attacker step i ≤ N ,
let xi be its query and let zi+1 = H(xi ). For N < i ≤ Nmax , pad with pairwise distinct symbols
xi = ⊥i ∈/ X and fixed values zi+1 = 0. Work over the enlarged universe X ⊔ {⊥1 , . . . , ⊥Nmax }. The
points are pairwise distinct because the attacker never repeats a query.
    Immediately before a real query xi , the history determines the current partial oracle hi−1 . Hence

                             Pr[xi ∈ L | z1 , x1 , . . . , zi ] = pM1 ,hi−1 (xi ) > δ.

Every real attacker query is therefore δ-heavy, while every padding point has conditional membership
probability zero. The heavy set in Lemma 3.5 has size exactly N , and so

                                                        E[|L|]   qA,1
                                           E[N ] ≤             ≤      .
                                                          δ       δ
By Markov’s inequality,
                                                                 qA,1
                                      Pr[N ≥ Nmax ] ≤                 ≤ δ.
                                                                δNmax
Since abort implies N = Nmax ,

                            Pr[LearnH
                                    δ (1 , M1 ) = ⊥] ≤ Pr[N ≥ Nmax ] ≤ δ.
                                        λ




                                                          16
5     Reprogramming Attacks
5.1    The Two-Message attacker
Definition 5.1 (Eve’s two-stage reprogramming attack). Fix 0 < δ < 1. The attacker Eδ = (Eδ,1 , Eδ,2 )
is defined as follows.
    On input the first message m1 , the preprocessing stage runs

                                                       δ (1 , m1 ).
                                              h ← LearnH   λ


If h = ⊥, it outputs ZE = ⊥. Otherwise it prepares

                                               (TA′ , SA
                                                       ′
                                                         ) ← ωm1 ,h

and outputs ZE = (m1 , h, TA′ , SA
                                 ′ ).

    After receiving Bob’s message register Ψ, the postprocessing stage outputs ⊥ if ZE = ⊥. Otherwise
it defines the fixed reprogrammed oracle H ′ = H[TA′ ], runs
                                                        ′
                                          K ∗ ← AH       ′
                                                 2 (1 , SA , Ψ),
                                                     λ


and outputs K ∗ .

    The preprocessing stage makes at most qA,1 /δ 2 classical queries. Each query to H[TA′ ] can
                                                               

be implemented using one query to H, a reversible lookup in the known transcript, and a |+⟩⊗ℓ
ancilla; see the proof of Lemma 5.6. The postprocessing stage therefore makes at most qA,2 quantum
queries.

Theorem 5.2. Let Π = (A1 , B, A2 ) be a protocol as in Definition 3.6, and let α = αΠ (λ). For
every 0 < δ < 1, the attacker Eδ of Definition 5.1 satisfies
                                                                   √
                                  Π,Eδ (λ) ≥ α − δ − 2(2qB + qA,2 ) δ.
                              AdvIntKR

It makes at most                                l           m
                                                 qA,1 /δ 2 + qA,2
random-oracle queries.

Proof of Theorem 5.2. We proceed via a hybrid argument. Consider the hybrids G0 , G1 , . . . , G5 ,
where G0 is the honest execution and G5 is Eve’s attack. We say that Gi succeeds when its two
recorded keys agree and are not ⊥ (an abort counts as failure).
Hybrid G0 (real execution)
    1. Sample H0 ← H.
    2. Run (TA,0 , M1,0 , SA,0 ) ← AH
                                    1 (1 ).
                                     0  λ


    3. Run (Ψ0 , KB,0 ) ← BH0 (1λ , M1,0 ).
    4. Run KA,0 ← AH
                   2 (1 , SA,0 , Ψ0 ).
                     0 λ


Therefore,
                                          Pr[G0 succeeds] = α.

Hybrid G1

                                                        17
  1. Sample H1 ← H.
  2. Run (TA,1 , M1,1 , SA,1 ) ← AH
                                  1 (1 ).
                                    1 λ


  3. Run h1 ← LearnH
                   δ (1 , M1,1 ); abort if h1 = ⊥.
                     1 λ


  4. Sample a fresh oracle H
                           b 1 ← Unif(H(h1 )) and set H
                                                      e1 = H
                                                           b 1 [TA,1 ].

  5. Run (Ψ1 , KB,1 ) ← BH (1 , M1,1 ).
                         e1 λ

  6. Run K1∗ ← AH
                2 (1 , SA,1 , Ψ1 ).
                  1 λ
                    e


Lemma 5.3 (G0 to G1 ).

                              |Pr[G0 succeeds] − Pr[G1 succeeds]| ≤ δ.

Proof. We begin by adding an intermediate hybrid G′0 that inserts into G0 an additional call
h ← LearnHδ (1 , M1,0 ) whose output is otherwise ignored. This computation does not change the
            0  λ

real execution. By Lemma 4.1, the call aborts with probability at most δ.
    Condition on the attacker not aborting, and fix values (m1 , τ, h) with positive probability. By
the deterministic-output property of Learn,

                                      δ (1 , m1 ) = h} = {h ⪯ H}.
                                {LearnH   λ


Because A1 makes only classical oracle queries, once (M1 , TA ) = (m1 , τ ) is fixed, its conditional
residual state depends only on the recorded query-answer history, not on any value of H outside
Dom(τ ). Since the original oracle is uniform, conditioning on

                                 M1 = m1 ,      TA = τ,      h⪯H

leaves H uniform over H(h, τ ) and independent of SA . This is the classical-quantum case of the
conditional-oracle identity used by Katz and Sela [KS24, Lemma 6].
    In G1 , H
            b 1 ← Unif(H(h)) is independent of Alice’s conditioned residual state, and Hb 1 [τ ] is
uniform over H(h, τ ). The conditioned experiments are therefore identical. The only loss comes
from the abort event, which has probability at most δ.

Hybrid G2
  1. Sample H2 ← H.
  2. Run (TA,2 , M1,2 , SA,2 ) ← AH
                                  1 (1 ).
                                   2  λ


  3. Run h2 ← LearnH
                   δ (1 , M1,2 ); abort if h2 = ⊥.
                     2 λ


  4. Sample H
            b 2 ← Unif(H(h2 )).

  5. Prepare (TA,2
               ′ , S′ ) ← ω
                    A,2    M1,2 ,h2 and set H2 = H2 [TA,2 ].
                                            e    b    ′


  6. Run (Ψ2 , KB,2 ) ← BH (1 , M1,2 ).
                         e2 λ

  7. Run K2∗ ← AH
                2 (1 , SA,2 , Ψ2 ).
                  2 λ   ′
                    e


Lemma 5.4 (G1 to G2 ).
                                Pr[G1 succeeds] = Pr[G2 succeeds].

                                                 18
Proof. Both hybrids abort on the same event. Condition on a reachable nonabort pair (m1 , h).
By the deterministic-output property, the conditioned state of Alice’s actual view in G1 is exactly
ωm1 ,h ; G2 simply prepares a new instance of that same classical-quantum state. In both hybrids,
the fresh oracle Hb i ← Unif(H(h)) is independent of the view, and is then reprogrammed according
to its transcript. The rest of the experiments is identical and therefore their conditional success
probabilities agree for every reachable nonabort (m1 , h). Since the two hybrids have the same
distribution on (M1 , h) and both fail on abort, their success probabilities are equal.

Hybrid G3
  1. Sample H3 ← H.
  2. Run (TA,3 , M1,3 , SA,3 ) ← AH
                                  1 (1 ).
                                   3  λ


  3. Run h3 ← LearnH
                   δ (1 , M1,3 ); abort if h3 = ⊥.
                     3 λ


  4. Sample H
            b 3 ← Unif(H(h3 )).

  5. Prepare (TA,3
               ′ , S′ ) ← ω
                    A,3    M1,3 ,h3 and set H3 = H3 [TA,3 ].
                                            e    b    ′


  6. Run (Ψ3 , KB,3 ) ← BH (1 , M1,3 ).
                         b3 λ

  7. Run K3∗ ← AH
                2 (1 , SA,3 , Ψ3 ).
                  3 λ   ′
                   e


Lemma 5.5 (G2 to G3 ).
                                                                     √
                            |Pr[G2 succeeds] − Pr[G3 succeeds]| ≤ 2qB δ.

Proof. Fix a reachable nonabort pair (m1 , h). We construct a distinguisher Dm1 ,h for the game in
Lemma 3.4 as follows.

 1. The distinguisher samples H
                              b ← Unif(H(h)), sends F0 := H  b to the challenger, and supplies the
    randomized algorithm Cm1 ,h . On fresh coins, Cm1 ,h samples τ ′ ← µm1 ,h and returns

                                            R := τ ′ |Dom(τ ′ )\Dom(h) .

 2. The challenger samples the coins of Cm1 ,h , obtains R, sets F1 := F0 [R], samples b ← {0, 1},
    and gives the distinguisher quantum oracle access to Fb . The distinguisher runs

                                          (Ψ, KB ) ← BFb (1λ , m1 )

    and retains (Ψ, KB ).

 3. The challenger removes access to Fb and reveals the coins of Cm1 ,h , thereby revealing τ ′ . The
    distinguisher prepares SA
                            ′ in the conditional state σ
                                                         m1 ,τ ′ , runs

                                                     b ′]
                                                     H[τ
                                          K ∗ ← A2                 ′
                                                            (1λ , SA , Ψ),

    and outputs 1 iff K ∗ = KB ̸= ⊥.




                                                     19
Only Bob’s algorithm receives the challenge oracle, so the distinguisher makes at most qB challenge
queries.
   Every transcript in Supp(µm1 ,h ) is consistent with h, so F1 = H[R]
                                                                     b    = H[τ
                                                                             b ′ ]. The cases b = 1
and b = 0 reproduce G2 and G3 , respectively, conditioned on (m1 , h). Moreover, for every x,

                                              0,                                     x ∈ Dom(h),
                                          (
                 Pr[x ∈ Dom(R)] ≤
                                              Prτ ′ ←µm1 ,h [x ∈ Dom(τ ′ )] ≤ δ,     x∈/ Dom(h),

where the
      √ last inequality is Lemma 4.1. The reprogramming lemma bounds the conditional difference
by 2qB δ. To remove the conditioning, let π(m1 , h) be the common subprobability mass of nonabort
executions of the shared prefix that output (M1 , h) = (m1 , h), and write

                  si (m1 , h) := Pr[Gi succeeds | M1,i = m1 , hi = h]       (i ∈ {2, 3}).
                                                              √
The preceding argument gives |s2 (m1 , h)−s3 (m1 , h)| ≤ 2qB δ for every (m1 , h) ∈ Supp(π). Because
success is defined to be false on abort, the two success probabilities are the corresponding π-weighted
sums. Hence the triangle inequality gives

        |Pr[G2 succeeds] − Pr[G3 succeeds]| ≤                             π(m1 , h) |s2 (m1 , h) − s3 (m1 , h)|
                                                               X

                                                        (m1 ,h)∈Supp(π)
                                                          √
                                                     ≤ 2qB δ,

where    (m1 ,h)∈Supp(π) π(m1 , h) ≤ 1.
        P


Hybrid G4
   1. Sample H4 ← H.
   2. Run (TA,4 , M1,4 , SA,4 ) ← AH
                                   1 (1 ).
                                    4  λ


   3. Run h4 ← LearnH
                    δ (1 , M1,4 ); abort if h4 = ⊥.
                      4 λ


   4. Sample H
             b 4 ← Unif(H(h4 )) and set Bob’s oracle H B = H
                                                      4
                                                           b 4 [TA,4 ].

   5. Prepare (TA,4
                ′ , S′ ) ← ω
                     A,4    M1,4 ,h4 and set H4 = H4 [TA,4 ].
                                              E    B ′

                              B
   6. Run (Ψ4 , KB,4 ) ← BH4 (1λ , M1,4 ).
                    HE
   7. Run K4∗ ← A2 4 (1λ , SA,4
                            ′ , Ψ ).
                                 4


Lemma 5.6 (G3 to G4 ).
                                                                            √
                         |Pr[G3 succeeds] − Pr[G4 succeeds]| ≤ 2(qB + qA,2 ) δ.

Proof. Fix a reachable nonabort pair (m1 , h). In G4 , the original residual register SA,4 is unused
and the conditional marginal of TA,4 is µm1 ,h . Thus the conditioned hybrid is unchanged if we
independently sample
                     b ← Unif(H(h)),
                     H                              τ ′′ ← µm1 ,h ,       (TA′ , SA
                                                                                  ′
                                                                                    ) ← ωm1 ,h ,

and then run Bob with H[τ
                        b ′′ ] and Alice’s final algorithm with H[τ
                                                                b ′′ ][T ′ ]. As usual, the second
                                                                        A
reprogramming overwrites the first wherever their domains overlap.
   We construct a distinguisher Dm1 ,h for the game in Lemma 3.4.

                                                          20
 1. The distinguisher prepares (TA′ , SA
                                       ′ )←ω
                                              m1 ,h , samples H ← Unif(H(h)), and sends F0 := H to
                                                                   b                          b
    the challenger. It also supplies a randomized algorithm Cm1 ,h that samples τ ′′ ← µm1 ,h and
    returns
                                          R := τ ′′ |Dom(τ ′′ )\Dom(h) .

 2. The challenger samples the coins of Cm1 ,h , obtains R, sets F1 := F0 [R], samples b ← {0, 1},
    and gives the distinguisher quantum oracle access to Fb . The distinguisher runs

                                          (Ψ, KB ) ← BFb (1λ , m1 )

    followed by
                                                      ′ ]
                                                  F [TA
                                         K ∗ ← A2 b                ′
                                                            (1λ , SA , Ψ),
    and records the bit d := 1[K ∗ = KB ̸= ⊥].

 3. The challenger removes access to Fb and reveals the coins of Cm1 ,h , thereby revealing τ ′′ . The
    distinguisher outputs the recorded bit d.

     Each query to Fb [TA′ ] uses one query to Fb . First compute reversibly whether the query point
lies in Dom(TA′ ). On that branch, swap the answer register with an ancilla in |+⟩⊗ℓ , apply the XOR
oracle UFb , and swap back. Because every XOR translation fixes |+⟩⊗ℓ , the challenge oracle has no
effect on the reprogrammed branch. XOR the known value TA′ (x) into the answer register there and
uncompute the lookup. This implements UFb [TA′ ] exactly. The total number of challenge queries is
at most qB + qA,2 .
     If b = 0, this is G3 . If b = 1, consistency on Dom(h) gives F1 = H[R]
                                                                          b    = H[τ
                                                                                  b ′′ ], yielding the
equivalent form of G4 . By Lemma 4.1, maxx Pr[x ∈ Dom(R)] ≤ δ. The reprogramming lemma gives
the pointwise bound
                                                                                                 √
    |Pr[G3 succeeds | M1 = m1 , h3 = h] − Pr[G4 succeeds | M1 = m1 , h4 = h]| ≤ 2(qB + qA,2 ) δ

for every reachable nonabort pair (m1 , h). Let π(m1 , h) denote the common subprobability mass of
nonabort executions of the shared prefix that produce that pair, and define

                  si (m1 , h) := Pr[Gi succeeds | M1,i = m1 , hi = h]           (i ∈ {3, 4}).

Because success is defined to be false on abort, the two success probabilities are the corresponding
π-weighted sums. The triangle inequality yields

       |Pr[G3 succeeds] − Pr[G4 succeeds]| ≤                        π(m1 , h) |s3 (m1 , h) − s4 (m1 , h)|
                                                       X

                                                (m1 ,h)∈Supp(π)
                                                             √
                                              ≤ 2(qB + qA,2 ) δ.



Hybrid G5
  1. Sample H5 ← H.
  2. Run (TA,5 , M1,5 , SA,5 ) ← AH
                                  1 (1 ).
                                   5  λ


  3. Run h5 ← LearnH
                   δ (1 , M1,5 ); abort if h5 = ⊥.
                     5 λ


  4. Prepare (TA,5
               ′ , S′ ) ← ω
                    A,5    M1,5 ,h5 and set H5 = H5 [TA,5 ].
                                            e         ′



                                                  21
   5. Run (Ψ5 , KB,5 ) ← BH5 (1λ , M1,5 ).

   6. Run K5∗ ← AH
                 2 (1 , SA,5 , Ψ5 ).
                   5 λ   ′
                     e


Lemma 5.7 (G4 to G5 ).
                                      Pr[G4 succeeds] = Pr[G5 succeeds].

Proof. Both hybrids abort on the same event. On success, fix (m1 , τ, h). By the deterministic-output
property and the conditional-oracle identity of Katz and Sela [KS24, Lemma 6], conditioned on this
triple the original oracle H5 in G5 is uniform over H(h, τ ) and independent of the unused original
residual state. In G4 , sampling Hb 4 ← Unif(H(h)) and setting H B = H
                                                                  4
                                                                        b 4 [τ ] gives the same uniform
distribution over H(h, τ ). The independently prepared view ωm1 ,h and every subsequent operation
are the same. Thus the conditional success probabilities of G4 and G5 are equal for every reachable
nonabort triple (m1 , τ, h). The two hybrids induce the same distribution π(m1 , τ, h) on these triples.
Define

           si (m1 , τ, h) := Pr[Gi succeeds | M1,i = m1 , TA,i = τ, hi = h]                  (i ∈ {4, 5}).

Then s4 (m1 , τ, h) = s5 (m1 , τ, h) throughout Supp(π). Both hybrids have success probability zero
on abort, so the law of total probability gives

 Pr[G4 succeeds] =             π(m1 , τ, h)s4 (m1 , τ, h) =             π(m1 , τ, h)s5 (m1 , τ, h) = Pr[G5 succeeds].
                         X                                     X

                     m1 ,τ,h                                  m1 ,τ,h




   Hybrid G5 is exactly IntKRΠ,Eδ : the preprocessing stage learns h and prepares the conditioned
view; Bob runs with the original oracle; Eve intercepts Ψ5 ; and Eve runs Alice’s final algorithm
with H5 [TA,5
          ′ ]. Therefore


                       Π,Eδ (λ) = Pr[G5 succeeds]
                    AdvIntKR
                                                                 √                √
                                     ≥ Pr[G0 succeeds] − δ − 2qB δ − 2(qB + qA,2 ) δ
                                                             √
                                     = α − δ − 2(2qB + qA,2 ) δ.

The query bound follows from Definition 5.1.

Corollary 5.8 (Concrete parameter choice). Let Π satisfy Definition 3.6, let α = αΠ (λ) > 0, and
define
                                                               α 2
                                                                
                         Q := max{1, 2qB + qA,2 },     δ :=         .
                                                              8Q
Then the adversary of Theorem 5.2 succeeds with probability strictly greater than α/2 and makes at
most                               l                m
                                    4096 qA,1 Q4 /α4 + qA,2
random-oracle queries.
Proof. The reprogramming loss is                    √
                                                  2Q δ = α/4.
Since 0 < α ≤ 1 and Q ≥ 1, δ = α2 /(64Q2 ) ≤ α/64. Hence the success lower bound is at least

                                             α − α/64 − α/4 > α/2.

                                                         22
Moreover,
                                        qA,1   4096 qA,1 Q4
                                             =              .
                                         δ2        α4


Corollary 5.9 (Polynomial-query two-message impossibility). Let Π = {Πλ } be a family of protocols
satisfying Definition 3.6. Suppose that qA,1 , qB , and qA,2 are each bounded by poly(λ), and that
αΠ (λ) ≥ 1/ poly(λ). Then the family is not interception key-recovery secure against computationally
unbounded quantum adversaries making at most poly(λ) random-oracle queries. In particular, the
conclusion applies when the completeness error is negligible.

5.2     The Multi-Round Attack
We give an attack on a multi-round key agreement protocol with a classical prefix and one final
possibly quantum message, as defined in Definition 3.9. Recall that in this model, the only property
the prefix must satisfy is that all communication and all queries to the random oracle are classical;
the parties’ local computation and residual states may otherwise be quantum. Our attack and
corresponding analysis extend the techniques from [BMG17] to our setting.

5.2.1    Classical Views of the Prefix
The main difference between our setting and the purely classical setting in [BMG17] is that we
allow the parties’ local computation to be quantum. However, as we discuss in this section, we can
assume without loss of generality that Alice and Bob are executing classical algorithms to generate
the prefix. In turn, we will be able to apply the techniques from [BMG17] directly.
    We first explain how to generate classical views of the prefix. Let Π be a protocol as defined in
Definition 3.9. Recall that while the parties must be query bounded, they may be computationally
unbounded. We therefore can define an exact classical simulation of the prefix of Π as follows. The
simulator maintains a classical descirption of the parties’ residual quantum states. Whenever an
honest party sends a message or queries the oracle during the prefix, the simulator produces a
sample according to the distribution induced by the party’s current quantum state and updates its
classical description of the corresponding conditional residual state. Thus the simulation makes the
same classical oracle queries and produces exactly the same joint state of the public transcript, the
parties’ query transcripts, and their residual registers as the original prefix.
    For P ∈ {A, B}, define
                                         UP := (RP , M, TP )
as the classical view of party P in this simulation, where RP records all private random choices of
the simulator, M is the public prefix transcript, and TP is the complete ordered oracle query-answer
transcript of P . This is equivalent to the notion of a view used by Barak and Mahmoody [BMG17,
Section 3.1]. We note that the classical description of the residual states is not part of UP .
    We now explain what is needed to use this simulated classical view in combination with the
techniques of [BMG17]. The eventual attack will retain the public prefix transcript m and a
partial oracle h learned during the prefix, and then prepare a fresh Alice prefix view from its
conditional marginal given (m, h). To justify replacing Alice’s real view by this fresh sample without
significantly changing Bob’s subsequent behavior, we need the real joint state of the two prefix
views, conditioned on (m, h), to be close to the product of its marginals. Section 5.2.2 obtains the
corresponding approximate-product guarantee for the simulated classical views UA and UB from the
Barak–Mahmoody learner.


                                                 23
    That classical guarantee is not yet sufficient for our application. The final round of the key
agreement protocol acts on the parties’ residual quantum registers, rather than on the simulator’s
private randomness, and its algorithms may query the same random oracle H in superposition. We
must therefore both transfer the approximate-product guarantee from UA , UB to the parties’ actual
query transcripts and residual quantum states, and preserve the correct correlation of those states
with H. The local channels defined below perform the first task. The conditional-oracle identity in
Equation (4) performs the second. In Section 5.2.3, we combine the two facts to replace the real
conditioned prefix state by independently sampled Alice and Bob views together with a suitably
sampled and reprogrammed oracle.
    For every uP in the support of UP , let TP (uP ) denote the query transcript contained in uP , and
let σP (uP ) be the residual density operator tracked by the simulator after the prefix on that view.
Define the local channel

                           ΦP (|uP ⟩⟨uP |) := |TP (uP )⟩⟨TP (uP )| ⊗ σP (uP ).

Thus UP is only an auxiliary classical view used to invoke the Barak–Mahmoody result; applying
ΦP discards the simulator’s private randomness and keeps only the actual query transcript and
residual quantum state.
    For a complete public prefix transcript m and a partial oracle h, write

                                     Fm,h := {M = m, h ⪯ H}.

Whenever Pr[Fm,h ] > 0, let νm,h
                               AB be the diagonal density operator corresponding to the conditional

distribution of (UA , UB ) given Fm,h , and let νm,h
                                                 A , ν B be its marginals. Define
                                                      m,h

                                      AB
                                     ωm,h := (ΦA ⊗ ΦB )(νm,h
                                                         AB
                                                             ),

and define ωm,h
              A , ωB
                    m,h analogously. Hence ωm,h is a state on TA SA TB SB and contains no simulator
                                               AB

randomness. We note that, since we condition on M = m, the transcript register is fixed to |m⟩⟨m|M .
Let Ωm,h be the real conditional state on HTA SA TB SB given Fm,h , where H stores the random oracle.
Since the simulation is exact, ωm,h
                                  AB is precisely the T S T S -marginal of Ω
                                                          A A B B               m,h .
    Since all oracle queries in the prefix are classical, once M = m, TA = tA , and TB = tB are fixed,
the residual state of Alice and Bob is the same for every oracle consistent with tA and tB . Therefore,
since H is initially uniform, whenever the conditioning event has positive probability,

                             Fm,h , TA = tA , TB = tB       ∼ Unif(H(h, tA , tB )) .               (4)
                                                        
                       H

Moreover, under this conditioning, the residual state is independent of H.

5.2.2   The Barak–Mahmoody Learner
In this section, we recall the relevant results from [BMG17], lifted to our setting. The first lemma
below restates the general result of Barak and Mahmoody for an arbitrary classical protocol.
In particular, their Theorem 4.3 gives an expected query bound and guarantees approximate
independence and lightness after each round. We retain only the guarantees after the last protocol
message, when M is the complete public transcript and h is the learner’s final partial oracle. The
second lemma then applies this result to the exact classical simulation from Section 5.2.1. It fixes
the parameters in terms of η, truncates the learner to obtain a worst-case query bound, aborts if
the truncation threshold is reached or either the independence or lightness guarantee fails, and
transfers the approximate-independence guarantee to the parties’ residual quantum states. It also

                                                   24
characterizes the learner’s output by h ⪯ H. Thus the first lemma isolates the result imported from
Barak and Mahmoody, while the second puts it in the form used for conditioned prefix resampling
in Section 5.2.3. The Barak–Mahmoody statement uses Items 2, 4, and 5 of their Theorem 4.3 and
their definition of self-dependency [BMG17, Definition 4.2 and Theorem 4.3, Items 2, 4, and 5].
Lemma 5.10 (Barak–Mahmoody). Consider a classical two-party random-oracle protocol. Let M
be its complete public transcript and let

                                UP = (RP , M, TP ),          P ∈ {A, B},

be the parties’ classical views, where TP is the oracle query-answer transcript. Suppose Alice and
Bob make at most nA and nB oracle queries, respectively, where nA , nB ≥ 1.
    Let
                          0 < ε1 ≤ ε2 < 1/10,     0 < α, β < 1,    αβ ≥ ε2 .
There is a deterministic classical-query algorithm

                                                ε1 ,ε2 (m)
                                               LH

that takes a complete public transcript m as input and outputs a partial oracle h. For every realized
pair (m, h), let µAB
                  m,h be the conditional distribution of (UA , UB ) given

                                     M = m,          ε1 ,ε2 (m) = h,
                                                    LH

and let µA      B
         m,h , µm,h be its marginals. Then:

 (i) The expected number of oracle queries made by Lε1 ,ε2 is at most
                                                  4nA nB
                                                         .
                                                    ε1

(ii) Except with probability at most 9α over the realized pair (M, h),
                                                                 
                                          M,h , µM,h × µM,h ≤ 9β.
                                     ∆TV µAB     A      B



(iii) Except with probability at most 9α over the realized pair (M, h), every x ∈
                                                                                / Dom(h) satisfies
                                           ε2                                            ε2
              Pr[x ∈ Dom(TA ) | M, h] <       + β,           Pr[x ∈ Dom(TB ) | M, h] <      + β.
                                           nB                                            nA

Proof. We use the deterministic learner from Barak and Mahmoody’s Construction 3.3 with param-
eter ε1 , together with the stopping modification from their Theorem 4.3. Barak and Mahmoody
describe this learner as running alongside the protocol. Its oracle queries do not affect the honest
execution, and Construction 3.3 uses deterministic tie-breaking. Consequently, given the complete
transcript m, we may replay the learner on the successive prefixes of m and make the same oracle
queries. This defines the deterministic algorithm LHε1 ,ε2 (m) with the same final partial oracle and
query complexity.
    With the stopping modification, the learner is an (ε1 , ε2 )-attacker in the sense of Definition 4.1
of Barak and Mahmoody. Item 2 of their Theorem 4.3 gives the expected query bound in Item (i).
Their Definition 4.2 identifies self-dependency with statistical distance from the product of the
marginals. Evaluating Item 4 of Theorem 4.3 after the final protocol message therefore gives
Item (ii). Evaluating Item 5 at the same point gives the two lightness bounds in Item (iii) [BMG17,
Construction 3.3, Definitions 4.1–4.2, and Theorem 4.3, Items 2, 4, and 5].

                                                   25
Lemma 5.11 (Barak–Mahmoody prefix attacker). Let 0 < η < 1/100, and set

                            q̄A := max{1, qA,pre },          q̄B := max{1, qB,pre },

                                                   4 · 105 q̄A q̄B
                                                    &                '
                                         Qlearn :=                 .
                                                         η3

There is a deterministic algorithm LearnBM,H
                                         η     with classical oracle access that, on input a complete
public prefix transcript m, outputs a partial oracle h or aborts. A pair (m, h) is reachable if
                                  h                                       i
                                Pr M = m, LearnBM,H
                                               η    (1λ , m) = h > 0.

It satisfies the following properties.

 (i) It makes at most Qlearn oracle queries and aborts with probability at most η.

(ii) For every reachable pair (m, h),
                                         1 AB     A      B
                                           ω   − ωm,h ⊗ ωm,h   ≤ η.
                                         2 m,h               1


(iii) For every reachable pair (m, h) and every x ∈
                                                  / Dom(h),

                                         Pr[x ∈ Dom(TA ) | Fm,h ] ≤ η.

Moreover, for every reachable pair (m, h) and every oracle H,

                                LearnBM,H
                                     η    (1λ , m) = h         ⇐⇒        h ⪯ H.

Proof. We apply Lemma 5.10 to the exact classical simulation of the prefix with parameters

                                                                 η2                        η
                   nA = q̄A ,     nB = q̄B ,       ε1 = ε2 =         ,        α0 = β0 =       .
                                                                 104                      100
These parameters satisfy α0 β0 = ε2 . The resulting learner makes at most

                                           4q̄A q̄B   4 · 104 q̄A q̄B
                                                    =
                                              ε1           η2
queries in expectation. We truncate this learner after Qlearn queries and abort if the truncation
threshold is reached. By Markov’s inequality, this occurs with probability at most η/10.
   The exceptional events in Items (ii) and (iii) of Lemma 5.10 have total probability at most
18α0 . Since computation is unbounded in our query model, once the learner terminates we may test
whether both conditional guarantees hold and abort otherwise, without making any further oracle
queries. By a union bound, the total abort probability is at most
                                                   η    28η
                                          18α0 +      =     < η.
                                                   10   100
This proves Item (i).
    We next establish the claimed characterization of the learner’s output. Fix a reachable nonabort
pair (m, h). For fixed m, every query and stopping decision of the learner is a deterministic function
of the partial oracle learned so far. Since some execution produces h, every oracle extending h gives

                                                        26
the same answers along that execution and therefore produces the same output. Conversely, if the
learner outputs h, then every pair in h was obtained from an oracle query, and hence h ⪯ H. It
follows that, for every oracle H,

                              LearnBM,H
                                   η    (1λ , m) = h       ⇐⇒       h ⪯ H.

Thus, for every reachable nonabort pair (m, h), conditioning on the learner’s output is equivalent to
conditioning on Fm,h .
   It remains to transfer the guarantees for the simulated classical views to the actual prefix views.
By Item (ii) of Lemma 5.10,
                                                          
                                ∆TV νm,h
                                     AB     A
                                         , νm,h    B
                                                × νm,h ≤ 9β0 < η.

Applying the local channel ΦA ⊗ ΦB and using trace-distance data processing [Wat18, Chapter 3]
proves Item (ii). Finally, Item (iii) of Lemma 5.10 gives, for every x ∈
                                                                       / Dom(h),

                                                       ε2        η2    η
                       Pr[x ∈ Dom(TA ) | Fm,h ] <          + β0 ≤ 4 +     < η,
                                                       q̄B       10   100

which proves Item (iii).

5.2.3   Conditioned Prefix Resampling
The preceding subsection shows that, conditioned on a reachable pair (m, h), the parties’ actual
prefix views are close to the product state ωm,h
                                             A ⊗ ω B . This does not by itself justify sampling the
                                                     m,h
two views independently in the attack, because that statement does not include the random oracle.
Bob’s final algorithm and Eve’s simulation of Alice both query the same oracle in superposition, so
we must also specify how the independently sampled views are coupled to that oracle.
    The conditional-oracle identity in Equation (4) tells us how to do so. After sampling the
two marginal views independently, we first sample a base oracle H0 consistent with h and Bob’s
transcript TB′ , and then reprogram it on Alice’s transcript TA′ . The order is deliberate: the base
oracle is compatible with Bob’s sampled view, while the final oracle H    e = H0 [T ′ ] contains the
                                                                                     A
answers recorded in Alice’s sampled view.
    The proof compares the real and resampled experiments by applying the same channel to two
input states. On the real joint view ωm,h
                                       AB , the channel reconstructs the real conditioned state Ω
                                                                                                 m,h
exactly. On the product of the marginals, it produces the resampled state Ωm,h defined below. The
                                                                            e
trace-distance bound then essentially follows directly from the approximate-independence guarantee
of the preceding subsection. In particular, any later joint quantum computation using the oracle
and the prefix views changes the success probability by at most η when the real conditioned prefix
is replaced by this resampled one.

Lemma 5.12 (Conditioned prefix resampling). Fix a reachable pair (m, h), and consider the
following experiment:

 1. independently prepare
                                (TA′ , SA
                                        ′
                                          ) ← ωm,h
                                               A
                                                   ,       (TB′ , SB′ ) ← ωm,h
                                                                           B
                                                                               ;

 2. sample H0 ← Unif(H(h, TB′ )), and define
                                               e = H0 [T ′ ].
                                               H        A


                                                  27
Let Ω
    e                                 ′ ′   ′ ′
      m,h be the resulting state on HTA SA TB SB , with H holding the sampled function H. Then
                                                                                       e

                                    1
                                       Ωm,h − Ω
                                              e
                                                m,h   ≤ η.
                                    2               1
Proof. We compare the two states by applying the same channel to the real joint prefix view and
to the product of its marginals. Define a channel Rm,h on TA SA TB SB as follows. On classical
transcripts tA , tB , it samples
                                     H0 ← Unif(H(h, tB ))
and attaches the oracle H0 [tA ], while leaving the four input registers unchanged. Every tB in the
support of ωm,h
             B   is consistent with h, so this channel is well defined on both input states considered
below.
    We first apply the channel to the real joint prefix view. In this case, tA and tB are mutually
consistent, and H0 [tA ] is uniform over H(h, tA , tB ). By (4), this is precisely the conditional
distribution of the real oracle given the two query transcripts. Moreover, the residual state is
independent of the unobserved oracle values under this conditioning. Therefore,
                                           Rm,h (ωm,h
                                                  AB
                                                      ) = Ωm,h .
Applying the same channel to the product of the two marginal views gives, by the definition of the
resampling experiment,
                                  Rm,h (ωm,h
                                         A       B
                                             ⊗ ωm,h )=Ωe
                                                         m,h .
Combining these two identities with trace-distance data processing and Lemma 5.11, we obtain
                      1                     1 AB
                         Ωm,h − Ω e
                                    m,h   ≤    ω        A
                                                    − ωm,h     B
                                                           ⊗ ωm,h     ≤ η.
                      2                 1   2 m,h                   1




5.2.4   The Multi-Round attacker
In this section we conclude the proof by defining the attacker.
Definition 5.13 (Multi-round reprogramming attack). Fix 0 < η < 1/100. The attacker Eη acts as
follows. During the classical prefix, Eve runs the online attacker LearnBM,H
                                                                        η     of Lemma 5.11. If the
attacker aborts, Eve records an abort flag. Otherwise, after the last classical message Eve has the
full public transcript m and a partial oracle h. She prepares an independent Alice prefix view
                           VA′ = (WA′ , SA
                                         ′
                                           ) ← ωm,h
                                                A
                                                    ,        TA′ := TA (WA′ ).
After intercepting Bob’s final message register Ψ, Eve outputs ⊥ if the attacker aborted. Otherwise
she runs
                                             H[T ′ ]
                                    K ∗ ← Afin A (1λ , m, SA
                                                           ′
                                                             , Ψ)
and outputs K ∗ .
Theorem 5.14 (Multi-round quantitative attack). Let Πmr satisfy Definition 3.9, and let α =
αΠmr (λ). For every 0 < η < 1/100, the attacker of Definition 5.13 satisfies
                                                                       √
                          AdvIntKR,mr
                              Πmr ,Eη (λ) ≥ α − 5η − 2(2qB,q + qA,fin ) η.

It makes at most
                               4 · 105 max{1, qA,pre } max{1, qB,pre }
                           &                                         '
                                                                       + qA,fin
                                                η3
random-oracle queries. The first term consists only of classical queries. There is no explicit
dependence on the number of prefix rounds beyond the two parties’ total prefix-query bounds.

                                                    28
Proof. We proceed via a hybrid argument. Hybrid J0 is the honest execution. In J1 , . . . , J5 , the
online attacker runs alongside the real classical prefix and an abort counts as failure. Unless stated
otherwise, these hybrids induce the same distribution on the public transcript M and the attacker’s
output h. We say that Ji succeeds when its two recorded keys agree and are not ⊥. Throughout,
VP = (WP , SP ) denotes the extended classical-quantum prefix view defined above. Changes from
one hybrid to the next are shown in color.
Multi-round hybrid J0 (real execution)
  1. Sample H0 ← H and run the honest classical prefix, obtaining (M (0) , VA,0 , VB,0 ).
  2. Run (Ψ0 , KB,0 ) ← BqH0 (1λ , M (0) , SB,0 ).

  3. Run KA,0 ← AH
                 fin (1 , M
                    0  λ    (0) , S
                                   A,0 , Ψ0 ).

Thus
                                           Pr[J0 succeeds] = α.

Multi-round hybrid J1
  1. Sample H1 ← H, and run the honest classical prefix using H1 while activating LearnBM,H η
                                                                                              1


     after every message. Obtain (M , VA,1 , VB,1 , h1 ), and abort if the attacker aborts.
                                   (1)


  2. Run (Ψ1 , KB,1 ) ← BqH1 (1λ , M (1) , SB,1 ), followed by KA,1 ← AH
                                                                       fin (1 , M
                                                                          1  λ    (1) , S
                                                                                         A,1 , Ψ1 ).

Running the attacker alongside the protocol does not change the honest execution. The only
difference is that J1 counts a attacker abort as failure. Item (i) of Lemma 5.11 gives

                                |Pr[J0 succeeds] − Pr[J1 succeeds]| ≤ η.                               (5)

Multi-round hybrid J2
  1. Run the real prefix and attacker as in J1 , retaining (M (2) , h2 ) and discarding the original
     oracle and prefix views.
  2. Independently prepare
                                         ′       ′      ′
                                        VA,2 = (WA,2 , SA,2 ) ← ωM
                                                                 A
                                                                   (2) ,h ,
                                                                         2

                                          ′       ′      ′
                                         VB,2 = (WB,2 , SB,2 ) ← ωM
                                                                  B
                                                                    (2) ,h .
                                                                          2

       Set TA,2
            ′   = TA (WA,2
                       ′ ) and T ′
                                B,2 = TB (WB,2 ).
                                           ′


  3. Sample H
            b 2 ← Unif(H(h2 , T ′ )) and set H
                               B,2
                                             e2 = H
                                                  b 2 [T ′ ].
                                                        A,2

  4. Run (Ψ2 , KB,2 ) ← BqH (1 , M (2) , SB,2
                          e2 λ            ′ ).


  5. Run K2∗ ← AH
                fin (1 , M
                   2  λ    (2) , S ′ , Ψ ).
                     e
                                  A,2   2

   Condition on a reachable pair (m, h). By the output characterization in Lemma 5.11, the oracle
and prefix views in J1 have joint state Ωm,h , while the resampled objects in J2 have state Ω
                                                                                            e
                                                                                              m,h .
Applying Lemma 5.12 and trace-distance data processing through the final algorithms [Wat18,
Chapter 3] shows that, for every reachable nonabort pair,

            |Pr[J1 succeeds | M = m, h1 = h] − Pr[J2 succeeds | M = m, h2 = h]| ≤ 2η.


                                                     29
Let π(m, h) be the common subprobability mass of nonabort prefix executions in the two hybrids
that output (M, h) = (m, h). Since success is defined to be false on abort, only these executions
contribute. Define

                  si (m, h) := Pr[Ji succeeds | M (i) = m, hi = h]            (i ∈ {1, 2}).

The triangle inequality gives

                       |Pr[J1 succeeds] − Pr[J2 succeeds]|
                                                π(m, h) |s1 (m, h) − s2 (m, h)| ≤ 2η.
                                     X
                            ≤
                                (m,h)∈Supp(π)

In particular,
                                |Pr[J1 succeeds] − Pr[J2 succeeds]| ≤ 2η.                            (6)

Multi-round hybrid J3
  1. Run the real prefix and attacker as in J1 , retain (M (3) , h3 ), discard the original oracle and
     prefix views, and independently prepare
                   ′       ′      ′                             ′       ′      ′
                  VA,3 = (WA,3 , SA,3 ) ← ωM
                                           A
                                             (3) ,h ,
                                                   3
                                                               VB,3 = (WB,3 , SB,3 ) ← ωM
                                                                                        B
                                                                                          (3) ,h ,
                                                                                                3


      set TA,3
           ′   = TA (WA,3
                      ′ ) and T ′
                               B,3 = TB (WB,3 ), and sample H3 ← Unif(H(h3 , TB,3 )).
                                          ′                 b                 ′


  2. Set H
         e3 = H
              b 3 [T ′ ].
                    A,3

  3. Run (Ψ3 , KB,3 ) ← BqH (1 , M (3) , SB,3
                          b3 λ            ′ ).


  4. Run K3∗ ← AH
                fin (1 , M
                   3  λ    (3) , S ′ , Ψ ).
                   e
                                  A,3   3


Lemma 5.15 (J2 to J3 ).
                                                                       √
                            |Pr[J2 succeeds] − Pr[J3 succeeds]| ≤ 2qB,q η.

Proof. Condition on a reachable pair (m, h) and on a value WB′ = wB′ in the support of the
classical-history marginal of ωm,h
                                B . Prepare S ′ in the corresponding conditional state and set
                                                B
TB = TB (wB ). For the random reprogramming game of Katz and Sela [KS24, Lemma 3], sample
  ′         ′

Hb ← Unif(H(h, T ′ )) and set F0 = H.
                                   b The randomized classical procedure Cm,h samples the history
                  B
WA from the classical marginal of ωm,h
    ′                               A , sets T ′ = T (W ′ ), and returns
                                              A     A  A

                                         R = TA′ Dom(T ′ )\Dom(h) .
                                                           A


Given challenge access to Fb , run

                                       (Ψ, KB ) ← BqFb (1λ , m, SB′ ).

After challenge access is removed, the coins of Cm,h reveal WA′ . Prepare SA
                                                                           ′ in the corresponding

conditional state specified by ωm,h , and run
                                A


                                                 b ′]
                                                 H[T
                                      K ∗ ← Afin A (1λ , m, SA
                                                             ′
                                                               , Ψ).


                                                      30
The distinguisher outputs 1 iff K ∗ = KB ̸= ⊥.
   Every sampled Alice transcript is consistent with h, so F1 = H[R] b     = H[T
                                                                               b ′ ]. Thus b = 1
                                                                                  A
reproduces J2 and b = 0 reproduces J3 , conditioned on (M, h, WB ) = (m, h, wB ). Only Bob queries
                                                               ′             ′

the challenge oracle. Moreover, by Lemma 5.11, for every x,

                                              0,                     x ∈ Dom(h),
                                            (
                     Pr[x ∈ Dom(R)] ≤
                                              Pr[x ∈ Dom(TA′ )] ≤ η, x ∈
                                                                       / Dom(h).

Thus Lemma 3.4 bounds the absolute difference between the two conditional success probabilities by
     √
2qB,q η for every (m, h, wB′ ) in the support of the shared conditioning data. If π(m, h, wB′ ) denotes
the common subprobability mass of that data on nonabort executions of J2 and J3 , define

          si (m, h, wB′ ) := Pr[Ji succeeds | M (i) = m, hi = h, WB,i
                                                                  ′
                                                                      = wB′ ]              (i ∈ {2, 3}).

Because success is defined to be false on abort,

             Pr[Ji succeeds] =                         π(m, h, wB′ )si (m, h, wB′ )     (i ∈ {2, 3}).
                                         X
                                         ′ )∈Supp(π)
                                   (m,h,wB

The triangle inequality gives

  |Pr[J2 succeeds] − Pr[J3 succeeds]| ≤                           π(m, h, wB′ ) s2 (m, h, wB′ ) − s3 (m, h, wB′ )
                                                       X
                                                   ′ )∈Supp(π)
                                             (m,h,wB
                                                 √
                                          ≤ 2qB,q η.



Multi-round hybrid J4
   1. Run the real prefix and attacker as in J1 , retain (M (4) , h4 ), discard the original oracle and
      prefix views, and independently prepare
                                                                  ′       ′      ′
                     E
                    VA,4 = (WA,4
                             E      E
                                 , SA,4 ) ← ωM
                                             A
                                               (4) ,h ,
                                                     4
                                                                 VB,4 = (WB,4 , SB,4 ) ← ωM
                                                                                          B
                                                                                            (4) ,h ,
                                                                                                  4


      set TA,4
           E = T (W E ) and T ′
                A  A,4       B,4 = TB (WB,4 ), and sample H4 ← Unif(H(h4 , TB,4 )).
                                        ′                 b                 ′


   2. Independently prepare the Alice view that determines Bob’s oracle,
                                          B
                                         VA,4 = (WA,4
                                                  B      B
                                                      , SA,4 ) ← ωM
                                                                  A
                                                                    (4) ,h ,
                                                                          4


      and set TA,4
               B = T (W B ). Set
                    A  A,4

                                      H4B = H
                                            b 4 [T B ],
                                                  A,4           H4E = H4B [TA,4
                                                                            E
                                                                                ].


                              HB
   3. Run (Ψ4 , KB,4 ) ← Bq 4 (1λ , M (4) , SB,4
                                             ′ ).

                     HE
   4. Run K4∗ ← Afin4 (1λ , M (4) , SA,4
                                     E , Ψ ).
                                          4


Lemma 5.16 (J3 to J4 ).
                                                                                 √
                          |Pr[J3 succeeds] − Pr[J4 succeeds]| ≤ 2(qB,q + qA,fin ) η.

                                                         31
Proof. Condition on a reachable pair (m, h) and on a value WB′ = wB′ in the support of the classical-
history marginal of ωm,h
                     B . Prepare S ′ in the corresponding conditional state, and write T ′ = T (w ′ ).
                                   B                                                    B     B   B
Independently prepare Eve’s Alice view VAE = (WAE , SA  E ) ← ω A , and set T E = T (W E ). Sample
                                                               m,h            A    A     A
Hb ← Unif(H(h, T ′ )), output F0 = H,
                                   b and let the randomized classical procedure Cm,h independently
                  B
sample WAB from the classical marginal of ωm,h
                                             A , set T B = T (W B ), and return
                                                      A      A   A

                                        R = TAB Dom(T B )\Dom(h) .
                                                            A


Given challenge access to Fb , run Bob’s final algorithm with Fb and Alice’s final algorithm with
Fb [TAE ]. A query to Fb [TAE ] is implemented with one query to Fb by reversibly testing membership
in the known transcript and supplying the recorded answer on member inputs. The total number of
challenge queries is therefore at most qB,q + qA,fin .
    After challenge access is removed, the revealed coins of Cm,h determine WAB . The reduction
can then prepare the corresponding register SA     B . This register is unused in the b = 0 case and

may be discarded; in the b = 1 case it completes the auxiliary classical-quantum view sampled
in J4 . Every sampled Alice transcript is consistent with h. Therefore, for b = 0 the experiment
is J3 after discarding that unused view, while for b = 1, F1 = H[T    b B ] and the experiment is J4 .
                                                                         A
As in the preceding proof, each point belongs to the reprogramming set with probability at most
η: points in Dom(h) are excluded, and Item (iii) of Lemma 5.11 applies everywhere else. The
random reprogramming lemma of Katz and Sela [KS24, Lemma 3] therefore bounds the absolute
difference between the conditional success probabilities of J3 and J4 , given (M, h, WB′ ) = (m, h, wB′ ),
                    √
by 2(qB,q + qA,fin ) η. Let π(m, h, wB′ ) denote the common subprobability of these conditioning data
in the two hybrids, and define

          si (m, h, wB′ ) := Pr[Ji succeeds | M (i) = m, hi = h, WB,i
                                                                  ′
                                                                      = wB′ ]             (i ∈ {3, 4}).

The law of total probability and the triangle inequality yield

       |Pr[J3 succeeds] − Pr[J4 succeeds]| ≤                π(m, h, wB′ ) s3 (m, h, wB′ ) − s4 (m, h, wB′ )
                                                  X
                                                     ′
                                                m,h,wB
                                                                 √
                                              ≤ 2(qB,q + qA,fin ) η.

Again, the omitted abort branch has success probability zero in both hybrids.

Multi-round hybrid J5 (the real interception attack)
   1. Sample H5 ← H, and run the honest classical prefix together with the online attacker. Obtain

                                             (M (5) , h5 , VA,5 , VB,5 ),

      and abort if the attacker aborts.
   2. Independently prepare Eve’s Alice prefix view
                                        ′       ′      ′
                                       VA,5 = (WA,5 , SA,5 ) ← ωM
                                                                A
                                                                  (5) ,h ,
                                                                        5


      and set TA,5
               ′   = TA (WA,5
                          ′ ).


   3. Run (Ψ5 , KB,5 ) ← BqH5 (1λ , M (5) , SB,5 ), and transfer Ψ5 to Eve.
   4. Run                                          ′
                                              H5 [TA,5 ]
                                     K5∗ ← Afin                           ′
                                                           (1λ , M (5) , SA,5 , Ψ5 ).

                                                     32
   Fix a reachable pair (m, h). The tuple
                                                          ′
                                            H4B , VA,4
                                                   B            
                                                       , VB,4

in J4 has exactly the distribution of the conditioned prefix-resampling experiment from Lemma 5.12.
Eve’s second Alice view VA,4 E is independent in both hybrids. Hence, by Lemma 5.12 and trace-

distance data processing [Wat18, Chapter 3], for every reachable nonabort pair (m, h),

         Pr[J4 succeeds | M (4) = m, h4 = h] − Pr[J5 succeeds | M (5) = m, h5 = h] ≤ 2η.

Let π(m, h) be the common probability that the prefix and attacker in the two hybrids output
(m, h) without aborting, and define

                  si (m, h) := Pr[Ji succeeds | M (i) = m, hi = h]                (i ∈ {4, 5}).

The abort branch contributes zero, so the law of total probability and the triangle inequality give

           |Pr[J4 succeeds] − Pr[J5 succeeds]| ≤          π(m, h) |s4 (m, h) − s5 (m, h)| ≤ 2η.
                                                    X

                                                    m,h

Thus
                             |Pr[J4 succeeds] − Pr[J5 succeeds]| ≤ 2η.                            (7)
   Hybrid J5 is precisely IntKRmr
                               Πmr ,Eη . Combining (5), (6), Lemmas 5.15 and 5.16, and (7) gives

                                                                √
                          AdvIntKR,mr
                             Πmr ,Eη (λ) ≥ α − η − 2η − 2qB,q η
                                                              √
                                           − 2(qB,q + qA,fin ) η − 2η
                                                                      √
                                         = α − 5η − 2(2qB,q + qA,fin ) η.

The query bound follows directly from Lemma 5.11 and Definition 5.13.

Corollary 5.17 (Polynomial-query multi-round impossibility). Let Πmr satisfy Definition 3.9, let
α = αΠmr (λ) > 0, and define
                                                                                        2
                                                                                 α
                                                                           
                       Qfin := max{1, 2qB,q + qA,fin },             η :=                     .
                                                                               16Qfin

Then the attacker of Theorem 5.14 succeeds with probability greater than α/2 and makes

                            max{1, qA,pre } max{1, qB,pre }Q6fin
                                                                                    !
                          O                                      + qA,fin
                                            α6

queries. It follows that any family of such protocols with inverse-polynomial valid agreement and
honest query complexity bounded by poly(λ) is insecure against a computationally unbounded quantum
attacker making at most poly(λ) oracle queries. The query bound depends on the number of prefix
rounds only through the total honest prefix-query bounds.
                                                                                         √
Proof. The choice of η satisfies η ≤ 1/256 < 1/100, and the reprogramming loss is 2Qfin η = α/8.
Since Qfin ≥ 1 and 0 < α ≤ 1, 5η ≤ 5α/256. Thus the success lower bound is strictly greater than
α/2. Substituting 1/η 3 = (16Qfin /α)6 gives the query bound.



                                                   33
6      Applications
In this section, we state the two main applications of our results.
Definition 6.1 (Fully classical Alice and classical reply). A protocol from Definition 3.6 has fully
classical Alice and a classical reply if:
 1. A1 is a probabilistic classical oracle algorithm and its residual state is classical;

 2. Bob’s message Ψ is classical; and

 3. A2 is a probabilistic classical algorithm with classical oracle access.
Bob may still perform quantum computation and make quantum random-oracle queries.
Corollary 6.2 (Classical eavesdropping attack). For a protocol with fully classical Alice and a
classical reply, the attacker in Theorem 5.2 is a computationally unbounded classical attacker with
classical random-oracle access. Therefore the conclusions of Corollaries 5.8 and 5.9 hold against
classical eavesdroppers. Because the reply is classical, Eve can copy it and forward it to Alice; the
attack is therefore passive.
Proof. Under the stated assumptions, ωm1 ,h is an ordinary classical distribution over Alice’s transcript
and residual classical state. The attacker is classical, exact conditional sampling is classical, the
                                                          H[T ′ ]
reply can be stored classically, and the simulation of A2 A uses only classical oracle queries. No
quantum operation remains in Eve’s algorithm.

Theorem 6.3 (Attack on QPKE with classical-query key generation). Let Σ satisfy Definition 3.11.
For every 0 < δ < 1, there is a computationally unbounded quantum IND-CPA attacker Dδ making
at most                                  l         m
                                          qGen /δ 2 + qDec
random-oracle queries and satisfying
                                                  1                       √
                          AdvIND-CPA (λ) ≥ αΣ −     − δ − 2(2qEnc + qDec ) δ.
                             Σ,Dδ
                                                  2
In particular, if αΣ (λ) > 0, let
                                                                               2
                                                                          αΣ
                                                                     
                           QΣ := max{1, 2qEnc + qDec },       δ :=                  .
                                                                         8QΣ
Then
                                                        47     1
                                     AdvIND-CPA (λ) ≥      αΣ − ,
                                        Σ,Dδ
                                                        64     2
and Dδ makes at most                   l                  m
                                        4096qGen Q4Σ /αΣ
                                                       4
                                                         + qDec
random-oracle queries. Consequently, a scheme with negligible correctness error and honest query
complexity bounded by poly(λ) is not query-bounded IND-CPA secure: for every polynomial p, an
attacker making at most poly(λ) queries achieves advantage at least 1/2 − 1/p(λ) − negl(λ), for every
message-length function µ bounded above by a polynomial in λ. Encryption, decryption, and the
ciphertext may all be quantum. For µ(λ) = 1, this conclusion applies in particular to the imperfectly
correct PKE obtained from two-round OSP by Bartusek and Khurana [BK25, Theorem 7.9], whenever
the OSP sender’s random-oracle queries are classical.

                                                   34
Proof. Define a key-agreement protocol ΠΣ from Σ as follows. Alice’s first stage runs

                                             (pk, sk) ← GenH (1λ )

and outputs (TGen , M1 , SA ) = (TGen , pk, sk). On input pk, Bob fixes the two distinct messages

                                       m0 := 0µ(λ) ,        m1 := 0µ(λ)−1 1,

samples b ← {0, 1}, runs C ← EncH (1λ , pk, mb ), sends C, and sets KB = b. Alice’s final stage
computes mb ← DecH (1λ , sk, C) and outputs
                                                     
                                                     0     if m
                                                               b = m0 ,
                                                     
                                                     
                                           KA :=       1    if m
                                                               b = m1 ,
                                                     
                                                     ⊥     otherwise.
                                                     


For b ∈ {0, 1}, let

                      pb := Pr m
                               b = mb :
                                 

                                  H ← Hλ , (pk, sk) ← GenH (1λ ),
                                  Cb ← EncH (1λ , pk, mb ), m
                                                            b ← DecH (1λ , sk, Cb ) .
                                                                                     


Therefore
                                                                     p0 + p1
               qA,1 = qGen ,         qB = qEnc ,       qA,2 = qDec ,      αΠΣ =
                                                                             ≥ αΣ ,
                                                                        2
where the inequality follows from the definition of the minimum correct-decryption probability in
Definition 3.11.
   This is the standard reduction from QPKE to key agreement used in prior QROM impossibility
work [BEGVV24, LLLL24]. Apply Theorem 5.2 to obtain the intercepting attacker Eδ = (E1 , E2 ).
The IND-CPA attacker Dδ has its first stage run

                                               ZD ← E1H (1λ , pk)

and returns (ZD , m0 , m1 ). Its second stage, upon receiving the challenge ciphertext register C, runs
K ∗ ← E2H (1λ , ZD , C) and outputs K ∗ when K ∗ ∈ {0, 1}, or an independent uniform bit otherwise.
Thus its success probability satisfies

                           Pr[INDΣ,Dδ (1λ ) = 1] ≥ Pr[IntKRΠΣ ,Eδ (1λ ) = 1].

The claimed advantage and query bound follow from Theorem 5.2, since
                                                                               1
                               AdvIND-CPA (λ) ≥ Pr[INDΣ,Dδ (1λ ) = 1] −
                                  Σ,Dδ
                                                                               2
                                                                                1
                                                   ≥ Pr[IntKRΠΣ ,Eδ (1λ ) = 1] − .
                                                                                2
   For the stated parameter choice,
                                            √    αΣ                    αΣ
                                         2QΣ δ =    ,           δ≤        ,
                                                  4                    64
which gives the factor 47/64; the query bound follows by substituting 1/δ 2 = 4096Q4Σ /αΣ     4. A

quantum challenge ciphertext is transferred to the attacker’s second stage, so the reduction does
not copy it. If Gen and Dec are classical algorithms and the ciphertext is classical, Corollary 6.2
moreover yields a classical attack.

                                                           35
References
[AA14]      Scott Aaronson and Andris Ambainis. The need for structure in quantum speedups.
            Theory of Computing, 10:133–166, 2014.

[ABKM22]    Gorjan Alagic, Chen Bai, Jonathan Katz, and Christian Majenz. Post-quantum security
            of the Even–Mansour cipher. In Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2022, Part
            III, volume 13277 of LNCS, pages 458–487. Springer, 2022.

[ACC+ 22]   Per Austrin, Hao Chung, Kai-Min Chung, Shiuan Fu, Yao-Ting Lin, and Mohammad
            Mahmoody. On the impossibility of key agreements from quantum random oracles.
            In Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2022, Part II, volume 13508 of LNCS, pages
            165–194. Springer, 2022.

[BDF+ 11]   Dan Boneh, Özgür Dagdelen, Marc Fischlin, Anja Lehmann, Christian Schaffner, and
            Mark Zhandry. Random oracles in a quantum world. In Advances in Cryptology –
            ASIACRYPT 2011, volume 7073 of LNCS, pages 41–69. Springer, 2011.

[BEGVV24] Samuel Bouaziz-Ermann, Alex B. Grilo, Damien Vergnaud, and Quoc-Huy Vu. Towards
          the impossibility of quantum public key encryption with classical keys from one-way
          functions. Communications in Cryptology, 1(1), 2024. arXiv:2311.03512.

[BHK+ 19]   Gilles Brassard, Peter Høyer, Kassem Kalach, Marc Kaplan, Sophie Laplante, and
            Louis Salvail. Key establishment à la merkle in a quantum world. Journal of Cryptology,
            32(3):601–634, Jul 2019.

[BK25]      James Bartusek and Dakshita Khurana. On the power of oblivious state preparation. In
            Yael Tauman Kalai and Seny F. Kamara, editors, Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO
            2025, pages 575–607, Cham, 2025. Springer Nature Switzerland.

[BMG17]     Boaz Barak and Mohammad Mahmoody-Ghidary. Merkle’s key agreement protocol is
            optimal: An O(n2 )-query attack on any key exchange from a random oracle. Journal
            of Cryptology, 30:699–734, 2017. Full version: arXiv:0801.3669.

[BS08]      Gilles Brassard and Louis Salvail. Quantum merkle puzzles. In Proceedings of the 2nd
            International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies, pages 76–79.
            IEEE Computer Society, 2008.

[HY18]      Akinori Hosoyamada and Takashi Yamakawa. Finding collisions in a quantum world:
            Quantum black-box separation of collision-resistance and one-wayness. Cryptology
            ePrint Archive, Paper 2018/1066, 2018.

[IR89]      Russell Impagliazzo and Steven Rudich. Limits on the provable consequences of one-
            way permutations. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
            Computing, pages 44–61. ACM, 1989.

[KS24]      Jonathan Katz and Ben Sela. A quantum “lifting theorem” for constructions of
            pseudorandom generators from random oracles. arXiv:2401.14319, 2024.

[LLLL24]    Longcheng Li, Qian Li, Xingjian Li, and Qipeng Liu. How (not) to build quantum
            PKE in minicrypt. In Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2024, volume 14926 of
            LNCS, pages 152–183. Springer, 2024.


                                               36
[LLLL25]    Longcheng Li, Qian Li, Xingjian Li, and Qipeng Liu. Toward the impossibility of perfect
            complete quantum PKE from OWFs. In 16th Innovations in Theoretical Computer
            Science Conference (ITCS 2025), volume 325 of LIPIcs, pages 71:1–71:16. Schloss
            Dagstuhl, 2025.

[LLLL26a]   Longcheng Li, Qian Li, Xingjian Li, and Qipeng Liu. Cryptomania v.s. minicrypt in a
            quantum world, 2026. To appear in Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2026. IACR
            ePrint 2025/639.

[LLLL26b]   Longcheng Li, Qian Li, Xingjian Li, and Qipeng Liu. Impossibility of perfectly complete
            many-round key agreement in the QROM. arXiv:2608.03824, 2026.

[Mer78]     Ralph C. Merkle. Secure communications over insecure channels. Communications of
            the ACM, 21(4):294–299, 1978.

[Wat18]     John Watrous. The Theory of Quantum Information. Cambridge University Press,
            2018.




                                               37
