                                                   Galactic Science with Ultra-High Angular
                                                           Resolution X-ray Imaging
                                                          On Behalf of Working Group 3 of the Hi-ReX SAG

                                               Paul A. Draghis1,* , Jeremy Hare2,3,4,† , Mayura Balakrishnan5,6 , Poshak Gandhi7 , Tyler
                                               Holland-Ashford2 , Margarita Karovska8 , Thomas Maccarone9 , Herman L. Marshall1 ,
                                               Mark Reynolds10,11 , Malgosia Sobolewska8 , Ryan Tanner2,3
                                               Affiliations: 1 MIT Kavli Institute for Astrophysics and Space Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
arXiv:2608.28746v1 [astro-ph.HE] 28 Aug 2026




                                               ogy, 70 Vassar St, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA
                                               2
                                                 NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Astrophysics Science Division, Greenbelt, MD, 20771, USA
                                               3
                                                 The Catholic University of America, 620 Michigan Ave., N.E. Washington, DC, 20064, USA
                                               4
                                                 Center for Research and Exploration in Space Science and Technology, NASA/GSFC, Greenbelt, MD,
                                               20771, USA
                                               5
                                                 Department of Physics, McGill University, 3600 Rue University, Montréal, Québec, H3A 2T8, Canada
                                               6
                                                 Trottier Space Institute at McGill, 3550 Rue University, Montréal, Québec, H3A 2A7, Canada
                                               7
                                                 School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton, University Road, Southampton SO17 1BJ,
                                               UK
                                               8
                                                 Center for Astrophysics | Harvard & Smithsonian, 60 Garden St., Cambridge, MA, 02138, USA
                                               9
                                                 Department of Physics & Astronomy, Texas Tech University, Box 41051, Lubbock, TX, 79409, USA
                                               10
                                                  Department of Astronomy, Ohio State University, 140 West 18th Ave., Columbus, OH, 43210, USA
                                               11
                                                  Center for Cosmology and AstroParticle Physics (CCAPP), Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43210,
                                               USA
                                               Corresponding authors email: * pdraghis@mit.edu, † jeremy.hare@nasa.gov

                                                                                                Abstract
                                                    Milli- to micro-arcsecond X-ray imaging will open a new observational regime for Galactic as-
                                                    trophysics by resolving physical scales that are inaccessible to current X-ray observatories. This
                                                    white paper highlights the science enabled by such capabilities across four broad questions: how
                                                    particles are accelerated, how stars die, how accretion is fueled, and what populations of X-
                                                    ray sources inhabit the Galaxy. Ultra-high angular resolution will enable many new studies,
                                                    such as resolving shocks and jets, measuring proper motions, parallaxes, and binary orbits, and
                                                    providing secure multiwavelength counterpart identifications in crowded environments such as
                                                    the Galactic Center and globular clusters. Combined with high-time-resolution observations,
                                                    these measurements will connect variability and transient events to the physical structures in
                                                    which they originate, while coordination with gravitational-wave, neutrino, γ-ray, radio, opti-
                                                    cal, and infrared facilities will provide spatial information needed to identify and characterize
                                                    multi-messenger sources. In addition to defining the science cases, this paper presents a curated
                                                    list of compelling targets spanning various angular resolutions and outlines the complementary
                                                    specifications necessary to maximize the scientific outcome. Accomplishing these science goals
                                                    will require an instrument with high angular resolution, precise astrometry, substantial collecting
                                                    area, sufficient spectral and timing resolution, and high dynamic range imaging capabilities.


                                               1    Introduction
                                               X-ray observations provide a uniquely direct view of the hottest and most energetic components of astro-
                                               physical systems, including accretion flows onto compact objects, relativistic jets, shock-heated plasma, and
                                               populations of high-energy particles. However, many of the physical scales on which these processes origi-
                                               nate remain far below the angular resolution of current X-ray observatories. As a result, phenomena that
                                               are spatially resolved at optical, infrared, or radio wavelengths are often observed in X-rays only through
                                               their integrated spectra and variability. Advancing X-ray imaging from the sub-arcsecond regime into the


                                                                                                    1
milli- to micro-arcsecond regime would therefore provide spatial information to problems that are currently
constrained primarily through indirect measurements, allowing the locations, geometries, and motions of
X-ray-emitting structures to be measured directly.
    The high angular resolution study of Galactic sources would unlock unique insights into the fundamental
mechanisms that govern the Universe. The Milky Way provides an especially powerful laboratory as its
proximity allows physical scales ranging from supernova remnant shocks to compact-binary separations, and
to the environments in the immediate vicinity of black holes, to be mapped at angular scales that would
remain inaccessible in extragalactic systems. At the same time, precise X-ray astrometry would extend these
capabilities beyond imaging alone, enabling measurements of proper motions, parallaxes, and orbital motion
for sources that may be obscured, crowded, or undetectable at other wavelengths. In particular, this work
highlights how improved imaging and astrometric capabilities can address four broad questions:

               1. How are particles accelerated? (Section 2)
               2. How do stars die? (Section 3)

               3. How is accretion fueled? (Section 4)
               4. What are the populations of X-ray sources? (Section 5)

    Figure 1 displays the broad range of physical and angular scales relevant to these science cases. The hori-
zontal bands indicate representative angular-resolution milestones of 1 mas, 100 µas, and 10 µas, illustrating
that different stages in the development of ultra-high-resolution X-ray imaging would already open distinct
regions of discovery space. Rather than requiring the ultimate angular resolution for every application, many
of the science cases considered below become progressively accessible as the resolution improves. The follow-
ing sections connect these angular scales to specific Galactic sources and physical processes, demonstrating
both the breadth of the science enabled and the complementary requirements on astrometric precision,
collecting area, energy and time resolution, and imaging dynamic range.

                                   Chandra                                             Cas A (3.1)
                          100 Lynx ∼ 0.500 Crab Nebula (2.3, 3.1)
Angular scale [arcsec]




                                       100 km s −1                                                                                        Sgr A* 105 rg
                                                     in 5 yr
                              −1
                         10            100 km s −1
                                                                                                                          PSR J1101-6101 (2.3)
                                                                                                                                                                     SN 1987A (3.1)
                                       10 km s −1 in 1 yr                                                                                                                           shock filaments
                                                  in 5 yr       PSR B1259-63 (3.2)
                         10−2          10 km s −1
                                                  in 1 yr                                                           SS 433 1 day (2.4)
                                     1 AU
                                                                                                                                                                                    ejecta filaments
                              −3   1 mas
                         10                             1 mas parallax                   SS 433 10 ks                                     Sgr A* 100 rg                             shock precursors (2.1)
                                                                                                                                                                ejecta knots
                                   100 µas
                         10−4                                        Cyg X-1 (4.3)
                                                                                          SS 433 1 ks                                        100 µas parallax
                                                                                                                        Galactic center




                                                                                                                                                                               LMC ∼ 50 kpc
                                                                                                                        (2.2, 4.2, 5.1)




                                   10 µas
                                                                                                     47 Tuc (5.3)




                              −5
                         10                     R
                                                                              V404 Cyg (4.3)
                                                                                                                                                                                              10 µas parallax
                              −6
                         10
                                                               103                                                                    104                                                          105
                                                                                                      Distance [pc]
Figure 1: Representative physical and angular scales for the Galactic science cases discussed in this work.
Source distance is shown along the horizontal axis and angular scale along the vertical axis, with horizon-
tal bands marking the approximate resolution regimes of 1 mas, 100 µas, and 10 µas. Individual markers
indicate characteristic scales for selected sources and phenomena, including compact-binary separations,
supernova-remnant structures, pulsar-wind features, jet ejecta, Galactic-center accretion scales, and astro-
metric measurements such as parallaxes and proper motions. The figure illustrates how progressively finer
angular resolution opens access to qualitatively different science, from resolving extended shocks and ejecta
to probing compact-binary and black-hole environments directly. The numbers next to certain markers in-
dicate the sections where these science cases are discussed.




                                                                                                                    2
2                       How are Particles Accelerated?
2.1                     Supernova Remnants (SNRs)
SNRs are theorized to be responsible for cosmic ray acceleration up to the “knee” at ∼3 PeV (see e.g., [147]
for a review). In order for these particles to be accelerated, the ambient ISM magnetic field of ∼3 µG must
be amplified more than the factor of ≲4 from shock compression. Studies of the thin synchrotron-emitting
filaments along the edges of SNRs have supported magnetic field amplification up to 50–500 µG in MW
SNRs. The thin widths of these filaments necessitates a rapid dropoff in downstream synchrotron emission
from either electron energy losses or magnetic field damping, and the diffusive shock acceleration process
requires a precursor shock from upstream accelerated particles rebounding back back towards the shock
front. However, evidence of these phenomena and their origins have yet to be conclusively found.
    Downstream: [124] found that filament widths in SN 1006 depended on photon energy, ruling out
magnetic damping models. However, [145] found evidence consistent with either loss-limited or magnetic
damping models in Tycho’s SNR (see Figure 2). Additionally, the magnetic damping models allowed much
lower magnetic fields immediately downstream of the shock: only ∼10× that of typical galactic field values.
As typical SNR filament widths are 0.01–0.1 pc upstream and 0.06–0.4 pc downstream (corresponding to
∼0.5”–20” for Galactic SNRs; [5]), a moderate angular resolution of ≲0.1” will be sufficient to robustly
measure the filament width dependence on energy and explain the rapid dropoff in downstream synchrotron
emission in SNRs.
    Upstream: Diffusive shock acceleration requires that accelerated particles spend time ahead of the shock
(before they bounce back toward the shock on the turbulent magnetic field lines) and produce synchrotron
radiation while there. However, evidence of this has yet to be conclusively discovered at levels below Chan-
dra’s PSF (e.g., [151]; see Figure 2, Right). Estimates of the scale length for pre-shock emission are bounded
by the electron gyroradius and the diffusive scale length. For typical SNR magnetic field strengths of 50–500
µG, the electron gyroradius for a particle radiating a peak of 4 keV is (1.3–42) × 1014 cm and the Bohm
diffusive scale length is (2.7–85) × 1015 cm. Using a conservative intermediate value of 1.3 ×1015 cm, a
telescope with an angular resolution of ≲0.01” is needed to identify shock precursors for SNRs 8 kpc away
(0.025” for D=3.4 kpc).However, the findings of [124] suggest the possibility of “sub-Bohm diffusion” where
the mean free path can be less than the gyroradius in perpendicular shocks. This might necessitate even
smaller angular resolution X-ray telescopes, going down to ∼1 mas.

                                         19 18
                                    20
                  120
                                                                    17 16
                                                                         15
                                                                          14

                  100

                                                                                        13
    Dec (J2000)




                                                                                         12
                                                                                          11
                  080                                                                    10
                                                                                           9
                                                                                          8
                                                                                          7
                                                                                         6
                                                                                        5
                                                                                       4
                  060                                                              3
                                                                               2
                                                                          1


    +64◦ 040

                    26m 00s   40s                 20s         25m 00s      0h 24m 40s
                                                 RA (J2000)




Figure 2: (Left): Chandra RGB observation of Tycho’s SNR labeled with filament regions selected for
energy-width study. (Middle): the data from region 1 fit with both loss-limited and magnetic damping
models, taken from [145]. Neither model accurately fits the data. (Right): the observed profile of the
upstream shock for a region in SN 1006 (black) which cannot be statistically distinguished from the dropoff
due to the Chandra PSF response to a sharp edge (red), taken from [151]. Resolving these structures at
one to two orders of magnitude below Chandra would allow direct measurements of both the downstream
synchrotron-loss scale and any upstream precursor emission, providing substantially stronger constraints on
magnetic-field amplification and particle diffusion at SNR shocks.




                                                                                               3
2.2    Sgr A*: Jets and Outflows
Jets and outflows provide direct laboratories for studying particle acceleration in the immediate environments
of accreting black holes, where magnetic energy can be converted into bulk motion and non-thermal particles.
As the closest supermassive black hole (SMBH), Sagittarius A∗ (Sgr A∗ ) offers a unique opportunity to
spatially resolve these particle-acceleration processes on scales that are inaccessible in more distant systems.
Deep Chandra spectroscopy provides evidence for mass loss in an outflow from the radiatively inefficient
accretion flow, although no collimated jet has yet been detected directly [148]. A linear X-ray filament,
G359.944−0.052, and an associated radio shock front have been interpreted as a candidate parsec-scale jet,
but these features do not resolve the jet-launching region [86, 156]. As shown in Figure 3, the X-ray filament
lies downstream of the proposed radio shock and approximately along a possible jet trajectory from Sgr A∗ ,
although the physical association remains unconfirmed. A key goal of mas X-ray imaging would therefore
be to determine whether an inner collimated outflow connects Sgr A∗ to this much larger-scale structure.




Figure 3: Multiwavelength evidence for a candidate parsec-scale jet from Sgr A∗ . Panel (a) shows the VLA
1.3-cm emission from the Eastern Arm of Sgr A West, including a possible shock front and the proposed jet
path from Sgr A∗ . Panel (b) shows the corresponding Chandra 2–8 keV image, in which the linear filament
G359.944−0.052 lies downstream of the shock. This alignment has been interpreted as a jet interacting with
the surrounding ionized gas, although its association with Sgr A∗ remains unconfirmed. Milli-arcsecond
X-ray imaging could test whether a collimated inner outflow connects Sgr A∗ to this larger-scale structure.
Reproduced from [86].

    At a distance of 8.1 kpc and a mass of 4.1 × 106 M⊙ [50], 1 mas corresponds to approximately 200 rg .
This scale probes an important gap between the horizon-scale structure measured by the Event Horizon
Telescope and the much larger-scale candidate outflow seen in Figure 3. EHT polarimetry has revealed
ordered magnetic fields close to the event horizon, providing conditions favorable for magnetically driven
outflows [37, 38], while mm-VLBI studies indicate that projected scales of ∼ 0.4–2.5 mas (∼ 70–460 rg ) may
encompass the region in which a compact outflow becomes collimated [116]. Imaging Sgr A∗ at ∼ 1 mas
could therefore test whether the X-ray core remains point-like or develops a persistent elongation, knots,
or other asymmetric structure associated with a weak jet or episodic magnetized outflow. The best-fitting
7-mm jet models favor a bipolar flow viewed at high inclination and tentatively suggest a sky position angle
near 105◦ , although these constraints remain model dependent [94]. High-resolution X-ray imaging could
directly test whether any resolved structure preferentially develops along this axis and could probe the region
where magnetic energy is converted into bulk kinetic energy and accelerated particles.
    Variability provides an additional dimension to this experiment. Sgr A∗ also displays significant variability
across the electromagnetic spectrum with X-ray flares reaching ∼ 102 –103 times the quiescent level (on
average ∼1 per day; [112]) and NIR flux variations of factors of a few to ∼100 (∼4 per day; [136, 31]). Milli-
arcsecond imaging could determine whether the morphology of the X-ray source changes during these events,
for example through the appearance of transient elongation, moving ejecta, or localized particle-acceleration
sites. Such measurements would directly connect temporal variability to changes in spatial structure. For


                                                       4
this science case, a field of view of at least 1′′ × 1′′ is required. Given the quiescent Chandra count rate
of 5.2 × 10−3 counts s−1 [112], an effective area of approximately 3000 cm2 in the 4–8 keV band would
provide ∼ 3000 counts in 100 ks, enabling flare-resolved imaging and spectroscopy. An energy resolution
of ∼ 100 eV at 6 keV would be sufficient for broad morphological spectroscopy, while ∼ 6–7 eV resolution
would enable kinematic measurements; high-time-resolution capability would also be required to follow the
rapidly evolving flares.

2.3    Magnetars, Pulsar Wind Nebulae, and PeV Sources
Pulsars lose their rotational energy primarily through relativistic magnetized particle winds known as pulsar
wind nebulae (PWN; see e.g., [137] for a review). The relativistic wind from the pulsar eventually collides
with the surrounding material (i.e., either the material in the SNR, or ISM once the pulsar has escaped its
SNR) and is slowed down at the termination shock (TS), where the energetic particles interact with the
magnetic field and produce synchrotron and inverse Compton emission. The size of the TS is determined by
the distance at which the pressure from the pulsar wind equals the pressure from the surrounding medium,
                                  1/2 −1/2
DTS ≈ (Ė/4πcPamb )1/2 ≈ 0.05Ė36 Pamb,10 pc, where E˙36 is the pulsar spin-down power in units of 1036 erg
s−1 and Pamb,10 is the ambient pressure in units of 10−10 dyn cm−2 (scaling adopted from [73]). While the
termination shock distance is typically large for young, energetic pulsars (e.g., ∼ 1′ for the Crab pulsar),
substructure has been observed on scales much smaller than the TS. For instance, knots have been observed
in the Crab PWN on scales as small as several hundred mas for the knots in X-rays, optical, and radio
[64, 141, 89, 131]. Probing these much smaller scales in X-rays would allow for searches of X-ray substructure
within the knots and wisps, which can help further inform broadband modeling of the PWN. Additionally,
there are several pulsars that are relatively bright in X-rays, making it difficult to resolve their PWN due
to the bright PSF wings that overlap it (see, e.g., [74, 47]). High angular resolution imaging would help to
firmly separate the PWN emission from that of the pulsar.
    Another interesting facet of PWN science are the spectacular mis-aligned outflows. One of the most
prominent examples is the mis-aligned outflow from the lighthouse PWN (see Figure 4 and [79]). These
extended X-ray emitting structures are thought to be formed by the highest energy PWN particles that
escape from the apex of the PWN bow-shock and travel along the ISM magnetic field lines, producing
synchrotron emission. However, several other models have also been suggested (see e.g., [115, 29]). In any
case, high angular resolution imaging may help shed light on exactly how the particles escape into the ISM,
by resolving the structures near the PWN bow-shock (∼1-100 mas angular scales).
    Magnetars are neutron stars with high magnetic fields (i.e., B ≳ 1013 G), which exhibit strong X-ray
outbursts. On rare occasion, they can produce giant flares, with the most energetic flares having a total
energy of E ≳ 1046 erg and reaching an X-ray luminosities of LX ≳ 1047 erg s−1 (e.g., SGR 1806-20; [69]).
These flares are so energetic that they can launch material from the NS surface having velocities of ∼ 0.25c




Figure 4: Chandra images of PSR J1101–6101. The left panel shows a zoomed out image of PSR J1101–6101’s
pulsar wind nebula and long mis-aligned outflow. The second image shows the protrusions near the head of
the PWN extending from the point source (cyan arrows) on arcsecond scales. The last panel shows a model
of magnetic draping of the ISM magnetic field lines near the pulsar wind bow shock. Figure adopted from
[79] and modified.


                                                      5
[142]. Radio observations of SGR J1806-20 found asymmetric resolved radio emission, having a size of 50-300
mas, around the magnetar about 10 days after its giant flare in 2004 [142], which showed signs of deceleration
at late times. Magnetars are also leading candidates for the origin of at least some fast radio bursts (FRBs),
a connection established by the detection of the Galactic FRB 200428 from the magnetar SGR 1935+2154,
accompanied by an X-ray burst ([20, 11]). Resolving the X-ray-emitting ejecta and surrounding environment
following magnetar flares could therefore help connect the conditions associated with magnetar activity to
the production of coherent radio bursts, providing an important nearby laboratory for understanding the
FRB phenomenon. Furthermore, it has been suggested that these giant flares may be appreciable sites of
heavy r-process nucleosynthesis [18]. A high-resolution X-ray observatory would allow for such ejecta to
be monitored in X-rays at early times to constrain the particle injection spectrum and cooling and help
constrain broadband models of the ejecta. This could also help to better differentiate between extragalactic
magnetar giant flares and GRBs [14, 100, 146]. Lastly, on the fainter end, at least one magnetar (Swift
J1834.9-0846) has shown extended X-ray emission several years after undergoing an outburst [152], which
could be studied with a high angular resolution X-ray observatory.
    High energy (TeV) observatories have uncovered a large population of TeV emitting PWN [54], some
of which may accelerate electrons accelerated to PeV energies (see e.g., G. Brunelli et al. 12). The most
relevant systems that could benefit from high angular resolution X-ray imaging are the systems that are
fairly compact in TeV and spatially coincident with the X-ray PWN (see e.g., PSR J1849-0001 [47]), leading
to a high likelihood that they are associated. Several of these systems show under-luminous X-ray PWN (see
e.g., [75]) that lack the typical jet-torus morphology seen in other systems. High angular resolution X-ray
imaging of the inner regions of these PWN, and those with more typical luminosities and morphologies,
could help to elucidate the connection between these systems and their corresponding TeV emission.
    Another more recently discovered class of extreme TeV emitting objects (i.e., photon energies E > 100
TeV or electrons with ∼ PeV energies) are the BH X-ray binaries with jets [85]. A recent study has suggested
that the radio bright, high duty cycle systems are more likely to be detected at these energies [114]. Similar
to PWN the TeV emission appears to be fairly offset from the binaries (see e.g., Table 1 in [114]) . High
angular resolution X-ray and radio imaging of the jets at launch and as they escape the binary could help to
constrain the particle energy distribution in these jets and how these particles cool over time, which would
help place constraints on the particle populations responsible for the TeV emission. Additionally, at late
times, the particles in the jet can interact with the ISM leading to a rebrightening in X-rays, which was seen
for the TeV detected black-hole binary MAXI J1820+070 [36]. High angular resolution X-ray imaging may
resolve the shocks in these jets as they interact with the ISM and place constraints on their particle energy
distribution, and whether they are re-accelerated in these shocks.
    High-resolution X-ray imaging would also be complementary to high-energy neutrino observations. As
neutrinos directly trace hadronic interactions, identifying their astrophysical sources is critical for deter-
mining where Galactic cosmic rays are accelerated. Current neutrino localizations can encompass multiple
potential X-ray and γ-ray emitters, including pulsar wind nebulae, supernova remnants, and accreting com-
pact objects, which are all candidate neutrino production sites (see e.g., [27, 46, 1]). Resolving these envi-
ronments in X-rays would identify shocks and compact accelerators within the neutrino localization region
and determine whether the X-ray morphology and spectrum are consistent with sites of efficient particle
acceleration. Coordinated X-ray, γ-ray, and neutrino observations could therefore distinguish leptonic from
hadronic accelerators and identify the Galactic sources capable of producing the highest-energy particles.

2.4    Winds and Jets
Relativistic jets from X-ray binaries provide nearby laboratories for studying how accretion energy is con-
verted into bulk motion and non-thermal particles. The composition of the jets remains particularly im-
portant: a baryon-loaded jet carries substantially more kinetic energy than an electron-positron outflow
and can therefore have a much larger impact on its surroundings. SS 433 provides the clearest example of
baryonic jets, with Doppler-shifted emission lines from highly ionized species detected in its X-ray spectrum
[95]. Spatially resolved Chandra spectroscopy has further detected Doppler-shifted Fe emission from the
arcsecond-scale jets, demonstrating that baryonic material remains hot, or is reheated, far downstream from
the binary [101]. Similar Doppler-shifted X-ray lines have also been associated with relativistic ejecta from
the black hole candidate 4U 1630-47 [28]. Milli- to micro-arcsecond imaging combined with spectroscopy


                                                      6
would extend these measurements inward toward the launch region, determining where line-emitting mate-
rial first appears and whether baryons are intrinsic to the jet or are entrained at larger radii. Resolving the
X-ray spectrum along the jet would directly map where thermal plasma, shocks, and particle acceleration
develop.
    Transient ejecta provide a complementary probe of how jets propagate and transfer energy to their
environments. Chandra observations of XTE J1550-564 followed relativistic X-ray ejecta over several years
and directly measured their deceleration, with synchrotron emission indicating acceleration of electrons to
TeV energies in shocks within the ejecta or at their interaction with the surrounding medium [22]. More
recently, moving X-ray jets from MAXI J1820+070 showed similar evidence for relativistic propagation,
deceleration, and late-time particle acceleration as the ejecta encountered the ISM [36]. Higher spatial
resolution would allow these ejecta to be detected much closer to the binary and followed from launch through
their subsequent expansion and interaction with the environment, linking changes in the inner accretion flow
to the eventual deposition of kinetic energy in the ISM. At the same time, highly ionized accretion-disk
winds are observed preferentially when relativistic jets are weak or absent, suggesting that winds and jets
represent competing or coupled channels through which accretion energy and mass are expelled [111, 121].
Spatially resolving these outflows would therefore provide a direct view of how accretion flows divide their
energy between winds, relativistic jets, and radiation.


3     How do Stars Die?
3.1    Supernova Remnants (SNRs)
SNRs are extremely complex objects: up to tens of parsecs in size and exhibiting structure down to ≲0.01
pc. For Galactic SNRs, this corresponds to radii of up to tens of arcminutes with sub-arcsecond spatial
features. A JWST survey of Casseiopeia A revealed structure—including a system of web-like filaments,
light echoes, and holes created by high-velocity ejecta knots—down to its MIR diffraction limit of ∼0.6”
(0.01 pc; [102]; see Figure 5), and the images hint at structure on even smaller scales. Similarly, Hubble
studies of Cas A identified structures down to the ∼0.05” diffraction limit [39]. The much lower diffraction
limits for X-ray telescopes (0.25 mas at 1 keV, 25 µas at 10 keV) theoretically enable us to obtain images
with ≳1000x better resolution than optical and IR telescopes. Such observations would reveal information
about the supernova’s progenitor wind, along with the size and distribution of ejecta knots.
    Quasi-stationary flocculi (QSF) in Cas A have been measured to have radii of 0.004-0.06 pc (0.25”–3.6”
at 3.4 kpc; [81]). Dust globules in the Crab Nebula have been measured to have radii of ∼500 AU (0.15”
at 3.4 kpc [52]. Observed ejecta knots in Cas A are 0.2–1.0” in size [6], but [40] identified flux variability
in outer knots with timescales around 1 year or less, indicative of knot scale lengths/sizes of ≲ 1015 cm
(≲0.02”). Overall, 0.1” spatial resolution can identify most QSFs, dust clumps, and ejecta knots in Galactic
SNRs, while a spatial resolution of ≲0.01” is required to study them in detail.
    Sub-arcsecond spatial resolution would also enable improved studies of SNRs in the Magellanic Clouds,
and thus better characterize the progenitors and expansion of SNRs into a lower-metallicity environment. To
resolve physical features in LMC & SMC SNRs at the same level as for Cas A (D=3.4 kpc) with Chandra, a
∼0.03” angular resolution is required, and a field of view (FoV) of few-to-tens of arcminutes2 . SN1987A has
a diameter of 1.5”: only barely resolved in Chandra ACIS images (see [43] and Figure 5). In the upcoming
years, the first evidence of reverse shock-heated ejecta and forward shock-heated CSM from this object are
expected to be observed. Unfortunately, its small size compared to Chandra’s spatial resolution means that
spectral signatures from SN1987A overlap; a telescope with higher spatial resolution is vital for spatially
isolating different regions of emission in its SN-to-SNR transition period. The other youngest SNR in the
Local Group is G1.9+0.3, with age estimates of 100–150 yr [16, 130]. This leaves a gap of ∼80 years
with no observations capturing the early stages of SNR evolution, highlighting the importance of observing
SN 1987A over the next few decades. The 0.01 pc-sized structures observed in Galactic SNRs correspond to
0.04” at 50 kpc, but as the physical features in SN1987a are likely an order of magnitude smaller due to its
young age, an X-ray imager with ∼1–10 mas resolution is required to isolate and study specific features in
SN 1987A. For sufficiently nearby galaxies, the same capability would extend beyond supernova remnants
to newly discovered supernovae themselves, allowing spatially resolved X-ray observations of the evolving
shock, ejecta, and circumstellar interaction on physical scales inaccessible with current X-ray observatories.


                                                      7
Figure 5: (Left): A JWST combined NIRCam and MIRI image of a region within the so-called “Green
Monster” of Cassiopeia A that exhibits ∼1”-radius holes created by high-velocity CSM knots, taken from
[102]. (Right): Deconvolved Chandra soft and hard X-ray images of SN 1987A taken 25 years apart, adapted
from [132].


    Type Ia supernovae provide another opportunity to connect compact-binary evolution directly to the
physics of stellar explosions. The progenitor channels of SN Ia remain uncertain, with mergers of double
white-dwarf binaries among the leading possibilities. LISA will identify large numbers of compact double-
WD systems and should provide a nearly complete census of the shortest-period candidate SN Ia progenitors,
using their gravitational-wave chirp masses to constrain the component masses and merger rates [123, 82].
High-resolution X-ray observations would provide a complementary view after explosion, resolving the dis-
tribution of shocked ejecta and circumstellar material and searching for asymmetries or structures that
distinguish different progenitor and explosion scenarios. Together, gravitational-wave measurements of the
pre-explosion binary population and spatially resolved X-ray observations of their remnants would directly
connect progenitor demographics to the outcomes of thermonuclear explosions.
    Finally, many SNR distances are uncertain: parallaxes to embedded NSs or ejecta knots could help
constrain their physical sizes, explosion energies, and expansion rates. A telescope that can localize the
positions of point sources to ∼0.1 mas would enable the parallax measurements of Galactic SNRs.

3.2    High-Mass Gamma-ray Binaries
High-mass gamma-ray binaries provide a rare view of young compact objects that remain bound to massive
stellar companions, offering a direct link between the end stages of massive-star evolution and the formation
of neutron stars and black holes. These systems consist of young Be or O-type stars with a compact object
in an often highly eccentric orbit (see e.g., [33] for a review). In the few systems where the compact object is
known to be a neutron star, through the detection of radio pulsations, its high spin-down power and young
age imply a strong relativistic pulsar wind. This wind interacts and shocks with the stellar wind produced by
the massive companion, accelerating particles that produce synchrotron X-ray emission and TeV emission
through inverse-Compton scattering of photons from the companion star. The canonical system is PSR
B1259-63 [72], where a young energetic pulsar is in a 3.4-year orbit around a massive Be star and crosses
the companion’s decretion disk twice per orbit [71, 19]. At its distance of 2.6 kpc, the projected orbit has a
size of about 1 mas [103], so an X-ray observatory with sub-mas angular resolution could directly resolve the
X-ray emission site as the pulsar moves through its orbit. Because these systems are young, measurements
of the nature of the compact-object, orbital eccentricity, three-dimensional motion, and interaction geometry
can also preserve information about the mass loss and natal kick associated with the supernova that formed
the compact remnant, providing constraints on how massive stars end their lives. This would be particularly
useful for systems where no radio pulsations have been identified.


                                                       8
Figure 6: Top: Extended X-ray emission launched from the PSR B1259-63 binary as seen by Chandra.
Figure adopted from [58]. Bottom: Hydrodynamical simulation of the interacting pulsar and stellar winds in
the PSR B1259-63 system. The X and Y axes are shown in units of the orbital semi-major axis (a sin i ≈ 1296
lt-s; [103]) corresponding to angular scales of several hundred mas at PSR B1259’s distance. The colors show
the density distribution of the winds, with the tenuous pulsar wind shown in blue and the dense stellar wind
shown in yellow/green. The arrows show the direction of the wind flow with darker colors representing a
faster flow speed. Figure adopted from [7].


    One of the most interesting features exhibited by these sources is extended X-ray emission near the
binary (see e.g., [34, 117]). This was originally thought to be from jets (assuming a black hole scenario)
or the termination shock of a PWN. However, follow-up studies of the extended emission surrounding PSR
B1259-63 showed that material was being expelled from the binary at a high velocity (∼0.1c), with possible
hints of acceleration [118, 58]. The predominant theory for this emission is that, due to the high eccentricity
of the orbit, the pulsar spends a majority of its time near apastron. The stellar wind is dynamically dominant
over the pulsar wind, but the relativistic pulsar wind carves out a channel in this dense, slow moving stellar
wind. As the pulsar passes through the disk it knocks disk material into this channel, which is shocked
by the pulsar wind (producing synchrotron emission observable at X-ray energies) and possibly accelerated,
eventually being ejected from the binary [118, 7, 58]. Hence, the extended X-ray emission is observed to
move along the apastron direction (see Figure 6). To date, this phenomena has been observed after 2 of the 4
periastron passages that were closely monitored by Chandra [60] and it is still unclear what exactly leads to
the appearance/disappearance of this emission. High-angular resolution imaging of this binary during (and
following) perisatron passage could help us better understand the launching mechanism of this disk material
and what dictates whether the material will be launched after a given periastron passage. Hydrodynamical
simulations suggest that the shocked wind structures close to the NS and its companion should be resolvable
at distances 100s of times the orbital semi-major axis (or several hundred mas) a few hundred days after
periastron passage (see Figure 6). Additional observations of other systems where extended emission has
been observed, such as LS 5039 [34], could help to determine whether it has a similar origin or is due to an
entirely different process (e.g., jets).


                                                      9
3.3    Natal Kicks
Neutron stars are observed to have average sky motions of a few hundred km s−1 [66, 149, 30], larger
than can be explained from the disruption of a progenitor binary. Understanding the link between NS
kick velocities and SNR properties – asymmetry, energy, magnetic field, progenitor mass, etc. – can help
elucidate the processes that occur within and lead to supernova explosions. For example, [67, 76] showed
that NSs preferentially move in a direction opposite the bulk motion of ejecta, supporting a conservation
of momentum-like argument for the acceleration of NSs. Simulations by e.g., [15] have supported these
observational findings, but additionally indicated that the slowest moving NS from the smallest progenitors
(v∼100 km s−1 ; M≲10M⊙ ) might be accelerated as a result of asymmetries in bulk neutrino emission.
    A NS velocity of ∼400 km s−1 corresponds to a sky motion of ∼0.03” yr−1 at a distance of 3 kpc. The
diagonal lines in Figure 1 show the angular displacement expected for representative transverse velocities over
fixed observing baselines, illustrating the range of natal-kick motions that could be measured as a function
of source distance. Currently, obtaining accurate measurements of Galactic NSs’ motions requires Chandra
baselines of ≳10 years and the ability to detect a sufficient number of registration sources to perform absolute
astrometric corrections, and often still results in >100 km/s uncertainties (e.g., [98]). An example of this
approach is shown in the left panel of Figure 7 for G292.1+1.8, where a proper motion corresponding to a
velocity of 612 ± 152 km s−1 was measured using a Chandra baseline of 10 years. The authors compared
the neutron star’s backward motion to independently determined centers of the remnant to obtain a better
constraint on the SNR’s age [90]. The difficulty in obtaining robust NS velocity measurements has limited
the ability to build large samples for study. To date, there are only ∼ 20 robust velocity measurements for
NSs associated with SNRs, several of which are shown in the right panel of Figure 7, and only about half
of these remnants are dominated by thermal ejecta emission rather than swept-up material or nonthermal
synchrotron emission from the forward shock and/or PWN. These are a small fraction of the hundreds of
known Galactic SNRs [51], and are heavily biased to nearby and bright sources.
    Identifying NS positions to within 1 mas would enable the proper motion measurement of all NSs on
this side of the Galactic center (d≲8 kpc) to within ±50 km s−1 with just 1-year baselines. To make such a
measurement within a single observing cycle (e.g., a baseline of 3 months), centroid uncertainties closer to
0.25 mas are necessary. Furthermore, as the positions of point sources can be identified to greater precision
than the pixel size and PSF of a detector (roughly ∼10x, assuming a sufficient pointing accuracy and number
of counts), a detector would only need to have ∼2–10 mas spatial resolution to make these measurements.




Figure 7: (Left): The backward evolution of the NS in the SNR G292.1+1.8. Each shaded region represents
1000 years, the blue ellipse is the SNR’s center of expansion, the magenta plus is the SNR’s geometric center,
and the black plus is the center of X-ray emission. (Right): Distribution of velocities for the bulk pulsar
population compared to recent kick velocity measurements of individual NSs associated with SNRs. Figures
are taken from [90].


                                                      10
    A future high-resolution X-ray observatory would also benefit from the long time baseline provided by the
existing Chandra archive. For a mission launched around 2040, many neutron stars observed during the first
decade of Chandra operations would have astrometric baselines of ∼ 30–40 years. Over such intervals, even
relatively modest improvements in absolute astrometric precision could translate into useful proper-motion
constraints. For sources within ∼ 8 kpc, combining a future position measurement with a Chandra position
registered to the Gaia reference frame could constrain transverse velocities to ≲ 100 km/s for systems with
first-epoch positional uncertainties of order 0.1′′ . This would substantially enlarge the sample of neutron
stars with measured transverse velocities without requiring repeated observations over the lifetime of the
future mission.
    For neutron stars in the Magellanic Clouds, their ∼ 50 kpc distances correspond to typical transverse
motions of only ∼ 17 mas per decade, making direct X-ray proper-motion measurements extremely challeng-
ing with Chandra. In some systems, however, complementary optical astrometry may be possible. Optically
detected young pulsars can in principle be measured directly, while high-mass X-ray binaries generally have
bright stellar companions whose motions may be accessible with Gaia. High-precision X-ray astrometry
would nevertheless provide a complementary and in some cases uniquely direct measurement of the compact
object’s motion, particularly for isolated or optically faint neutron stars and for systems in which the stellar
companion does not faithfully trace the natal motion of the remnant. Assuming the ability to identify the
centroid of a point source to a factor of ∼10x better than the spatial resolution/pixel size, a telescope with
spatial resolution of 0.4 mas would unlock 1σ uncertainties of ±50 km s−1 for all Magellanic Cloud NS ve-
locities within a single observing cycle (e.g., a 3-month baseline), while a telescope with a spatial resolution
of 6 mas would enable us to constrain all Magellanic Cloud NS velocities to ±50 km s−1 using a reasonable
mission-length baseline of 4 years.
    Kick velocity distributions of black hole X-ray binaries remain more controversial. This is partly a result
of their smaller numbers and partly because they tend to reside in systems with low-mass companions that
are fainter in quiescence [17, 23, 144, 48, 41]. Pinning down black hole kicks is arguably even more important
than for neutron stars, because the canonical assumption is that kicks will be moderated by ‘fallback’ of
material on to a proto-neutron star core during supernova, resulting in weak momentum recoil which will
scale inversely with compact object mass [44]. By contrast, kinematic studies using radio interferometric
observations and optical astrometry are suggesting that at least some accreting black hole systems require
strong kicks [105, 150, 48, 2, 78, 25], but not necessarily all [13, 110], with potential inferences for a bimodal
distribution of kicks dependent on the mass of the binary [154]. Identifying more systems and tracing their
proper motions is key to pinning down the kick distribution. X-rays can help with both discovering more
accreting systems, and also with tracing their kinematics in obscured regions of the Galactic disc/bulge
beyond the reach of current optical surveys.

3.4    Black Hole and Neutron Star Orbits: Masses, Spins and Misalignments
Understanding the masses of black holes and neutron stars in X-ray binaries is crucial for understanding the
supernovae that formed them. In most cases, obtaining a v sin θ measurement is straightforward. The harder
ingredients, the ones that break degeneracies in the mass function and unlock individual mass measurements,
are the inclination angles and mass ratios of the binaries. While these can often be estimated through
ellipsoidal modulations and rotational broadening, there are systematic uncertainties for both. Furthermore,
neither works in a straightforward manner for wind-fed detached binaries. Astrometric wobble can provide
both of these values. Black hole masses are important for determining whether the black holes formed
from prompt collapses of stars or a supernova with fallback accretion, while precise neutron star masses can
constrain the difference between formation via iron core collapse and electron capture [120, 140].
    Additionally, the disk continuum method for estimating black hole spins relies on having accurate values
of the distance, inclination angle, and black hole mass for a system [99, 49]. The reflection method can provide
black hole spin values without any additional system knowledge [128, 32], but independent measurements of
the inclination angle provide a vital check on the model systematics of reflection fitting. Finally, measurement
of the position angle and inclination angle of the binary orbit relative to the inclination angle and position
angle of relativistic jets can be used to determine whether the jet launching direction is perpendicular to
the orbital plane; if it is stably in some other direction, that is presumably because it goes along the black
hole spin axis, which is misaligned from the orbit due to frame dragging. Hints of this happening come from


                                                       11
inclination angle offsets [42, 92] and from polarization measurements[122], as well as from the interpretation
of certain quasi-periodic oscillations as Lense-Thirring precession [42].
    For a compact object of mass, MCO in a binary with a star of mass M∗ , for a total mass of M , at period
P and distance d. The angular size of the semimajor axis of the orbit is:
                                               2/3                                        −1
                                           P                    −2/3                    d
                          ∆θ = 1 mas                   (M/M⊙ )         (M∗ /M⊙ )                   .         (1)
                                           yr                                          kpc

    For a 10 M⊙ black hole, with a 1 M⊙ companion at 5 kpc in a 1 day orbit, this will be just under a
µas. For neutron stars in wide orbits, it can be considerably larger. Because these are very bright sources,
a signal to noise ratio of about 1000 may be obtained in many cases, so sufficient centroiding accuracy to
measure the orbit is likely to be possible with resolution of the order µas for many objects.


4     How is Accretion Fueled?
4.1       Magnetically Channeled Accretion
While T-Tauri systems facilitate the investigation of magnetic channeling at the stellar scale (∼ 7 × 108 m),
and white dwarf systems (∼ 6 × 106 m) enable studies at planetary scales (e.g., see [53]), the analysis of
magnetically channeled accretion onto neutron stars offers a unique laboratory where strong-field General
Relativity (GR) dominates. The study of X-ray emission from this environment can provide critical con-
straints on the fundamental Equation of State (EoS) of dense nuclear matter and the most intense magnetic
fields observed in the Universe. Advancing the understanding of these processes requires a significant leap
in observational capabilities to resolve emission at the neutron star scale (∼ 104 m), corresponding to an
angular resolution of ≲ 10−10 arcseconds for a distance of 1 kpc.
    The study of neutron star accretion is particularly compelling for systems characterized by magnetic field
strengths in the 1012 −1015 G regime. In this domain, the emission physics is highly sensitive to the accretion
rate; the emission geometry is predicted to transition from a pencil beam (originating from the accretion
shock at the stellar surface) to a fan beam (originating from the lateral walls of the accretion column) as
the accretion rate and density increase. The resulting X-ray emission from the accretion column may extend
vertically to tens of kilometers above the neutron star surface [8, 10]. At moderate accretion rates, the intense
magnetic field truncates the accretion disk at the Alfven radius, resulting in prominent X-ray emission from
the inner disk on scales of 0.1−0.01 µas [129, 133]. In principle, spatially resolving X-ray emission from
the neutron-star surface could reveal both magnetic poles through gravitational light bending and provide
a direct probe of strong-field general relativity. Nearby bright millisecond pulsars, with existing emission
topology constraints from NICER, would provide the most favorable systems for such measurements [21].
    Furthermore, the study of cyclotron absorption features at higher energies allows for direct empirical
constraints on the magnetic field for neutron stars with B ∼ 1012 G. Notably, there are accreting neutron
stars exhibiting candidate proton cyclotron lines within the soft X-ray band, potentially facilitating the study
of magnetic fields in excess of the Schwinger limit [138]. It has also been established that the central engines
of many Ultra Luminous X-ray sources (ULXs) are neutron stars [3, 45, 70]. These objects accrete at super-
Eddington rates, conditions under which the accretion flow geometry is expected to undergo fundamental
structural changes (e.g., [109]). Transient examples of super Eddington accretion onto neutron stars are
known within the Galaxy [139, 88].

4.2       Accretion Feeding
      ∗
Sgr A is extraordinarily faint, placing it in the category of low-luminosity active galactic nuclei (LLAGN),
a regime that likely represents the most common state of supermassive black-hole accretion in the local
Universe [65]. 1 mas X-ray imaging would bridge the current gap between the resolved hot-gas reservoir at
RBondi ∼ 105 − 106 Rg (resolvable with Chandra) and the unresolved inner accretion flow down to 200 Rg ,
and help decipher why material does not reach the inner regions. Within the Bondi radius (RBondi ∼ 4”),
hot plasma supplied by stellar winds is gravitationally captured, but the connection between this large-scale
reservoir of hot gas and the inner accretion flow remains unconstrained. Despite 10−5 M⊙ yr−1 of available


                                                           12
material at the Bondi radius [24], Sgr A∗ ’s accretion rate close to the event horizon is only 10−8 M⊙ yr−1 [127],
with models showing that < 1% of inflowing gas reaches the SMBH [153]. Hydrodynamic simulations find
that around 0.2”, or 4 × 104 Rg , the flow transitions from quasi-spherical to a rotating outflow-dominated
structure. Milli-arcsecond X-ray imaging would provide the first spatially resolved measurement of this
transition between 102 –104 Rg , where simulations predict asymmetric, rotating flows and lower-density polar
cavities (Figure 8). X-ray observations currently indicate that the flow is strongly mass-losing at large radii;
spectral modeling of the quiescent emission suggests an inflow-outflow balance near RBondi [4, 148]. But
closer in, less material is proportionally ejected [91]. Obtaining a constraint of the dependence of density
and temperature on radius would provide insight into quasi-spherical flows and other LLAGN. This science
goal requires a FOV of 4” × 4” and an energy resolution of 100 eV at 6 keV at a minimum, but if possible an
energy resolution of ∼ 10 eV (about 500 km/s precision) would separate fine structure seen in the Chandra
spectrum (∼ 150 eV at 6 keV) and allow us to compare to hydrodynamical simulations [125]. An effective
area of ∼ 104 cm2 is required to conduct a spatially resolved spectroscopic analysis.




Figure 8: Predicted morphology of the wind-fed accretion flow around Sgr A⋆ . The panel shows a plane-
of-sky mass-density slice from a MHD simulation and spans ±1 mpc, corresponding to approximately ±25
mas or ±5 × 103 Rg . The simulation produces rotating, asymmetric flows with lower-density cavities whose
orientation and structure depend on the magnetic field and stochastic wind feeding. Milli-arcsecond X-ray
imaging would resolve this region and test these predicted density structures, distinguishing quasi-spherical
inflow from rotationally and magnetically shaped accretion and outflow. Adapted from Figure 1 of [126].



4.3    Compact Binary Feeding
In interacting binaries, the geometry of mass transfer determines how material reaches the compact object,
how angular momentum is redistributed, and whether matter is ultimately accreted or expelled from the sys-
tem. In Roche-lobe overflow (RLOF) systems, the mass-transfer stream, outer accretion disk, and possible
circumbinary outflows all occupy scales comparable to the binary separation, although the bulk of the X-ray
luminosity in ordinary states is expected to originate much closer to the compact object. The most promising
opportunities for spatially resolving larger-scale X-ray structure may therefore occur during outbursts, when
the accretion flow becomes highly dynamic and strong disk winds, scattering material, stream-disk interac-
tions, and ejecta can redistribute X-ray emission over a much broader range of radii. V404 Cyg provides a
useful fiducial example: for d = 2.39 kpc, P ≃ 6.5 days, MBH ≃ 12 M⊙ , and M2 ≃ 0.7 M⊙ , the binary sepa-
ration is ≃ 0.16 AU, corresponding to ∼ 70 µas. An angular resolution of 10 µas would probe ∼ 0.024 AU,
providing multiple resolution elements across the binary. During bright outbursts, such observations could
search for asymmetric or extended X-ray emission associated with disk winds, the stream-impact region,
and material expelled from the binary, while testing whether non-conservative RLOF produces larger-scale
circumbinary structures [134, 135].


                                                       13
    A complementary regime is provided by detached and semi-detached systems in which the compact object
accretes from the wind of its companion. In high-mass X-ray binaries, Cygnus X-1 is a key fiducial case
[104]: its ∼ 0.4 AU binary separation corresponds to ∼ 200 µas at 2.2 kpc, while 10 µas imaging probes
scales of only ∼ 0.02 AU. For comparison, one gravitational radius for the ∼ 21 M⊙ black hole in Cygnus
X-1 subtends ∼ 10−10 arcseconds. Such observations could spatially connect the black hole environment
to the focused stellar wind, testing how an asymmetric wind develops into an accretion stream or disk
and how changes in the donor wind propagate inward to modulate the X-ray luminosity. Similar physics
operates in symbiotic binaries, where a white dwarf or neutron star accretes from the dense, slow wind of
an evolved giant. Three-dimensional hydrodynamical modeling-calculations show that gravitational focusing
can produce complex streams, spiral-like structures, and accretion rates substantially larger than predicted
by simple Bondi–Hoyle–Lyttleton capture [26]. For the nearest and widest interacting binaries, mas to
sub-mas X-ray imaging could therefore resolve the structures through which wind material is captured and
circularized, as well as follow changes in those structures during accretion-driven outbursts and jet ejections.
    These measurements have implications extending beyond the instantaneous accretion process. Interacting
binaries containing accreting white dwarfs are possible progenitors of planetary nebulae and, when the white
dwarf can retain sufficient accreted mass, potential contributors to the single-degenerate channel for Type Ia
supernovae. Directly measuring how much transferred material is accreted, expelled in winds, or carried
away by episodic jets is therefore central to determining whether massive white dwarfs can grow toward
the Chandrasekhar mass and to understanding how binary interaction shapes the circumstellar environment
prior to stellar death. More broadly, resolving the formation of disks, focused streams, winds, and jets in
nearby compact binaries would establish spatially resolved laboratories for accretion processes that operate
across a much wider range of mass scales, from young stellar objects to active galactic nuclei.


5     What are the Populations of X-ray Sources?
Ultra-high-resolution X-ray imaging would enable population studies across the full range of Galactic en-
vironments, from the nuclear star cluster to globular clusters and the Galactic disk, determining how the
relative numbers of cataclysmic variables, white dwarf binaries, ultracompact X-ray binaries, neutron star
systems, and black hole binaries depend on stellar density, age, metallicity, and dynamical interactions.

5.1    Galactic Center
The Galactic Center is home to thousands of X-ray point sources [108, 107] and provides a unique laboratory
for determining how compact-object populations depend on stellar density, age, metallicity, and dynamical
interactions. Deep Chandra observations have detected ∼2000 X-ray sources within the central 17′ × 17′
[107], while a wider 2◦ × 0.8◦ survey detected ∼9000 sources [108]. An ultradeep survey of the central 500”
subsequently detected 3619 sources (Figure 9, left), approximately 3500 of which are probable GC sources,
down to an intrinsic L2−10 keV ∼ 1031 erg s−1 [155]. These sources include magnetic and non-magnetic
cataclysmic variables (CVs), quiescent and transient neutron stars and black hole X-ray binaries, pulsars
and magnetars, massive stars and colliding-wind binaries, and contaminating sources (foreground stars or
background AGN). Distinguishing magnetic and non-magnetic CVs from faint neutron-star binaries and
UCXBs would establish whether the nuclear source population is primarily an extension of the Galactic-
bulge population or is instead strongly modified by dynamical interactions near Sgr A∗ .
    Despite extensive surveys, the nature of most of the sources remains unknown. Many sources contain
too few photons for detailed spectroscopy, and different source classes can produce similarly hard and highly
absorbed X-ray spectra. Hard X-ray observations suggest that magnetic CVs account for 40-60% of the
brighter NuSTAR population [68], but the relative contributions of non-magnetic CVs, neutron star or black
hole binaries, pulsars, and massive stars is poorly constrained. Multiwavelength follow-up provides critical
additional information. For example, infrared spectroscopy confirmed 16 massive stellar counterparts to
Chandra sources, including Wolf-Rayet stars and supergiants [97]. Nevertheless, the high density of infrared
sources means that a Chandra positional region can constrain multiple possible counterparts, preventing
secure classifications for much of the population.
    The source population may also change substantially with distance from Sgr A∗ (Figure 9, right). Four
of the seven X-ray transients detected within 23 pc of Sgr A∗ were located within the central parsec, corre-


                                                      14
Figure 9: Chandra measurements of the Galactic Center X-ray-source population. (Left): Spatial distribution
of the 3619 sources detected within 500′′ of Sgr A∗ . Filled points denote sources located at the Galactic Center
or beyond, while open circles denote likely foreground sources; the large circle marks a projected radius of
250′′ . (Right): radial surface-density profile of a flux-limited sample compared with models for the nuclear
star cluster and nuclear stellar disk. The known X-ray transients, plotted with their density multiplied
by ten for clarity, exhibit a substantially steeper central distribution than the overall source population.
These measurements illustrate both the extreme projected source density and the possible radial variation
in source demographics that motivate higher-resolution, class-resolved studies. Adapted from Figures 3 and
12 of [155].


sponding to a strong excess per unit stellar mass relative to the surrounding region [106]. A concentration
of 12 quiescent X-ray binary candidates in the same region has been interpreted as evidence for a cusp of
stellar-mass black-hole binaries [57]. By contrast, the wider inner-20 pc population appears to be dominated
by CVs, with quiescent low-mass X-ray binaries contributing at most a few percent [155]. Milli-arcsecond
X-ray imaging could securely associate an X-ray source with an individual infrared or radio counterpart
and separate faint sources from nearby objects, diffuse plasma, and contamination from the PSF wings of
bright transients. With stable sub-mas relative astrometry, this resolution could also enable proper-motion
measurements for sufficiently bright X-ray sources. A transverse velocity of 100 km s−1 in the nuclear star
cluster corresponds to approximately 2.6 mas yr−1 at 8.1 kpc. Multi-epoch X-ray astrometry could therefore
help distinguish Galactic Center members from foreground and background sources and determine whether
white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black-hole binaries have different radial and kinematic distributions around
Sgr A∗ . These measurements would test mass segregation, dynamical binary formation around a supermas-
sive black hole, compact-remnant retention, and predictions for gravitational-wave progenitors in galactic
nuclei. A class-resolved luminosity function would also determine which populations produce the unresolved
hard X-ray emission from the nuclear star cluster.
    A particularly compelling application of ultra-high-resolution X-ray imaging would be to extend the
stellar-orbit experiments around Sgr A∗ to compact objects and X-ray emitting stars at smaller angular
separations. The GRAVITY collaboration has demonstrated that precision astrometry of individual stellar
orbits can probe relativistic effects in the potential of the galactic center. Most recently, GRAVITY+
discovered S301, a star on a highly eccentric (e ∼ 0.982) 8.7 yr orbit that approaches Sgr A∗ close enough to
become sensitive to frame dragging from the black hole spin through Lense-Thirring precession [35]. A high-
resolution X-ray imager could provide an analogous experiment using bright X-ray sources whose optical
or infrared counterparts may be too faint or confused for conventional astrometry. Monitoring multiple
sources on short-period, highly-eccentric orbits can improve constraints on gravity under the most extreme
environments, and open a new window into independent measurements of the spin of Sgr A∗ [119].




                                                       15
5.2    X-ray Parallaxes and Geometric Distances
Distances remain one of the dominant uncertainties in translating observed X-ray fluxes into intrinsic source
properties and population statistics. Gaia provides exquisite parallaxes for optically accessible systems,
while radio interferometry has measured geometric distances to a subset of radio-bright X-ray binaries and
pulsars. However, many X-ray-selected sources lie in highly extincted or crowded regions, have intrinsically
faint companions, or lack sufficiently bright radio counterparts. High-precision X-ray astrometry would
provide direct geometric distances to these otherwise inaccessible populations.
    The parallax of a source at distance d is π = 1/dkpc mas, corresponding to 200 µas at 5 kpc, 100 µas
at 10 kpc, and 50 µas at 20 kpc. Sub-100-µas astrometry could therefore provide distance measurements
for X-ray sources across much of the Milky Way, including sources in the Galactic bulge and toward the
Galactic Center. These measurements would directly improve X-ray luminosity functions, Galactic spatial
distributions, accretion-rate estimates, and compact-object parameter measurements, while providing the
distance information needed for applications ranging from natal-kick studies to pulsar timing arrays.

5.3    Astrometry in Globular Clusters
It has long been known that globular clusters host an overabundance of X-ray binaries compared to the
Galactic disk. However, it is often difficult to identify the true optical/IR counterpart to the X-ray source
due to the large chance coincidence probabilities (see e.g., [59, 63]). This is due to the large density of the
optical/IR sources and the relatively large sizes of the Chandra positional uncertainties, which are often
≈ 0.3′′ or larger (at 2σ), leading to large chance coincidence probabilities. An X-ray observatory with an
angular resolution of 10 mas or better would measure the X-ray source positions very accurately (assuming
accurate absolute astrometry), drastically reducing the chance coincidence probability, and allowing for a
confident determination of the true optical/IR counterpart (or lack thereof) to the X-ray sources. Identifying
the true counterpart of the X-ray sources is critical for source classification, particularly at the faint end
of the X-ray luminosity function, where sources often have too few counts to constrain their spectra. The
optical/IR counterpart can then be placed on the cluster color magnitude diagram (CMD) and its location on
the CMD can be used to help determine the nature of the source (see e.g., [61]). The precise determination
of the counterpart and its photometric properties can also help to better understand the physical processes
occurring in these systems. For example, locating the counterparts to X-ray emitting binary millisecond
pulsars (MSPs) discovered in radio, known as spider binaries, can help better understand how MSPs ablate
their companions as a function of spin-down power (Ė), orbital separation, companion type, and system
age (see e.g., [80]). This is particularly important for ultracompact X-ray binaries, which are efficiently
produced through dynamical interactions in dense stellar environments and can have extremely faint optical
companions, making precise X-ray localization essential for identifying their counterparts and distinguishing
them from the much more numerous CV population.
    In addition to accurate counterpart determination, an angular resolution of < 1 mas would allow for
the measurement of X-ray proper motions. Several prominent clusters (e.g., 47 Tuc, Omega Cen, Terzan
5; [113, 87, 96]) have proper motions of several mas yr−1 , which would easily be measurable with a ∼ 1
mas angular resolution instrument. This would determine cluster membership based solely on the X-ray
proper motion, which would be useful for sources without counterparts (e.g., isolated MSPs) or those with
counterparts too faint to be detected (e.g., black widow binaries with planet mass companions, or background
active galactic nuclei). This would allow for a complete census of X-ray source populations to be determined
down to some luminosity limit (determined by the detector sensitivity), which would be useful for direct
comparison to simulations (see e.g., [83] for a recent review). Furthermore, the internal motions of X-
ray sources could be measured. For instance, Omega cen has a velocity dispersion of about 20 km s−1
(other clusters have typical values between 10-20 km s−1 [93, 9]), which at a distance of 5.4 kpc, would be
measurable across a ∼ 5 year baseline [56]. This would enable studies of the kinematics of X-ray emitting
compact objects within globular clusters and comparison to simulations. Additionally, this would enable
searches of fast moving X-ray sources, similar to those recently discovered in HST observations of Omega
Cen [55], which were used to place constraints on the location and mass of a potential intermediate mass
black hole in the cluster.




                                                      16
5.4    Refining Pulsar Timing Arrays with Pulsar Distance Estimates
Pulsar timing arrays [143] use timing residuals of pulsars to measure gravitational waves passing by both
the Earth and the pulsar being used to trace the gravitational waves [84]. The Hellings-Downs curve [62]
measures the correlations between the pulsar timing residuals as a function of angular separation on the sky.
This is useful at the present time because, without precise distances to the pulsars, the terms at the pulsar
are not readily interpretable. The Earth terms for pulsars along similar lines of sight should be similar, and
hence correlations and anticorrelations will build up with time and the number of tracers.
    On the other hand, if several pulsars have sufficiently precise distance estimates, then the correlations
between their timing residuals from their pulsar terms become meaningful, and can even be used to localize
individual sources of gravitational waves, rather than just the stochastic background[84].
    The challenge is that the precision of the distance measurement must be a fraction of the wavelength of
the gravitational waves. For nanohertz waves, this means that ideally distances would be obtained to an
accuracy of about 0.1 pc. Many of the NANOGrav pulsars are at distances of a few hundred pc. Taking
300 pc as a distance estimate, the parallax signal will be about 3.3 mas. With µas resolution, this would
then mean that even a modest signal to noise measurement of the pulsar parallax would yield a sufficiently
good distance estimate, but this can also be achieved through a combination of lower resolution and higher
signal-to-noise. Astrometric precision at this scale is likely fundamentally impossible with ground-based
radio telescopes because phase calibration of the ionosphere and troposphere can be done only via reference
sources.
    A complementary approach is provided by gamma-ray pulsar timing arrays (GPTAs), which use the
rotational stability of γ-ray millisecond pulsars to search for the same nanohertz gravitational-wave signals
targeted by radio PTAs. The Fermi Large Area Telescope has already enabled timing of ∼ 100 millisecond
pulsars in γ rays, while future GeV observatories could increase this population to 103 –104 sources and
achieve gravitational-wave sensitivities comparable to or exceeding those of current radio PTAs (M. Kerr et al.
77). Gamma-ray timing is particularly complementary to radio measurements because it is unaffected by
interstellar dispersion and scattering, suffers from fewer propagation-induced timing systematics, and accesses
a somewhat different pulsar population. Precise X-ray astrometric distances to γ-ray MSPs would therefore
improve the interpretation of pulsar terms and strengthen joint radio–γ-ray PTA analyses, particularly for
radio-faint or radio-quiet MSPs lacking other direct geometric distance measurements.


6     Ideal Candidate Sources and Resolution Milestones
The science return of an ultra-high-resolution X-ray observatory will depend strongly on the angular resolu-
tion that can be achieved, as well as on collecting area, field of view, astrometric stability, spectral response,
timing capability, and imaging dynamic range. This is particularly important for a pathfinder mission, for
which the collecting area may be modest and photon statistics may limit the complexity of images that can
be reconstructed. The most favorable early targets are therefore not necessarily those requiring the smallest
physical scales, but rather bright sources for which a new angular-resolution regime enables a clear novel
measurement: resolving previously identified extended structures on finer physical scales, measuring motion
or elongation, separating a bright point source from surrounding emission, or determining a source centroid
with precision substantially better than the nominal angular resolution. Table 1 summarizes particularly
compelling science cases as a function of angular-resolution capability.
    These resolution milestones illustrate that a useful pathfinder does not need to achieve the ultimate µas
goal to produce unique science. A ∼ 10–100 mas mission could target bright PWN, magnetar ejecta, SNR
shocks, SN 1987A, and relativistic jets; a ∼ 1 mas instrument would add binary wind-interaction regions
and precision X-ray astrometry; and sub-mas capabilities would begin to probe compact-binary separations
and orbital motion directly. For a photon-starved mission, the strongest targets are therefore those that
concentrate many photons into a compact region while offering a clear spatial or astrometric signature. The
Crab, SS 433, PSR B1259–63, Cygnus X-1, Sco X-1, and bright transient ejecta from magnetars or X-ray
binaries form a particularly favorable set of pathfinder targets, while sensitivity-demanding applications such
as quiescent Sgr A∗ imaging, faint Galactic-center population studies, and spatially resolved spectroscopy
of low-surface-brightness structures are more naturally associated with the next generation of high angular
resolution observatory.


                                                       17
Table 1: Representative science cases and candidate Galactic targets as a function of achievable angular
resolution. The quoted fluxes and requirements are intended as order-of-magnitude guides for evaluating
pathfinder concepts; in many cases, astrometric precision, effective area, spectral and timing resolution,
dynamic range, field of view, count-rate capability, or target-of-opportunity response may be as important
as the nominal angular resolution.

 Resolution     Candidate          Primary science case            Brightness / photon         Other key requirements           Section
                source                                             considerations
 ∼ 100 mas      Crab               Resolve inner knots, wisps,     ∼ 1 Crab; exceptionally     High dynamic range; high         2.3, 3.1
                pulsar/PWN         and pulsar/PWN structure;       photon-rich persistent      count-rate capability with
                                   identify sites of particle      source                      minimal pile-up; high timing
                                   acceleration                                                resolution; FoV ≳ 10′′
 ∼ 10–100 mas   Cas A / Tycho /    Resolve synchrotron             High surface brightness,    High effective area; spatially   2.1, 3.1
                SN 1006            filaments, ejecta knots, and    although photons are        resolved spectroscopy; FoV
                                   small-scale shock structure     distributed over an         ≳ 10′′
                                                                   extended source
 ∼ 50–100 mas   SGR                Resolve and track ejecta        Transient; extremely        Rapid ToO response; high         2.3
                1806–20-like       following a magnetar giant      bright during the flare,    effective area; FoV ≳ 10′′
                giant flare        flare                           followed by rapidly
                                                                   fading ejecta
 ∼ 1–10 mas     SN 1987A           Resolve shock and ejecta        Relatively                  High effective area; spatially   3.1
                                   structure during the            photon-starved              resolved spectroscopy; FoV
                                   SN-to-SNR transition            compared with bright        ≳ 2′′
                                                                   Galactic sources
 ∼ 10 mas       SS 433             Trace baryonic jets inward      Bright persistent X-ray     High spectral resolution at      2.4
                                   and localize Fe-line-emitting   jet source                  Fe K; high dynamic range
                                   or reheated plasma
 ∼ 10 mas       XTE J1550–564      Track relativistic X-ray        Most favorable during       Rapid ToO response;              2.3, 2.4
                / MAXI             ejecta from launch through      bright outbursts            high-precision astrometry
                J1820+070-like     interaction with the ISM
                transients
 ∼ 1 mas        PSR B1259–63       Resolve the changing            LX ∼ 1032 –1033 erg s−1 ;   High effective area; high        3.2
                                   pulsar/stellar-wind             significantly more          dynamic range
                                   interaction region across       photon-starved than
                                   the eccentric orbit             bright XRBs
 ∼ 1 mas        Sgr A∗             Resolve accretion/outflow       Quiescent Chandra rate      Effective area ∼ 3000 cm2 at     2.2, 4.2,
                                   structure between Bondi         ∼ 5.2 × 10−3 counts s−1     4–8 keV; FoV ∼ 1′′ ; high        5.1
                                   and horizon scales                                          timing and spectral
                                                                                               resolution
 ∼ 1 mas        Bright pulsars /   Proper motions, parallaxes,     Best suited to bright       High-precision astrometry;       3.3, 5.2
 imaging;       neutron stars      and natal-kick                  point sources, where        high count-rate capability
 sub-mas                           measurements                    centroiding uses the full   with minimal pile-up
 centroiding                                                       source photon count
 ∼ 100 µas      Cygnus X-1         Probe wind-fed accretion on     F0.5−10 keV ∼ 10−8 erg      High-precision astrometry;       3.4, 4.3,
                                   scales comparable to the        s−1 cm−2 ; persistently     high dynamic range; high         5.2
                                   binary separation; measure      bright                      count-rate capability with
                                   orbital astrometry and                                      minimal pile-up
                                   parallax
 ∼ 100 µas      Sco X-1            Precision parallax and          F0.3−10 keV ∼ 2–4 × 10−7    High-precision astrometry;       3.4, 5.2
 imaging;                          orbital astrometry              erg s−1 cm−2 ; among        high count-rate capability
 few-µas                                                           the brightest persistent    with minimal pile-up
 centroiding                                                       X-ray sources
 ∼ 100 µas      Bright obscured    X-ray-only orbital              Prefer the brightest        High-precision astrometry;       3.4, 5.2
                XRBs with          astrometry and astrometric      persistent systems to
                poorly known       mass-function constraints       maximize centroid
                companions                                         precision
 ∼ 10 µas       V404 Cyg in        Search for asymmetric or        Can become extremely        High dynamic range; rapid        4.3
                outburst           extended emission               bright during outburst;     ToO response; high
                                   associated with disk winds,     quiescent state is          count-rate capability with
                                   stream–disk interactions,       substantially less          minimal pile-up; high timing
                                   ejecta, and circumbinary        favorable                   resolution
                                   material
 ∼ 10 µas       Cygnus X-1         Image substantially inside      F0.5−10 keV ∼ 10−8 erg      High dynamic range;              4.3
                                   the binary separation and       s−1 cm−2 ; persistent       high-precision astrometry;
                                   probe the transition from                                   high count-rate capability
                                   focused stellar wind to                                     with minimal pile-up
                                   accretion flow
 ∼ 10 µas       Long-period        Measure orbital wobble,         Long-period and             High-precision astrometry;       3.4
 astrometry     bright X-ray       inclination, and astrometric    high-count-rate systems     high count-rate capability
                binaries           mass functions                  are favored because         with minimal pile-up
                                                                   a ∝ P 2/3




                                                                   18
7    Conclusions
Milli- to micro-arcsecond X-ray imaging will open a fundamentally new regime for Galactic astrophysics,
transforming many sources that are currently unresolved into spatially resolved laboratories. Across the
science cases considered here, increased angular resolution is transformative, enabling qualitatively new
measurements of physical scales, motions, and source environments. Resolving shocks, jets, accretion flows,
stellar winds, binary orbits, and crowded source populations will connect phenomena that are presently
studied only indirectly through spectra, variability, or population statistics. The progression from mas to
tens-of-µas resolution therefore enables access to increasingly fundamental physical scales, from the structure
of shocks and outflows to the dimensions of compact binaries and the immediate environments of black holes.
    Such observations will provide new insight into how particles are accelerated and how stars and compact
objects return energy to their environments. Spatially resolving synchrotron filaments, shock precursors,
pulsar-wind structures, and relativistic ejecta will identify where particles are accelerated and how they sub-
sequently escape and cool. In supernovae and their remnants, resolving ejecta, circumstellar material, and
evolving shock fronts will connect the structure of the remnant to the progenitor and explosion mechanism,
while measurements of compact remnants and their motion will constrain the natal kicks imparted during
stellar collapse. These measurements will be especially powerful in a multi-messenger context. Neutrino and
γ-ray observations can identify systems capable of accelerating particles to extreme energies, while high-
resolution X-ray imaging can localize the shocks, jets, and pulsar-wind structures in which that acceleration
occurs. Similarly, gravitational-wave detections of compact systems can be complemented by X-ray measure-
ments of source position, distance, motion, and local environment. Rapid coordination with radio, optical,
infrared, γ-ray, neutrino, and gravitational-wave facilities will therefore allow energetic Galactic transients
to be followed simultaneously across different messengers and physical scales.
    At even smaller scales, high-resolution imaging and astrometry will change how accretion and compact
binaries are studied. In nearby X-ray binaries, resolving structures comparable to the binary separation will
directly probe how stellar winds or Roche-lobe overflow feed an accretion flow, while imaging moving ejecta
will connect changes close to the compact object to kinetic feedback on much larger scales. Around Sgr A∗ ,
mas imaging could bridge the gap between the Bondi-scale gas measured by Chandra and the horizon-scale
flow probed by the EHT, directly testing how matter is lost between these regimes. Combining such imaging
with high-time-resolution measurements would add important temporal information. Variability associated
with pulsations, quasi-periodic oscillations, eclipses, flares, accretion-state changes, or the launching of tran-
sient ejecta could be connected directly to the structures in which those signals originate. Repeated imaging
would link short-timescale variability to morphological evolution over days to years. Precise X-ray astrometry
will add a complementary capability: parallaxes, proper motions, and astrometric binary orbits could yield
geometric distances, compact-object velocities and masses, and potentially provide new probes of relativistic
orbital dynamics around Sgr A∗ . Such distance measurements would also strengthen gravitational-wave
studies with both radio and γ-ray pulsar timing arrays by allowing the pulsar terms to be modeled more
accurately. In addition, resolving faint extended emission around bright X-ray binaries may place strin-
gent requirements on imaging dynamic range, particularly for long-period systems and accretion-disk-corona
sources in which scattered emission may arise over a broad range of radii. Detecting structures many orders
of magnitude fainter than a bright and variable central source could therefore make dynamic range and
temporal stability as important as nominal angular resolution.
    Finally, this capability will transform our view of Galactic X-ray-source populations. Current surveys are
often limited not by the existence of detectable X-ray photons, but by confusion, uncertain multiwavelength
associations, and the inability to determine which physical source classes make up faint populations in
environments such as the Galactic Center and globular clusters. Accurate X-ray positions and proper motions
will permit secure counterpart identification, source classification, and membership determination, enabling
population studies that are inaccessible today. Realizing this science will require more than angular resolution
alone: stable and well-calibrated astrometry, sufficient collecting area for spatially resolved spectroscopy,
useful spectral resolution, high-time-resolution capabilities that can connect variability to resolved structures,
rapid response to transient and multi-messenger events, and high imaging dynamic range will all be essential
complements. An observatory combining these capabilities with milli- to micro-arcsecond imaging will make
spatial information a new fundamental dimension of X-ray astronomy and provide a uniquely powerful view
of how compact objects form, accrete, accelerate particles, and evolve throughout the Galaxy.


                                                       19
References
[1] Anchordoqui, L. A., Torres, D. F., McCauley, T. P., Romero, G. E., & Aharonian, F. A. 2003, Neutrinos from
   Accreting Neutron Stars, ApJ, 589, 481, doi: 10.1086/374551
[2] Atri, P., Miller-Jones, J. C. A., Bahramian, A., et al. 2019, Potential kick velocity distribution of black hole X-ray
   binaries and implications for natal kicks, MNRAS, 489, 3116, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2335
[3] Bachetti, M., Harrison, F. A., Walton, D. J., et al. 2014, An ultraluminous X-ray source powered by an accreting
   neutron star, Nature, 514, 202, doi: 10.1038/nature13791
[4] Balakrishnan, M., Corrales, L., Markoff, S., et al. 2024, Multistructured Accretion Flow of Sgr A*. I. Examination
   of a Radiatively Inefficient Accretion Flow Model, ApJ, 974, 98, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad6c08
[5] Bamba, A., Yamazaki, R., Yoshida, T., Terasawa, T., & Koyama, K. 2005, A Spatial and Spectral Study of
   Nonthermal Filaments in Historical Supernova Remnants: Observational Results with Chandra, ApJ, 621, 793,
   doi: 10.1086/427620
[6] Banovetz, J., Milisavljevic, D., Sravan, N., et al. 2021, The Center of Expansion and Age of the Oxygen-rich
   Supernova Remnant 1E 0102.2-7219, ApJ, 912, 33, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abe2a7
[7] Barkov, M. V., & Bosch-Ramon, V. 2016, The origin of the X-ray-emitting object moving away from PSR B1259-
   63, MNRAS, 456, L64, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slv171
[8] Basko, M. M., & Sunyaev, R. A. 1976, The limiting luminosity of accreting neutron stars with magnetic fields.,
   MNRAS, 175, 395, doi: 10.1093/mnras/175.2.395
[9] Baumgardt, H., Hilker, M., Sollima, A., & Bellini, A. 2019, Mean proper motions, space orbits, and velocity
   dispersion profiles of Galactic globular clusters derived from Gaia DR2 data, MNRAS, 482, 5138, doi: 10.1093/
   mnras/sty2997
[10] Becker, P. A., & Wolff, M. T. 2007, Thermal and Bulk Comptonization in Accretion-powered X-Ray Pulsars,
   ApJ, 654, 435, doi: 10.1086/509108
[11] Bochenek, C. D., Ravi, V., Belov, K. V., et al. 2020, A fast radio burst associated with a Galactic magnetar,
   Nature, 587, 59, doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2872-x
[12] Brunelli, G., Mori, K., Park, J., et al. 2026, New Hard X-Ray and Multiwavelength Study of the PeVatron
   Candidate Pulsar Wind Nebula G0.9+0.1 in the Galactic Center Region, ApJ, 998, 230, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/
   ae38e0
[13] Burdge, K. B., El-Badry, K., Kara, E., et al. 2024, The black hole low-mass X-ray binary V404 Cygni is part of
   a wide triple, Nature, 635, 316, doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08120-6
[14] Burns, E., Svinkin, D., Hurley, K., et al. 2021, Identification of a Local Sample of Gamma-Ray Bursts Consistent
   with a Magnetar Giant Flare Origin, ApJL, 907, L28, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/abd8c8
[15] Burrows, A., Wang, T., Vartanyan, D., & Coleman, M. S. B. 2024, A Theory for Neutron Star and Black Hole
   Kicks and Induced Spins, ApJ, 963, 63, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad2353
[16] Carlton, A. K., Borkowski, K. J., Reynolds, S. P., et al. 2011, Expansion of the Youngest Galactic Supernova
   Remnant G1.9+0.3, ApJL, 737, L22, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/737/1/L22
[17] Casares, J., & Jonker, P. G. 2014, Mass Measurements of Stellar and Intermediate-Mass Black Holes, SSRv,
   183, 223, doi: 10.1007/s11214-013-0030-6
[18] Cehula, J., Thompson, T. A., & Metzger, B. D. 2024, Dynamics of baryon ejection in magnetar giant flares:
   implications for radio afterglows, r-process nucleosynthesis, and fast radio bursts, MNRAS, 528, 5323, doi: 10.
   1093/mnras/stae358
[19] Chernyakova, M., Neronov, A., Lutovinov, A., Rodriguez, J., & Johnston, S. 2006, XMM-Newton observations
   of PSR B1259-63 near the 2004 periastron passage, MNRAS, 367, 1201, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2005.10039.x
[20] CHIME/FRB Collaboration, Andersen, B. C., Bandura, K. M., et al. 2020, A bright millisecond-duration radio
   burst from a Galactic magnetar, Nature, 587, 54, doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2863-y
[21] Choudhury, D., Salmi, T., Vinciguerra, S., et al. 2024, A NICER View of the Nearest and Brightest Millisecond
   Pulsar: PSR J0437-4715, ApJL, 971, L20, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad5a6f
[22] Corbel, S., Fender, R. P., Tzioumis, A. K., et al. 2002, Large-Scale, Decelerating, Relativistic X-ray Jets from
   the Microquasar XTE J1550-564, Science, 298, 196, doi: 10.1126/science.1075857
[23] Corral-Santana, J. M., Casares, J., Muñoz-Darias, T., et al. 2016, BlackCAT: A catalogue of stellar-mass black
   holes in X-ray transients, A&A, 587, A61, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201527130
[24] Cuadra, J., Nayakshin, S., & Martins, F. 2008, Variable accretion and emission from the stellar winds in the
   Galactic Centre, MNRAS, 383, 458, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2007.12573.x
[25] Dashwood Brown, C., Gandhi, P., & Zhao, Y. 2024, On the natal kick of the black hole X-ray binary H 1705-250,
   MNRAS, 527, L82, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slad151
[26] de Val-Borro, M., Karovska, M., Sasselov, D. D., & Stone, J. M. 2017, Three-dimensional hydrodynamical models
   of wind and outburst-related accretion in symbiotic systems, MNRAS, 468, 3408, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx684




                                                           20
[27] Di Palma, I., Guetta, D., & Amato, E. 2017, Revised Predictions of Neutrino Fluxes from Pulsar Wind Nebulae,
   ApJ, 836, 159, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/836/2/159
[28] Dı́az Trigo, M., Miller-Jones, J. C. A., Migliari, S., Broderick, J. W., & Tzioumis, T. 2013, Baryons in the
   relativistic jets of the stellar-mass black-hole candidate 4U1630-47, Nature, 504, 260, doi: 10.1038/nature12672
[29] Dinsmore, J. T., & Romani, R. W. 2024, A Catalog of Pulsar X-Ray Filaments, ApJ, 976, 4, doi: 10.3847/
   1538-4357/ad8344
[30] Disberg, P., Gaspari, N., & Levan, A. J. 2025, A kinematically constrained kick distribution for isolated neutron
   stars, A&A, 700, A75, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202554349
[31] Do, T., Witzel, G., Gautam, A. K., et al. 2019, Unprecedented Near-infrared Brightness and Variability of Sgr
   A*, ApJL, 882, L27, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab38c3
[32] Draghis, P. A., Miller, J. M., Zoghbi, A., et al. 2023, A Systematic View of Ten New Black Hole Spins, ApJ,
   946, 19, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acafe7
[33] Dubus, G. 2013, Gamma-ray binaries and related systems, A&A Rv, 21, 64, doi: 10.1007/s00159-013-0064-5
[34] Durant, M., Kargaltsev, O., Pavlov, G. G., Chang, C., & Garmire, G. P. 2011, Extended X-Ray Emission in the
   Vicinity of the Microquasar LS 5039: Pulsar Wind Nebula?, ApJ, 735, 58, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/735/1/58
[35] El Dayem, K. A., Abuter, R., Aimar, N., et al. 2026, Discovery of a star sensitive to the spin of Sgr A*, arXiv
   e-prints, arXiv:2607.12664, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2607.12664
[36] Espinasse, M., Corbel, S., Kaaret, P., et al. 2020, Relativistic X-Ray Jets from the Black Hole X-Ray Binary
   MAXI J1820+070, ApJL, 895, L31, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab88b6
[37] Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration, Akiyama, K., Alberdi, A., et al. 2024, First Sagittarius A* Event Horizon
   Telescope Results. VII. Polarization of the Ring, ApJL, 964, L25, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad2df0
[38] Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration, Akiyama, K., Alberdi, A., et al. 2024, First Sagittarius A* Event Horizon
   Telescope Results. VIII. Physical Interpretation of the Polarized Ring, ApJL, 964, L26, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/
   ad2df1
[39] Fesen, R. A., Morse, J. A., Chevalier, R. A., et al. 2001, Hubble Space Telescope WFPC2 Imaging of Cassiopeia
   A, AJ, 122, 2644, doi: 10.1086/323539
[40] Fesen, R. A., Zastrow, J. A., Hammell, M. C., Shull, J. M., & Silvia, D. W. 2011, Ejecta Knot Flickering, Mass
   Ablation, and Fragmentation in Cassiopeia A, ApJ, 736, 109, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/736/2/109
[41] Fortin, F., Kalsi, A., Garcı́a, F., Simaz-Bunzel, A., & Chaty, S. 2024, A catalogue of low-mass X-ray binaries in
   the Galaxy: From the INTEGRAL to the Gaia era, A&A, 684, A124, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202347908
[42] Fragile, P. C., Mathews, G. J., & Wilson, J. R. 2001, Bardeen-Petterson Effect and Quasi-periodic Oscillations
   in X-Ray Binaries, ApJ, 553, 955, doi: 10.1086/320990
[43] Frank, K. A., Zhekov, S. A., Park, S., et al. 2016, Chandra Observes the End of an Era in SN 1987A, ApJ, 829,
   40, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/829/1/40
[44] Fryer, C. L., Belczynski, K., Wiktorowicz, G., et al. 2012, Compact Remnant Mass Function: Dependence on
   the Explosion Mechanism and Metallicity, ApJ, 749, 91, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/749/1/91
[45] Fürst, F., Walton, D. J., Harrison, F. A., et al. 2016, Discovery of Coherent Pulsations from the Ultraluminous
   X-Ray Source NGC 7793 P13, ApJL, 831, L14, doi: 10.3847/2041-8205/831/2/L14
[46] Gabici, S., & Aharonian, F. A. 2007, Searching for Galactic Cosmic-Ray Pevatrons with Multi-TeV Gamma
   Rays and Neutrinos, ApJL, 665, L131, doi: 10.1086/521047
[47] Gagnon, S., Kargaltsev, O., Klingler, N., et al. 2024, Chandra X-Ray Observations of PSR J1849-0001, Its Pulsar
   Wind Nebula, and the TeV Source HESS J1849-000, ApJ, 968, 67, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad3e6d
[48] Gandhi, P., Rao, A., Johnson, M. A. C., Paice, J. A., & Maccarone, T. J. 2019, Gaia Data Release 2 distances
   and peculiar velocities for Galactic black hole transients, MNRAS, 485, 2642, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz438
[49] Gou, L., McClintock, J. E., Remillard, R. A., et al. 2014, Confirmation via the Continuum-fitting Method that
   the Spin of the Black Hole in Cygnus X-1 Is Extreme, ApJ, 790, 29, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/790/1/29
[50] GRAVITY Collaboration, Abuter, R., Amorim, A., et al. 2019, A geometric distance measurement to the
   Galactic center black hole with 0.3% uncertainty, A&A, 625, L10, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201935656
[51] Green, D. A. 2025, An updated catalogue of 310 Galactic supernova remnants and their statistical properties,
   Journal of Astrophysics and Astronomy, 46, 14, doi: 10.1007/s12036-024-10038-4
[52] Grenman, T., Gahm, G. F., & Elfgren, E. 2017, Dusty globules in the Crab Nebula, A&A, 599, A110, doi: 10.
   1051/0004-6361/201629693
[53] Günther, H. M., Wolk, S. J., Gunderson, S. J., et al. 2026, Star formation, stellar evolution, and planets in
   high-resolution X-ray imaging, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2607.15474, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2607.15474
[54] H. E. S. S. Collaboration, Abdalla, H., Abramowski, A., et al. 2018, The population of TeV pulsar wind nebulae
   in the H.E.S.S. Galactic Plane Survey, A&A, 612, A2, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201629377
[55] Häberle, M., Neumayer, N., Seth, A., et al. 2024, Fast-moving stars around an intermediate-mass black hole in
   ω Centauri, Nature, 631, 285, doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07511-z



                                                         21
[56] Häberle, M., Neumayer, N., Clontz, C., et al. 2025, oMEGACat. VI. Analysis of the Overall Kinematics of
   Omega Centauri in 3D: Velocity Dispersion, Kinematic Distance, Anisotropy, and Energy Equipartition, ApJ, 983,
   95, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adbe67
[57] Hailey, C. J., Mori, K., Bauer, F. E., et al. 2018, A density cusp of quiescent X-ray binaries in the central parsec
   of the Galaxy, Nature, 556, 70, doi: 10.1038/nature25029
[58] Hare, J., Kargaltsev, O., Pavlov, G., & Beniamini, P. 2019, Evolution of the Extended X-Ray Emission from the
   PSR B1259-63/LS 2883 Binary in the 2014-2017 Binary Cycle, ApJ, 882, 74, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab3648
[59] Hare, J., Kargaltsev, O., & Rangelov, B. 2018, Chandra X-Ray Observatory and Hubble Space Telescope
   Observations of the Intermediate-age Cluster GLIMPSE-C01, ApJ, 865, 33, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aad90d
[60] Hare, J., Pavlov, G. G., Garmire, G. P., & Kargaltsev, O. 2023, A Dragon Out of Breath? Monitoring High-
   velocity Outflows from the High-mass Gamma-Ray Binary LS 2883/PSR B1259-63 During the 2017-2021 Binary
   Cycle, ApJ, 958, 5, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acfdfc
[61] Heinke, C. O., Grindlay, J. E., Edmonds, P. D., et al. 2005, A Deep Chandra Survey of the Globular Cluster 47
   Tucanae: Catalog of Point Sources, ApJ, 625, 796, doi: 10.1086/429899
[62] Hellings, R. W., & Downs, G. S. 1983, Upper limits on the isotropic gravitational radiation background from
   pulsar timing analysis., ApJL, 265, L39, doi: 10.1086/183954
[63] Henleywillis, S., Cool, A. M., Haggard, D., et al. 2018, A Deep X-ray Survey of the globular cluster Omega
   Centauri, MNRAS, 479, 2834, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty675
[64] Hester, J. J., Mori, K., Burrows, D., et al. 2002, Hubble Space Telescope and Chandra Monitoring of the Crab
   Synchrotron Nebula, ApJL, 577, L49, doi: 10.1086/344132
[65] Ho, L. C. 2008, Nuclear activity in nearby galaxies., ARA&A, 46, 475, doi: 10.1146/annurev.astro.45.051806.
   110546
[66] Hobbs, G., Lorimer, D. R., Lyne, A. G., & Kramer, M. 2005, A statistical study of 233 pulsar proper motions,
   MNRAS, 360, 974, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2005.09087.x
[67] Holland-Ashford, T., Lopez, L. A., Auchettl, K., Temim, T., & Ramirez-Ruiz, E. 2017, Comparing Neutron Star
   Kicks to Supernova Remnant Asymmetries, ApJ, 844, 84, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa7a5c
[68] Hong, J., Mori, K., Hailey, C. J., et al. 2016, NuSTAR Hard X-Ray Survey of the Galactic Center Region. II.
   X-Ray Point Sources, ApJ, 825, 132, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/825/2/132
[69] Hurley, K., Boggs, S. E., Smith, D. M., et al. 2005, An exceptionally bright flare from SGR 1806-20 and the
   origins of short-duration γ-ray bursts, Nature, 434, 1098, doi: 10.1038/nature03519
[70] Israel, G. L., Papitto, A., Esposito, P., et al. 2017, Discovery of a 0.42-s pulsar in the ultraluminous X-ray source
   NGC 7793 P13, MNRAS, 466, L48, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slw218
[71] Johnston, S., Ball, L., Wang, N., & Manchester, R. N. 2005, Radio observations of PSR B1259-63 through the
   2004 periastron passage, MNRAS, 358, 1069, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2005.08854.x
[72] Johnston, S., Manchester, R. N., Lyne, A. G., et al. 1992, PSR 1259-63: A Binary Radio Pulsar with a Be Star
   Companion, ApJL, 387, L37, doi: 10.1086/186300
[73] Kargaltsev, O., & Pavlov, G. G. 2008, Pulsar Wind Nebulae in the Chandra Era, in American Institute of
   Physics Conference Series, Vol. 983, 40 Years of Pulsars: Millisecond Pulsars, Magnetars and More, ed. C. Bassa,
   Z. Wang, A. Cumming, & V. M. Kaspi (AIP), 171–185, doi: 10.1063/1.2900138
[74] Kargaltsev, O., Pavlov, G. G., & Wong, J. A. 2009, Young Energetic PSR J1617-5055, Its Nebula, and TeV
   Source HESS J1616-508, ApJ, 690, 891, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/690/1/891
[75] Kargaltsev, O., Rangelov, B., & Pavlov, G. 2013, Pulsar-Wind Nebulae as a Dominant Population of Galactic
   VHE Sources, in The Universe Evolution: Astrophysical and Nuclear Aspects. Edited by I. Strakovsky and L.
   Blokhintsev. (Nova Science Publishers), 359–406, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1305.2552
[76] Katsuda, S., Morii, M., Janka, H.-T., et al. 2018, Intermediate-mass Elements in Young Supernova Remnants
   Reveal Neutron Star Kicks by Asymmetric Explosions, ApJ, 856, 18, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aab092
[77] Kerr, M., Wadiasingh, Z., Laviron, A., et al. 2026, Future Space-based γ-Ray Pulsar Timing Arrays, ApJL,
   1001, L36, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ae570d
[78] Kimball, C., Imperato, S., Kalogera, V., et al. 2023, A Black Hole Kicked at Birth: MAXI J1305-704, ApJL,
   952, L34, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ace526
[79] Klingler, N., Hare, J., Kargaltsev, O., Pavlov, G. G., & Tomsick, J. 2023, A NuSTAR and Chandra Investigation
   of the Misaligned Outflow of PSR J1101-6101 and the Lighthouse Pulsar Wind Nebula, ApJ, 950, 177, doi: 10.
   3847/1538-4357/accd60
[80] Koljonen, K. I. I., & Linares, M. 2025, SpiderCat: A Catalog of Compact Binary Millisecond Pulsars, ApJ, 994,
   8, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae08a5
[81] Koo, B.-C., Kim, H.-J., Lee, Y.-H., et al. 2018, A Deep Near-infrared [Fe II]+[Si I] Emission Line Image of the
   Supernova Remnant Cassiopeia A, ApJ, 866, 139, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aae20e
[82] Korol, V., Buscicchio, R., Pakmor, R., et al. 2024, Expected insights into Type Ia supernovae from LISA’s
   gravitational wave observations, A&A, 691, A44, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202451380


                                                           22
[83] Kremer, K. 2026, Compact objects in globular clusters, in Encyclopedia of Astrophysics, Volume 3, Vol. 3,
   458–472, doi: 10.1016/B978-0-443-21439-4.00103-6
[84] Lee, K. J., Wex, N., Kramer, M., et al. 2011, Gravitational wave astronomy of single sources with a pulsar timing
   array, MNRAS, 414, 3251, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.18622.x
[85] Lhaaso Collaboration, Cao, Z., Aharonian, F., et al. 2025, Ultrahigh-Energy Gamma-ray Emission Associated
   with Black Hole-Jet Systems, National Science Review, 12, nwaf496, doi: 10.1093/nsr/nwaf496
[86] Li, Z., Morris, M. R., & Baganoff, F. K. 2013, Evidence for a Parsec-scale Jet from the Galactic Center Black
   Hole: Interaction with Local Gas, ApJ, 779, 154, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/779/2/154
[87] Libralato, M., Bellini, A., Bedin, L. R., et al. 2018, The HST Large Programme on ω Centauri. III. Absolute
   Proper Motion, ApJ, 854, 45, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaa59e
[88] Liu, J., Jenke, P. A., Ji, L., et al. 2022, Super-Eddington accretion of the first Galactic ultra-luminous X-ray
   pulsar Swift J0243.6+6124, MNRAS, 512, 5686, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac836
[89] Lobanov, A. P., Horns, D., & Muxlow, T. W. B. 2011, VLBI imaging of a flare in the Crab nebula: more than
   just a spot, A&A, 533, A10, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201117082
[90] Long, X., Patnaude, D. J., Plucinsky, P. P., & Gaetz, T. J. 2022, The Proper Motion of the Pulsar J1124-5916
   in the Galactic Supernova Remnant G292.0+1.8, ApJ, 932, 117, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac704b
[91] Ma, R.-Y., Roberts, S. R., Li, Y.-P., & Wang, Q. D. 2019, Spectral energy distribution of the inner accretion flow
   around Sgr A* - clue for a weak outflow in the innermost region, MNRAS, 483, 5614, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty3039
[92] Maccarone, T. J. 2002, On the misalignment of jets in microquasars, MNRAS, 336, 1371, doi: 10.1046/j.
   1365-8711.2002.05876.x
[93] Mann, C. R., Richer, H., Heyl, J., et al. 2019, A Multimass Velocity Dispersion Model of 47 Tucanae Indicates
   No Evidence for an Intermediate-mass Black Hole, ApJ, 875, 1, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab0e6d
[94] Markoff, S., Bower, G. C., & Falcke, H. 2007, How to hide large-scale outflows: size constraints on the jets of
   Sgr A*, MNRAS, 379, 1519, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2007.12071.x
[95] Marshall, H. L., Canizares, C. R., & Schulz, N. S. 2002, The High-Resolution X-Ray Spectrum of SS 433 Using
   the Chandra HETGS, ApJ, 564, 941, doi: 10.1086/324398
[96] Massari, D., Dalessandro, E., Ferraro, F. R., et al. 2015, Proper Motions in Terzan 5: Membership of the
   Multi-iron Subpopulations and First Constraint on the Orbit, ApJ, 810, 69, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/810/1/69
[97] Mauerhan, J. C., Muno, M. P., Morris, M. R., Stolovy, S. R., & Cotera, A. 2010, Near-infrared Counterparts to
   Chandra X-ray Sources Toward the Galactic Center. II. Discovery of Wolf-Rayet Stars and O Supergiants, ApJ,
   710, 706, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/710/1/706
[98] Mayer, M. G. F., & Becker, W. 2021, A kinematic study of central compact objects and their host supernova
   remnants, A&A, 651, A40, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202141119
[99] McClintock, J. E., Narayan, R., & Steiner, J. F. 2014, Black Hole Spin via Continuum Fitting and the Role of
   Spin in Powering Transient Jets, SSRv, 183, 295, doi: 10.1007/s11214-013-0003-9
[100] Mereghetti, S., Rigoselli, M., Salvaterra, R., et al. 2024, A magnetar giant flare in the nearby starburst galaxy
   M82, Nature, 629, 58, doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07285-4
[101] Migliari, S., Fender, R., & Méndez, M. 2002, Iron Emission Lines from Extended X-ray Jets in SS 433: Reheating
   of Atomic Nuclei, Science, 297, 1673, doi: 10.1126/science.1073660
[102] Milisavljevic, D., Temim, T., De Looze, I., et al. 2024, A JWST Survey of the Supernova Remnant Cassiopeia
   A, ApJL, 965, L27, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad324b
[103] Miller-Jones, J. C. A., Deller, A. T., Shannon, R. M., et al. 2018, The geometric distance and binary orbit of
   PSR B1259-63, MNRAS, 479, 4849, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty1775
[104] Miller-Jones, J. C. A., Bahramian, A., Orosz, J. A., et al. 2021, Cygnus X-1 contains a 21-solar mass black
   hole—Implications for massive star winds, Science, 371, 1046, doi: 10.1126/science.abb3363
[105] Mirabel, I. F., Mignani, R., Rodrigues, I., et al. 2002, The runaway black hole GRO J1655-40, A&A, 395, 595,
   doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20021440
[106] Muno, M. P., Pfahl, E., Baganoff, F. K., et al. 2005, An Overabundance of Transient X-Ray Binaries within 1
   Parsec of the Galactic Center, ApJL, 622, L113, doi: 10.1086/429721
[107] Muno, M. P., Baganoff, F. K., Bautz, M. W., et al. 2003, A Deep Chandra Catalog of X-Ray Point Sources
   toward the Galactic Center, ApJ, 589, 225, doi: 10.1086/374639
[108] Muno, M. P., Bauer, F. E., Baganoff, F. K., et al. 2009, A Catalog of X-Ray Point Sources from Two Megasec-
   onds of Chandra Observations of the Galactic Center, ApJS, 181, 110, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/181/1/110
[109] Mushtukov, A. A., Suleimanov, V. F., Tsygankov, S. S., & Ingram, A. 2017, Optically thick envelopes around
   ULXs powered by accreating neutron stars, MNRAS, 467, 1202, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx141
[110] Nagarajan, P., & El-Badry, K. 2025, Mixed Origins: Strong Natal Kicks for Some Black Holes and None for
   Others, PASP, 137, 034203, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/adb6d6
[111] Neilsen, J., & Lee, J. C. 2009, Accretion disk winds as the jet suppression mechanism in the microquasar GRS
   1915+105, Nature, 458, 481, doi: 10.1038/nature07680


                                                          23
[112] Neilsen, J., Nowak, M. A., Gammie, C., et al. 2013, A Chandra/HETGS Census of X-Ray Variability from Sgr
   A* during 2012, ApJ, 774, 42, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/774/1/42
[113] Niederhofer, F., Cioni, M.-R. L., Rubele, S., et al. 2018, The VMC survey. XXVIII. Improved measurements
   of the proper motion of the Galactic globular cluster 47 Tucanae, A&A, 612, A115, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/
   201732144
[114] Olivera-Nieto, L., Cowie, F. J., Markoff, S., Fender, R., & Crook-Mansour, J. 2026, Extreme particle accelera-
   tion in X-ray binaries is linked to their jets, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2607.06360, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2607.06360
[115] Olmi, B. 2023, Evolved Pulsar Wind Nebulae, Universe, 9, 402, doi: 10.3390/universe9090402
[116] Park, J.-H., Trippe, S., Krichbaum, T. P., et al. 2015, No asymmetric outflows from Sagittarius A* during the
   pericenter passage of the gas cloud G2, A&A, 576, L16, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201525969
[117] Pavlov, G. G., Chang, C., & Kargaltsev, O. 2011, Extended Emission from the PSR B1259-63/SS 2883 Binary
   Detected with Chandra, ApJ, 730, 2, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/730/1/2
[118] Pavlov, G. G., Hare, J., Kargaltsev, O., Rangelov, B., & Durant, M. 2015, An Extended X-Ray Object Ejected
   from the PSRB1259-63/LS2883 Binary, ApJ, 806, 192, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/806/2/192
[119] Piran, T., Amaro-Seoane, P., Aytac, B., et al. 2026, S301 and friends: Measuring the spin of Sgr A*, arXiv
   e-prints, arXiv:2607.24931, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2607.24931
[120] Podsiadlowski, P., Langer, N., Poelarends, A. J. T., et al. 2004, The Effects of Binary Evolution on the Dynamics
   of Core Collapse and Neutron Star Kicks, ApJ, 612, 1044, doi: 10.1086/421713
[121] Ponti, G., Fender, R. P., Begelman, M. C., et al. 2012, Ubiquitous equatorial accretion disc winds in black hole
   soft states, MNRAS, 422, L11, doi: 10.1111/j.1745-3933.2012.01224.x
[122] Poutanen, J., Veledina, A., Berdyugin, A. V., et al. 2022, Black hole spin-orbit misalignment in the x-ray binary
   MAXI J1820+070, Science, 375, 874, doi: 10.1126/science.abl4679
[123] Rebassa-Mansergas, A., Toonen, S., Korol, V., & Torres, S. 2019, Where are the double-degenerate progenitors
   of Type Ia supernovae?, MNRAS, 482, 3656, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty2965
[124] Ressler, S. M., Katsuda, S., Reynolds, S. P., et al. 2014, Magnetic Field Amplification in the Thin X-Ray Rims
   of SN 1006, ApJ, 790, 85, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/790/2/85
[125] Ressler, S. M., Quataert, E., & Stone, J. M. 2018, Hydrodynamic simulations of the inner accretion flow of
   Sagittarius A* fuelled by stellar winds, MNRAS, 478, 3544, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty1146
[126] Ressler, S. M., White, C. J., & Quataert, E. 2023, Wind-fed GRMHD simulations of Sagittarius A*: tilt and
   alignment of jets and accretion discs, electron thermodynamics, and multiscale modelling of the rotation measure,
   MNRAS, 521, 4277, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad837
[127] Ressler, S. M., White, C. J., Quataert, E., & Stone, J. M. 2020, Ab Initio Horizon-scale Simulations of Magnet-
   ically Arrested Accretion in Sagittarius A* Fed by Stellar Winds, ApJL, 896, L6, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab9532
[128] Reynolds, C. S. 2014, Measuring Black Hole Spin Using X-Ray Reflection Spectroscopy, SSRv, 183, 277,
   doi: 10.1007/s11214-013-0006-6
[129] Reynolds, M. T., & Miller, J. M. 2010, Chandra Grating Spectroscopy of the Be/X-ray Binary 1A 0535+262,
   ApJ, 723, 1799, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/723/2/1799
[130] Reynolds, S. P., Borkowski, K. J., Green, D. A., et al. 2008, The Youngest Galactic Supernova Remnant:
   G1.9+0.3, ApJL, 680, L41, doi: 10.1086/589570
[131] Rudy, A., Horns, D., DeLuca, A., et al. 2015, Characterization of the Inner Knot of the Crab: The Site of the
   Gamma-Ray Flares?, ApJ, 811, 24, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/811/1/24
[132] Sakai, Y., Yamada, S., Mori, K., et al. 2026, Chandra X-Ray Imaging and Spatially Resolved Spectroscopy of
   SN 1987A: Energy-dependent Morphology of the Equatorial Ring, ApJ, 1006, 93, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae7c72
[133] Sakamoto, K., Enoto, T., Kosec, P., et al. 2026, Kinematically Resolving the Fe K Complex in Her X-1: The
   Accretion Disk and Ionized Wind Across X-ray Eclipses, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2608.05719, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
   2608.05719
[134] Scherbak, P., Lu, W., & Fuller, J. 2025, Rapid Binary Mass Transfer: Circumbinary Outflows and Angular
   Momentum Losses, ApJ, 990, 172, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adf067
[135] Scherbak, P., Lu, W., & Fuller, J. 2025, Radiatively-Cooled Mass Transfer: Disk Properties and L2 outflows
   across Mass Transfer Rates, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2510.24127, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2510.24127
[136] Schödel, R., Morris, M. R., Muzic, K., et al. 2011, The mean infrared emission of Sagittarius A*, A&A, 532,
   A83, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201116994
[137] Slane, P. 2017, Pulsar Wind Nebulae, in Handbook of Supernovae, ed. A. W. Alsabti & P. Murdin (Springer
   International Publishing), 2159, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-21846-5_95
[138] Staubert, R., Trümper, J., Kendziorra, E., et al. 2019, Cyclotron lines in highly magnetized neutron stars,
   A&A, 622, A61, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201834479
[139] Tao, L., Feng, H., Zhang, S., et al. 2019, Super-Eddington Accretion onto the Galactic Ultraluminous X-Ray
   Pulsar Swift J0243.6+6124, ApJ, 873, 19, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab0211



                                                          24
[140] Tauris, T. M., Kramer, M., Freire, P. C. C., et al. 2017, Formation of Double Neutron Star Systems, ApJ, 846,
   170, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa7e89
[141] Tavani, M., Bulgarelli, A., Vittorini, V., et al. 2011, Discovery of Powerful Gamma-Ray Flares from the Crab
   Nebula, Science, 331, 736, doi: 10.1126/science.1200083
[142] Taylor, G. B., Gelfand, J. D., Gaensler, B. M., et al. 2005, The Growth, Polarization, and Motion of the Radio
   Afterglow from the Giant Flare from SGR 1806-20, ApJL, 634, L93, doi: 10.1086/491648
[143] Taylor, S. R. 2025, The dawn of gravitational wave astronomy at light-year wavelengths: insights from pulsar
   timing arrays, Ap&SS, 370, 124, doi: 10.1007/s10509-025-04513-9
[144] Tetarenko, B. E., Sivakoff, G. R., Heinke, C. O., & Gladstone, J. C. 2016, WATCHDOG: A Comprehensive
   All-sky Database of Galactic Black Hole X-ray Binaries, ApJS, 222, 15, doi: 10.3847/0067-0049/222/2/15
[145] Tran, A., Williams, B. J., Petre, R., Ressler, S. M., & Reynolds, S. P. 2015, Energy Dependence of Synchrotron
   X-Ray Rims in Tycho’s Supernova Remnant, ApJ, 812, 101, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/812/2/101
[146] Trigg, A. C., Burns, E., Negro, M., et al. 2026, From rare events to a population: Discovering overlooked
   extragalactic magnetar giant flare candidates in archival Fermi Gamma-ray Burst Monitor data, A&A, 710, A139,
   doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202558217
[147] Vink, J. 2012, Supernova remnants: the X-ray perspective, A&A Rv, 20, 49, doi: 10.1007/s00159-011-0049-1
[148] Wang, Q. D., Nowak, M. A., Markoff, S. B., et al. 2013, Dissecting X-ray-Emitting Gas Around the Center of
   Our Galaxy, Science, 341, 981, doi: 10.1126/science.1240755
[149] Wang, X. I., & Li, X.-D. 2025, On Neutron Star Natal Kicks in High-mass X-Ray Binaries: Insights from
   Population Synthesis, ApJ, 985, 12, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adc56f
[150] Willems, B., Henninger, M., Levin, T., et al. 2005, Understanding Compact Object Formation and Natal Kicks.
   I. Calculation Methods and the Case of GRO J1655-40, ApJ, 625, 324, doi: 10.1086/429557
[151] Winkler, P. F., Williams, B. J., Reynolds, S. P., et al. 2014, A High-resolution X-Ray and Optical Study
   of SN 1006: Asymmetric Expansion and Small-scale Structure in a Type Ia Supernova Remnant, ApJ, 781, 65,
   doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/781/2/65
[152] Younes, G., Kouveliotou, C., Kargaltsev, O., et al. 2016, The Wind Nebula around Magnetar Swift J1834.9-
   0846, ApJ, 824, 138, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/824/2/138
[153] Yuan, F., & Narayan, R. 2014, Hot Accretion Flows Around Black Holes, ARA&A, 52, 529, doi: 10.1146/
   annurev-astro-082812-141003
[154] Zhao, Y., Gandhi, P., Dashwood Brown, C., et al. 2023, Evidence for mass-dependent peculiar velocities in
   compact object binaries: towards better constraints on natal kicks, MNRAS, 525, 1498, doi: 10.1093/mnras/
   stad2226
[155] Zhu, Z., Li, Z., & Morris, M. R. 2018, An Ultradeep Chandra Catalog of X-Ray Point Sources in the Galactic
   Center Star Cluster, ApJS, 235, 26, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/aab14f
[156] Zhu, Z., Li, Z., Morris, M. R., Zhang, S., & Liu, S. 2019, A Deep Chandra View of a Candidate Parsec-scale
   Jet from the Galactic Center Supermassive Black Hole, ApJ, 875, 44, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab0e05




                                                        25
