NCU-HEP-k103
May 2024

Noncommutative Number Systems for Quantum Information
Otto C. W. Kong

arXiv:2405.10339v1 [physics.gen-ph] 14 May 2024

Department of Physics and Center for High Energy and High Field Physics,
National Central University,
Chung-li, Taiwan 32054

Abstract
Dirac talked about q-numbers versus c-numbers. Quantum observables are q-number variables
that generally do not commute among themselves. He was proposing to have a generalized form
of numbers as elements of a noncommutative algebra. That was Dirac’s appreciation of the mathematical properties of the physical quantities as presented in Heisenberg’s new quantum theory.
After all, the familiar real, or complex, number system only came into existence through the history of mathematics. Values of physical quantities having a commutative product is an assumption
that is not compatible with quantum physics. The revolutionary idea of Heisenberg and Dirac was
pulled back to a much more conservative setting by the work of Schrödinger, followed by Born and
Bohr. What Bohr missed is that the real number values we obtained from our measurements are
only a consequence of the design of the kind of experiments and our using real numbers to calibrate
the output scales of our apparatus. It is only our modeling of the information obtained about the
physical quantities rather than what Nature dictates. We have proposed an explicit notion of definite noncommutative values of observables that gives a picture of quantum mechanics as realistic
as the classical theory. In this article, we illustrate how matrices can be taken as noncommutative
(q-)numbers serving as the values of physical quantities, each to be seen as a piece of quantum
information. Our main task is to clarify the subtle issues involved in setting up a conventional
scheme assigning matrices as values to the physical quantities.
PACS numbers:

1

To be Is to be the value of a variable.

I.

— V. Quine

INTRODUCTION

To think about information through the perspective of Quine’s dictum, we can see that
a piece of information is practically always encoded in a physical system — yes, essentially
as the value of an observable. A piece of classical information is generally represented by a
real number, essentially as the value of a classical observable. Now, what about a piece of
quantum information? First of all, the nature of it as more than, or at least not, a piece of
classical information says that it is not supposed to be possible to be represented by a single
real number. Thinking about that as encoded in a physical quantity under the quantum
theory, the quantity carries the quantum information and there is no reason to see that as
its value. A quantum observable certainly cannot have a definite (real number) value, in
general. The only exception may be the case when one has an eigenstate of a particular
observable, for which the values of other observables not commuting with the latter certainly
have no definite values of the kind. Even in that case, however, it is not difficult to appreciate
then that representing the information carried by the eigenstate for the particular observable
simply as a piece of classical information may be incomplete. For example, we know it has
zero Heisenberg uncertainty and that is some extra information. Heisenberg’s revolutionary
idea for the theory was exactly to give up the classical idea that physical quantities have to
be real-valued variables; Dirac called them q-number-valued variables.
In the history of number theory, more and more general notions of numbers have been
introduced as values of variables, especially as solutions to algebraic equations of one or more
variables. Irrational numbers started from the introduction of the otherwise non-existing
solution to the equation x2 − 2 = 0. Complex numbers started from the introduction of the
otherwise non-existing solution to the equation x2 + 1 = 0. The equation xy − 1 = 0 has
no solution within the system of natural numbers or integers. Yet, it has an infinite family
of solutions within the system of rational numbers, and beyond. What about an equation
like xy − yx − 1 = 0? The equation as written indicates that it cannot be consistent with
a commutative product between the variables x and y. As such, solutions certainly do not
exist within any system of numbers with a commutative product. Following the tradition
in mathematics, it is not unreasonable to introduce a more general notion of numbers as
2

solutions to the equation. Now, here is the celebrated equation in quantum mechanics
xp − px − i~ = 0 ,

(1)

the Heisenberg commutation relation which essentially defines the theory. The position and
momentum observables as dynamic variables can only have (definite) values, mathematically as solutions to the above equation, within a new number system that generalizes the
complex numbers and have generally noncommutative products. Instead of seeing quantum
observables as not having definite values and using notions like Born probability to create
a mysterious and controversial picture of quantum physics, introducing noncommutative
numbers for the modeling of values of physical quantities may be more reasonable. That
was the wisdom of Dirac.
As Dirac picked up on the new theory of Heisenberg in 1925, he came to clarify the
mathematical properties of Heisenberg’s new way of dealing with physical quantities. In
Dirac’s second paper [1], he stated that “To distinguish the two kinds of numbers, we
shall call the quantum variables q-numbers and the numbers of classical mathematics which
satisfy the commutative law c-numbers, while the word number alone will be used to denote
either a q-number or a c-number.” He also said that “At present one can form no picture
of what a q-number is like.” This article takes up the task of presenting Dirac’s q-numbers.
Noncommutative numbers may be a more appropriate name.
Dirac was more explicit about the q-numbers as values of physical quantities in a later
paper [2]:“ Owing to the fact that we count the time as a c-number, we are allowed to use
the notion of the value of the dynamical variable at any instance of time. This value is
a q-number, capable of being represented by a generalized ‘matrix’, . . . ”. He pointed at
‘matrices’ as the candidates. It is mathematically clear that matrices are natural candidates
to be considered as some noncommutative generalization of numbers. Yet, the usual picture
is that the quantum observables themselves, rather than their values for any fixed state, are
matrices. Takesaki, in a preface to his three-volume book on the Theory of Operator Algebra
[3], suggested the theory is a kind of number theory, beyond “Integers, rational numbers,
real numbers and complex numbers” that “ are all commutative.” In resonance to Dirac, he
stated that “The advent of quantum physics at the turn of century forced one to consider
non-commutative variables. One needed to broaden the concept of numbers.” And that
is exactly what we said above. Takesaki had not presented any noncommutative number
3

system explicitly either. Nor has he addressed the relation between a quantum observable
and its various noncommutative number values in relation. Noted that some other physicists,
including notably t’Hooft, have been talking about ‘noncommutative numbers’ somewhat.
Yet, to the best of our knowledge, the general situation remains the same. There has
been no explicit presentation of any system of noncommutative numbers for modeling the
values of physical quantities. We consider the latter the key issue distinguishing a general
noncommutative algebra from what may be justified to be called a system of noncommutative
numbers. That may be what has been missing in the thinking of most mathematicians
against Takesaki’s insight in using the term noncommutative number system among various
noncommutative algebras.
To give a realistic picture to quantum physics similar to that of the classical theory, we
have introduced mathematically explicit notions of the noncommutative values of quantum
observables in recent years [4, 5]. The approach was first inspired by the mathematical
idea of noncommutative geometry [6], and the author’s discomfort about the assumption
of the classical model of physical space as remaining valid for the quantum theory while
the position coordinate observables are elements of a noncommutative algebra of quantum
observables, at the great expense of an object not having a definite position. Why would we
be happy to accept such a counter-intuitive notion without making an effort to find a better
mathematical model for the notions of positions and physical space that may describe the
quantum positions definitely? As Takesaki also said : “. . . , that in practice we never observe
points directly only approximately by successive evaluations of coordinates.” [3]. From the
point of view of theoretical physics, a theory describes relations among physical quantities
as variables all with specific values to be determined in various specific experimental settings. What we are doing with our experiments is basically extracting information about a
physical system. A successful theory should describe all the available information, classical
or quantum, within its framework. The value of a particular physical quantity should then
be taken as the complete information about it as experimental available for each specific
state. Whether one can get it out of a single simple reading of the output from the apparatus, however, does not matter. The latter also depends very much on our technology
and skills, including the design of the apparatus and the experiment. Our experimental
verification of a theory relies on checking the relation among those values. Yet, the exact
values are only defined in convention to the choice of the frame of reference and physical
4

units. With the usual projective measurement, a single eigenvalue outcome obtained hardly
gives any useful information. But by repeating the procedure enough, one can get the full
statistical distribution of that as predicted by the theory with no restriction on the precision
achievable in principle. The amount of information involved can be seen as N − 1 pieces
of classical information, as the relative frequencies of the N possible outcomes. Assuming
no eigenstate degeneracy for the observable, N would be the dimension of the Hilbert space
of states. A better representation of that can be given by the sequence of moments of the
distribution. The Heisenberg uncertainty is a number among them. The full information
the theory gives for an observable is, however, beyond that. Vogt [7], for example, illustrates
that those distributions of position and momentum observables do not uniquely determine
the state, hence not carrying full information about it. We have recently discussed how the
noncommutative values of the basic local observables, however, carry complete information
about a quantum system independent of whether it is in an entangled state [8]. Our first
picture of the noncommutative value can be represented as a sequence of complex numbers
involving twice the number of real numbers as the dimension of the Hilbert space. The key
feature is that the noncommutative algebra of such values, here the sequences, for the observables, altogether forms a state-dependent homomorphic image of the observable algebra.
Constructing a sensible picture of such noncommutative values is about finding a way to
look at a state as essentially such a homomorphism. The standard mathematical definition
of a state, for an algebra, is that of a functional. The latter gives a complex number value
for each element of the algebra. Applying to classical observable algebra in physics, the
functional is exactly an algebraic homomorphism preserving the algebraic relations among
the observables as dynamical variables in their values. Without that, one cannot check the
predictions of the theory experimentally. For the quantum case, we need something beyond
the value of that functional. Our first picture of the noncommutative value here discussed
is essentially the sequence of coefficients for the Taylor series expansion of the expectation
value as a function of the states. It naturally generalizes the real/complex number values
of a state functional to an element of a noncommutative algebra as an isomorphic images of
the observable algebra.
The noncommutative values we talk about in the last paragraph fail to be noncommutative numbers as we do not have a description of the algebra of such values, particularly the
product expression, independent of the state that defines them. The product between such
5

noncommutative values of observables for different states then cannot be defined. We still
talk about them here because we consider the physics issues about the notion of noncommutative values of quantum observables easier to appreciate from the analyses. At least for
the author, it served as an important background to appreciate what we are after here, the
noncommutative numbers as an alternative description of such values. For each state, the
former algebra of noncommutative values of observables is isomorphic to the algebra of their
noncommutative number values. That is to say, it is an alternative description of what is the
same algebra at the abstract level in a state-independent manner. It is a single mathematical
system that serves as the noncommutative, q-number, values of all observables in any state.
Our candidate for the noncommutative numbers is the new notion of DH matrix values [8]
to be discussed in the next section, followed by a section on a detailed presentation of the
system of 2 × 2 matrices as one of the noncommutative number values for observables of a
qubit. That aims to illustrate all the tricky issues lying in the way of understanding their
relations to the quantum observables explicitly. The last section concludes the article.

II.

DH MATRIX VALUES FOR OBSERVABLES AS NONCOMMUTATIVE NUM-

BER VALUES

In a study of quantum information transmission in a system of qubits in the Heisenberg
picture [9], Deutsch and Hayden introduced their descriptors as local carriers of the complete
information about the system. A sketch of the reasoning is as follows: The state is fixed in
the Heisenberg picture and can be taken as any convenient reference state denoted as |0i.
All the information for the quantum system is then encoded in the observables that evolve
with time. Taking an independent set of local basic observables, their time-evolved matrix
representation, always contains the complete information of the system. For each qubit, the
basic observables can be taken as (two out of) σ 1 , σ 2 , and σ 3 . For a particle system, they
are naturally the position and momentum observables of the particles. The completeness
of the information is a consequence of the fact that all observables, including the nonlocal
ones, can be expressed algebraically in terms of the local basic observables.
We have pressented a careful analysis of the idea of Deutsch and Hayden and its important
implications on the fascinating issue of the (non)locality of quantum systems in Ref.[8]. In
the latter paper, we adapted the key idea into a direct definition of a noncommutative value
6

of a quantum observable as the DH matrix value, for the analysis of the locality issue (see
also Refs.[10, 11]). In this article, we focus only on the subject matter of seeing the DH
matrix values as the noncommutative number values of quantum observables and do not
have to bother about if the quantum system is a composite one or not.
To recapitulate, one starts with a reference state. For any state |φi (with hφ|φi = 1), we
can find a unitary transformation Uφ that takes the reference state to |φi. For the expectation
value for any observable β, we have
hφ| β |φi = h0| Uφ† βUφ |0i .

(2)

The idea of Deutsch and Hayden [9], distilled out of the dynamical setting, can be appreciated
essentially as to take the matrix of Uφ† βUφ as the value of the observable β, that is our DH
matrix value [8]. We are most thinking about a quantum system with a Hilbert space of
finite dimensions here, with β and Uφ given as explicit matrices, but generalizing to the
countable infinite dimension case for particle systems is in principle not a problem. The
notion of DH matrix values clearly satisfies our criteria above for noncommutative values of
observables. For a fixed Uφ , we have
[·]Uφ :

β

7→

Uφ† βUφ

(3)

as a state-dependent evaluational homomorphism on the observable algebra. The map is in
fact one-to-one, as the zero matrix as the additive identity in the algebra cannot be the value
of any observables other than itself. A DH matrix value in itself is simply a (square) matrix.
As such, the multiplication among such values is straightforward mathematically. One can
then take the system of N × N matrices as a system of noncommutative numbers to be used
to model the values of physical quantities in the quantum theory of the physical system,
more or less as what Dirac had kind of spelled out. That is to say, a state |φi as a normalized
vector in an N-dimensional Hilbert space can be seen as an evaluative homomorphism [·]Uφ
that assigns such a noncommutative number as an N × N matrix to each observable.
A vigilant reader may raise the concern that Eq.(2) does not fix Uφ . The choice of an
admissible Uφ is essentially a notion of choice of frame of reference. The issue is also related
to the explicit matrix representation of an observable in quantum mechanics. The thing is
we have been so accustomed to the latter that we may forget an observables should be rather
a dynamic variable the value of which is different for different states and general changes
7

with time. Observables and their values being given through the same kind of mathematical
quantity is certainly confusing. An observable is not a number, nor a value itself. But again
the value of an observable is only defined based on a full system of reference which includes
a frame of reference and at least one conventional defined reference value. What is physical
is the mathematical relations of the different values of the same kind, i.e quantities with
the same physical dimension. As the existing reference values or chosen standards or the
fundamental units such as what is a meter of length are all classical notions, extending the
use to the quantum noncommutative values is a tricky business. At this point, we choose
to focus first only on the theoretical and mathematical side of the question, leaving any
practical issues to be addressed later. For the case of the observable algebra being one of
N × N matrix variables, the choice of reference frame is about fixing an exact basis for
the Hilbert space or an explicit description of the system phase space. We have advocated
the idea that physical frames of reference, and the related notion of relativity symmetry
should firstly be one for the phase space [12, 13]. The physical picture of space(time)
comes only from the configuration space of the one-particle phase space of a successful
dynamical theory. Moreover, from that (relativity) symmetry point of view, the quantum
phase space as an irreducible representation cannot be broken down into independent parts
of the configuration and the momentum spaces. That is a parallel to the case of the (classical)
relativity symmetry in the ‘relativistic’ case cannot have space and time as representations
but only one spacetime. The conclusion is that the mathematical model for the phase space
is the model for the spacetime for the quantum case [4]. Next, we need the standard reference
values. In the classical case, it is only about the physical definition of each fundamental
unit, such as what is one meter and what is one gram. However, the classical standard
is all about classical, real number values. One can think about such physical quantities
as noncommutative values. But they remain ones that can be well approximated by using
real numbers. The state of the reference system with an observable bearing the standard
value is taken classically, or a practical projective measurement is actually involved. For
the quantum case at hand, we need to give at least one standard DH matrix value from
a practical physical observable in a definite quantum state. That is what is given as the
matrix representation of the observable β. The DH matrix value is Uφ† βUφ . When Uφ is the
identity matrix, that is just β itself, not as a dynamical variable, but as its DH matrix value
for the reference state |0i that is conventionally defined. The latter has to be done in parallel
8

with the physically defined basis of the Hilbert space including |0i as one among the basis
vectors. The question is beyond the classical notion of the different physical units, do we
have to take more conventional defined DH matrix values to mathematically unambiguously
defined all such values?
In classical physics, we have one conventionally defined value for each physical quantity
in a fundamental physical unit. Adopting those to the case of the quantum noncommutative
values, it does not look like the noncommutativity itself necessarily leads to extra complication. After all, fundamental physical properties such as the mass and charge of a particle
are still taken as real number quantities. To look at the problem another way, however, we
may need more than one conventionally defined DH matrix value even for quantities having
the same physical units. One can think about having a consistent matrix representation of
the observable algebra for a system. One can assign explicit matrices to a set of Hermitian
generators of the algebra, the rest of the elements must then have their matrix representations exactly as obtained from their algebraic expressions in terms of the generators. Such a
set of generators is exactly the notion of the (local) basic observables as discussed in Ref.[8].
For a system of qubits, we have two for each qubit. For a system of spin-zero particles, we
have the position and momentum observables.
We have tried to present a careful illustration of how to look at a specific N × N matrix as the DH matrix value of an observable and hence a noncommutative number. That
requires conventionally and consistently defined DH matrix values for a set of algebraically
independent observables, as the (local) basic observables. The latter can be given by the
matrix representations of those observables commonly used in the theory though without
seeing them explicitly as reference values for the observables rather than the observables
themselves. Again the latter should be dynamical, DH matrix-valued, variables. The evalutational map from the observable algebra to the value being one-to-one allows such a
mathematical description of the observables. Yet, they became, for many of us, somewhat
of a source of confusion for appreciating the matrices as values rather than observables. Taking a matrix representation of the observables is really taking that as their conventionally
defined DH-matrix values for the reference state. Under that picture, before a generic state
|φi is specified, it is Uφ as a variable that gives Uφ† βUφ as the dynamic variable β̂ with the
matrix β as the reference value. Specifying the state specifies Uφ and hence the value of
Uφ† βUφ . In the section below, we give an explicit illustration of all that for the simple case
9

of a qubit, N = 2. The example would help readers to better appreciate what we discussed
here in this section.
Mathematically, it is easy to see that the algebra of N × N matrices can be seen as a
system of noncommutative numbers, and such systems can be embedded into another of a
bigger N. Taking N to infinity is not difficult to consider either, mathematically. Then,
one can entertain the idea of having one single system of noncommutative numbers. Note
that the dimension of the Hilbert space for a particle is the countable infinity, despite what
a naive thinking about the Schródinger representation may suggest [14].

III.

A SIMPLE NONCOMMUTATIVE NUMBER SYSTEM QUBIT OBSERV-

ABLES TAKE VALUES IN

Let us use the simple example of a qubit to look at an illustrative example of a noncommutative number system, that of 2 × 2 matrices, and check explicitly the issues involved
in having them as noncommutative (DH matrix) values of the observables. There are only
two independent physical observables mathematically. We use three variables si , i = 1 → 3
satisfying si sj = δ ij I + iǫijk sk . (with the Einstein summation convention). A familiar picture is that of a system of spin-half with 2~ si as the three spin components. Their standard
matrix representation is given by the Pauli matrices σ i . As two among the latter can be
taken as generators for the full algebra of 2 × 2 matrices. Any dynamic variable β can be
expressed theoretically as a quadratic polynomial of the two chosen si , times an appropriate
physical unit. It can also be expressed more conveniently as the complex linear combination β = aµ sµ , where we have µ = 0 → 3 with s0 ≡ I, a constant observable. Physical,
Hermitian, ones are the ones with aµ being real numbers. Yet, we need the non-Hermitian
ones to complete the algebra. The reference state |0i is the s3 eigenstate with eigenvalue
+1. A generic qubit state can be parametrized as |φi = c |0i + s |1i, c ≡ cos( θ2 )e 2 and
−iψ

iψ

s ≡ sin( θ2 )e 2 , 0 ≤ θ ≤ π, 0 ≤ ψ < 2π. From Eq.(2) a simple choice of Uφ is given by


c −s̄
,
Uφ = 
s c̄

(4)

with the other basis vector |1i as the s3 eigenstate with eigenvalue −1. It is this particular
orthonormal basis of the Hilbert space that gives the standard matrix representation, which
10

reads aµ σ µ for β. The DH matrix value of an observable β for the state |φi is then given by
[β]φ = Uφ−1 aµ σ µ Uφ
= a0 σ 0 + (a3 + a1 SC ′ + a2 SS ′ )σ 3 + (a3 S + a1 CC ′ + a2 CS ′ )σ 1 − (a1 S ′ − a2 C ′ )σ 2 , (5)
where we have introduced C = cosθ, S = sinθ, C ′ = cosψ, and S ′ = sinψ; σ 0 ≡ s0 . Note
that any given observable, as a dynamic variable, has a value that depends only on the two
real variables θ and ψ which describe the state. The latter assigns definite DH matrix values
to all observables. Again, the DH matrix values of the observables for any particular state
maintain among them all the algebraic relations among the observables. Having explicit
knowledge about the state or not, knowing its DH matrix values for the basic observables
s3 and s1 allows us to determine theoretically such values of all observables. Of course, that
also fixes the exact state.
The above is all straightforward. Yet, we want to look carefully at the not-so-obvious
subtleties. Firstly, a generic choice of Uφ solving |φi = Uφ |0i is given by



1 0
c −s̄

 .
Uφχ = 
iχ
0 e
s c̄

(6)

It takes |1i to eiχ (−s̄ |0i + c̄ |1i). As the above expression suggests, it is a product of




0
.
The latter
two unitary matrices, our particularly chosen Uφ and that of Uχ = 10 eiχ

unitary transformation takes |1i to |1χ i ≡ eiχ |1i. So, picking any nontrivial value of χ
is equivalent to having the DH matrix value, hence also the matrix representation of the
observables, taken with a somewhat different basis. |1i and |1χ i represent the same physical
state. But the different phase factor relative to the other basis vector |0i has implications.
|φχ i = c |0i + s |1χ i is not the same state as |φi = c |0i + s |1i. Taking |0i and |1i as our
basis and taking |0i and |1χ i instead are two different choices of frames of reference for the
Hilbert space as the phase space, though the reference state |0i has the same coordinates as
given by θ = 0 = ψ. To look at that in another way, Uφχ for the reference state is then given
by Uχ , in conflict with our conventional rule of having the matrix representations of the
observables correspond to their DH matrix values for the reference state, as conventionally
chosen. Alternatively, one can interpret that as taking a different matrix representation


iχ



0
e
1
 instead of σ . There is nothing wrong
of the observable algebra as Uχ−1 σ 1 Uχ is  e−iχ
0

about taking the matrix with any chosen nonzero value of χ to be the representation of
11

s1 . A generic matrix representation of an abstract algebra is exactly a homomorphism, in
line with our noncommutative value picture. When one picks a representation of a set of
generators for the algebra, that defines a representation for the whole algebra. The extra
Uχ is a unitary transformation that takes the representation of β = aµ σ µ to the unitarily
equivalent representation of β = Uχ−1 aµ σ µ Uχ , though σ 3 happens to be invariant under the
transformation. Similarly, the DH matrix values of all observables for a state |φi can be
seen as another such representation with |φi as the reference state, and −s̄ |0i + c̄ |1i as the
other basis vector to complete the reference frame. Hence, when we have a conventional
chosen matrix representation of a maximal set of independent observables as generators for
our observable algebra, there is one unique form of Uφ for a parametrized form of a generic
state |φi that gives the DH matrix values of any observables for any state of the system as
in Eq.(5).
Before a state is specified, an observable like a component of spin is a dynamic variable.
It is the physical concept of a quantity as an abstract notion. It has no ‘numerical’ value.
When we represent the dynamic variables in the quantum theory by a matrix, such as
taking s3 as the matrix σ 3 , the latter, of course, comes from its real number values for the
set of eigenstates, as the eigenvalues. But the representation loses the variable nature of the
dynamic quantity. The discussion above resolves that problem. The DH matrix value for the
reference state as an eigenstate is then exactly σ 3 , while the value for the other eigenstate,




0
. In the other representation of the noncommutative values as a sequence of
as |1i is  −1
0 1

complex numbers we discussed in the introduction section, such a sequence for an eigenstate
would have the first term as the eigenvalue and the rest being zero (see the explicit form
given in Ref.[8]), with the zeros still playing an important role in the properties of the
noncommutative value as an element of a noncommutative algebra. One way or another,
only that single eigenvalue cannot fully represent the value of the quantum observable. Each
eigenstate as a normalized vector is defined physically up to a phase factor. Such phase
factors play no role in the naive matrix representation. The ordering of the eigenstates, seen
in the ordering of the eigenvalues along the diagonal of the matrix, of course, matters. The
matrix is a conventional defined DH matrix value. But that is not enough. The set of basis
vectors is not specified completely unambiguously. The relative phase factor here is related
to the conventional defined DH matrix value of the other independent observable we take
as s1 here. The choice of the set of DH matrix values for the reference state for s3 and s1 as
12

σ 3 and σ 1 leaves no ambiguity and uniquely gives the DH matrix values for all observables.
That allows the comparison of the values not only among different observables for the same
state, but also among those of any states.
To summarize, we have explicitly written down a conventionally taken scheme that unambiguously assigns a matrix with explicit matrix elements to each observable in any particular
state. The assignment preserves the mathematical relations among observables in the values
for the same state and also gives a consistent picture of how the values of the same observables change as the state changes. That is a complete picture of how the system of 2 × 2
matrices serves a system of numbers useful for modeling the values of the physical quantities
as dynamic variables for the qubit system.

IV.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

We have presented above a careful discussion of all the notions involved in the seeing
matrices as the q-numbers Dirac wanted for modeling values of physical quantities as best
described in the quantum theory, at least for any system with an N-dimensional Hilbert
space. The last section in particular illustrates that all fully explicitly for a qubit, that
can be adopted for a system of qubits. The basic part of it is just what has been taken
as the matrix representation of the obervables. Only that our picture here should be the
right physics picture. Observables are dynamic variables. An explicit one-to-one matrix
representation of the observable algebra is really a conventional scheme of assignment of qnumbers as N × N matrices to their (DH matrix) values for a system with an N-dimensional
Hilbert space, with the exact matrix representation as the set of values for a reference state.
Our presentation restores the nature of the observables as dynamic variables, having statedependent values. The scheme gives a one-to-one homomorphism of the observable algebra
into the q-numbers. From the theoretical and mathematical point of view, such a q-number
value encodes the full information the quantum theory presents about the corresponding
observable for the specific state. Complete information about a quantum system can be
encoded in the set of local basic observables independent of whether the state is an entangled
one [8, 9]. One can look at the basic observables as a set of coordinates for the quantum
phase space, with a state to be specified by their values. That is an exact analog of the
classical case, except that the phase space then should be seen as having a noncommutative
13

geometry [15]. The observables are the physical quantities. Hence the noncommutative
picture is the physical picture.
Values of physical quantities are always only conventionally defined. The actual value of
one such quantity has no true meaning. Only the relations among such quantities, conveniently taken as the relation of each such value to a chosen standard value(s) characterize
its meaning. There are reference frame issues involved too. The full conventional scheme
in classical physics is well-known. The main task of this article is to clarify the content of
such a convention necessary for quantum physics, to be seen as Dirac suggested, and we
see most appropriate at least from the theoretical and conceptual perspectives, as q-number
physics, or matrix-valued physics. Apart from having the noncommutative (q-)numbers, the
matrices, to be used to model mathematically the notion of values for the physical quantities, quantum physics is essentially the same as classical physics. That is the original idea
of Heisenberg, that we need mostly only to think about the mathematical properties of the
dynamic quantities differently, not as real number-valued variables.
Let us say a few more words about the N > 2 cases. In Ref.[8], we have addressed how
one may define the DH matrix values of a generic quantum system unambiguously. The only
thing missing in the latter paper is the explicit identification of the values as noncommutative
number values and the discussion of what is the conventional features involved. In Ref.[8],
it has already been emphasized that a proper Uφ for such a scheme should contain only the
parameters or the set of independent coordinates needed to fully specify a generic state. A
simple scheme as a generalization of what we have in the last section to the case N > 2 can
easily be appreciated. Explicitly, for a simple N = 3 system, one can take



1 0 0
c −s̄ 0






Uφ =  s c̄ 0   0 c′ −s̄′ 



0 s′ c̄′
0 0 1

(7)

which corresponds to the state |φi = c |0i + sc′ |1i + ss′ |2i. And similarly for a larger N.
However, for a multipartite composite system, the observable algebra as a tensor product
has a number of generators smaller than that of the full matrix algebra for a generic system
with Hilbert space of the same dimension N, as that of the composite system. The algebra
of DH matrix values for any particular state then is only a nontrivial subalgebra of the
N × N matrices as a noncommutative number system. For a composite system, It is more
14

interesting to take a Uφ that coordinates the states separating the parameters that describe
entanglement from others. Other than that, the conventional scheme of assignment of the
DH matrix values can naturally be taken from that of the individual part, based on the local
basic observables adapted as operators on the composite system Hilbert space. Interested
readers may consult a description of the DH matrix value for a two-qubit entangled state
given in Ref.[8], for example. Of course, that is only about how we choose to describe things
for a generic state. That is useful for analyzing some theoretical issues about how some
physical properties change as the state changes. For the DH matrix values of observables for
any specific state, we have an explicit numerical Uφ . The description of the noncommutative
number values of the system adopted for each qubit in a system of qubits as a full description
of, at least the theoretical, quantum information in the system is what motivated the study
by Deutsch and Hayden [9], though the authors did not use the term noncommutative
number values nor address the issues in the general setting of quantum physics. How to use
them in practical studies and applications of quantum information is the challenge at hand.
Mathematically, the system of N × N matrices for each N can be embedded into one
with a larger N, and we have larger and larger noncommutative number systems. From the
point of view of fundamental physics taking particles as the basic ‘elementary’ systems, the
basic observables for a particle are the position and momentum observables as generators
of the observable algebra. One has to take N to countable infinity. Seeing the position and
momentum observables as the noncommutative coordinates of the quantum phase space [15]
is a very intuitive idea. The expectation value functions, taken as the starting point for our
earlier notion of the noncommutative values of the observables, also serve the purpose of
giving a picture of the observables as functions of the usual real/complex number geometric
picture of the phase space as the (projective) Hilbert space. That is a classical-like picture of
the observable algebra for the symplectic geometry, except with a noncommutative product
[16]. Matching that to the operator algebra picture, one can see the Schrödinger picture and
the Heisenberg picture as about Hamiltonian dynamics on the same symplectic geometry,
the former describes that with the infinite number of real/complex number coordinates while
the latter describes that with the small number of noncommutative coordinates [15]. The
noncommutative number values of the latter coordinates then give a specification of a point
in the noncommutative symplectic geometry. A generic scheme of local coordinate picture
for noncommutative geometry may be possible. That would be a true geometric picture
15

to complement the mostly algebraic descriptions in mathematical subject. It may also be
interesting to consider, from the point of view of mathematics, the possibility of generalizing
the noncommutative number systems to one of a skew field. Another direction is to consider
generalizing the notions of vector space and algebra to one with noncommutative numbers
as scalars, and a full noncommutative version of Hilbert’s Nullstellensatz may be possible.
We want to emphasize again that having the evaluation maps as algebraic homomorphisms is physically important. The theoretical relations among physical quantities can
only be checked through checking the relations among their values, i.e. through checking
experimentally the relations the theory predicts among all information of the observables
theoretically available. Not being able to do that means that we cannot fully confirm the
theory. For example, when the theory says an observable is the product of two others, it is
the values of the latter for any specific state agreeing with that for the product that verifies
it. With only the notion of the eigenvalue distributions in projective measurements, such
a verification cannot be achieved. The success of quantum mechanics as a theory certainly
could not be established only by obtaining expectation values of observables, still less by
looking only at eigenvalue results of individual projective measurements for each observable.
Experimental accessibility is of course important. However, how directly that may be could
be mostly a question about our practical ingenuity. In our previous studies [4, 5], we have
discussed how, to the extent that quantum state can be experimentally determined [17],
our earlier notion of the noncommutative values can be determined through enough experimental efforts. In principle, that can be done up to any required precision. It could be
just determining real number quantities, much like determining the full statistical distribution of eigenvalue outcomes in projective measurements through determining the moments.
The latter is more or less what experimental physicists have been doing when checking the
quantum theory, though one may be talking about it as the ‘probabilities’ of the individual
outcomes. It is easy to see that the same holds for the DH matrix value. What is more
interesting and truly challenging is if one can find some ways the full value more directly,
starting with the question of how to implement a reference system for defining the convention
adopted in fixing the values. The DH matrix values as a sensible notion of noncommutative
numbers that can be dealt with in a generic manner independent of the physical state is
particularly important for the purpose. The fact that the noncommutative numbers do not
form a well-ordered set is certainly going to make the task more complicated than simply
16

calibrating a simple output scale with noncommutative numbers, even if one finds a way to
do that. Yet, again, we think that is about treating quantum information as quantum information. Physical measurement is about extracting information about the physical quantity
we are interested in experimentally. As the physical information is, at the fundamental level
quantum in nature, we are dealing with quantum information. A noncommutative number
gives, mathematically, a direct description of an individual piece of quantum information.
The Deutsch and Hayden paper is effectively the first step to use that in quantum information science. This article aims at a full clarification of the notion and theoretical issues
involved, hoping to lay a firm ground for practical efforts in its applications.

Acknowledgment

The author is partially supported by research grant number 112-2112-M-008-019 of the
NSTC of Taiwan

[1] P.A.M. Dirac, Quantum Mechanics and a Preliminary Investigation of the Hydrogen Atom,
Proc. Roy. Soc. London A 110 (1926) 561-79.
[2] P.A.M. Dirac, The quantum theory of the emission and absorption of radiation, Proc. Roy.
Soc. London A 114 (1927) 243-65.
[3] M. Takesaki, Theory of Operator Algebras II, Springer, Berlin, 2003.
[4] O.C.W. Kong, Towards noncommutative quantum reality, Stud. Hist. Philo. Sci. 92 (2022)
186-195.
[5] O.C.W. Kong and W.-Y. Liu, The Noncommutative Values of Quantum Observables, Chin.
J. Phys. 69 (2021) 70-76.
[6] A. Connes, Noncommutative Geometry, Academic Press, 1994.
[7] A. Vogt, Position and Momentum Distributions do not Determine the Quantum Mechanical
State, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Theory (ed. A.R. Marlow), Acdemic Press,
1978, 365-371.
[8] O.C.W. Kong, On Locality of Quantum Information in the Heisenberg Picture for Arbitrary
States, Chin. J. Phys. 89 (2024) 1462-1473.

17

[9] D. Deutsch and P. Hayden, Information flow in entangled quantum systems, Proc. R. Soc. A
456 (2000) 1759-1774.
[10] C. Hewitt-Horsman and V. Vedral, Developing the Deutsch-Hayden approach to quantum
mechanics, New J. Phys. 9 (2007) 135.
[11] C. G. Timpson, Nonlocality and Information Flow: The Approach of Deutsch and Hayden,
Found Phys. 35 (2005) 313-343.
[12] O.C.W. Kong, Quantum Origin of (Newtonian) Mass and and Galilean Relativity Symmetry,
Chin. J. Phys. 83 (2023) 337-345.
[13] O.C.W. Kong, and H.K. Ting, E = mc2 versus Symmetry for Lorentz Covariant Physics,
Chin. J. Phys. 83 (2023) 480-488.
[14] D.A. Dubin, M.A. Hennings, and T.B. Smith, Mathematical Aspects of Weyl Quantization
and Phase, World Scientific, 2000.
[15] O.C.W. Kong and W.-Y. Liu, Noncommutative Coordinate Picture of the Quantum Phase
Space, Chin. J. Phys. 77 (2021) 2881-2896.
[16] R. Cirelli, A. Manià, and L. Pizzocchero, Quantum Mechanics as an Infinite-Dimensional
Hamiltonian System with Uncertainty Structure. Part I, J. Math. Phys. 31 (1990) 2891-2897.
[17] U. Leonhardt, Measuring the Quantum State of Light, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997.

18

