Science Opportunities of Wet Extreme Mass-Ratio Inspirals
Zhenwei Lyu,1, ∗ Zhen Pan,2, 3 Junjie Mao,4 Ning Jiang,5, 6 and Huan Yang4, †
1
Leicester International Institute, Dalian University of Technology, Panjin 124221, China
Tsung-Dao Lee Institute, Shanghai Jiao-Tong University, Shanghai, 520 Shengrong Road, 201210, China
3
School of Physics & Astronomy, Shanghai Jiao-Tong University, Shanghai, 800 Dongchuan Road, 200240, China
4
Department of Astronomy, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
5
CAS Key Laboratory for Research in Galaxies and Cosmology, Department of Astronomy,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, People’s Republic of China
6
School of Astronomy and Space Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, People’s Republic of China

arXiv:2501.03252v3 [astro-ph.HE] 23 Jan 2026

2

Wet extreme mass-ratio inspirals (wet EMRIs), which arise from stellar-mass black holes (sBHs) inspiral
into supermassive black holes (SMBHs) within the gas-rich environments of Active Galactic Nuclei (AGN), are
primary sources of gravitational waves (GWs) for space-borne detectors like LISA, TianQin, and Taiji. Unlike
“dry EMRIs”, which form through gravitational scattering in nuclear star clusters, wet EMRIs are naturally
accompanied by interactions with accretion disks, offering rich multi-messenger science opportunities. They are
distinct in generating transient electromagnetic (EM) signals, such as quasi-periodic eruptions (QPEs), which
serve as valuable probes of accretion disk physics and SMBH environments. Their GW signals provide an
unprecedented precision of the order of O(10−4 ∼ 10−6 ) in measuring SMBH mass and spin, enabling the
calibration of traditional EM techniques and offering insights into jet formation models. Additionally, wet
EMRIs serve as bright and dark sirens for cosmology, facilitating percent-level precision measurements of
Hubble parameter through AGN host identification or statistical association. These systems hold immense
potential for advancing our understanding of black hole dynamics, accretion physics, and cosmology.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Extreme mass-ratio inspirals (EMRIs) and massive black
hole (BH) binaries are the two main extragalactic sources of
space-borne gravitational wave detectors, such as LISA (Laser
Interferometer Space Antenna) [1–5], TianQin [6–9] and Taiji
[9–11], which operate in the millihertz frequency band. In
particular, EMRIs are known for their superior precision in
measuring weak environmental forces, including tidal gravitational forces from nearby stellar-mass objects [12], disk forces
associated with Active Galactic Nuclei (AGN) [13–17], and
dynamical friction from clouds of Axion-like particles populated around massive BHs [18–21].
Those EMRIs formed through the interaction with accretion disks are often referred as “Wet EMRIs” [22]. It was
previously pointed out in [23] that star formation and evolution within AGN may lead to this class of objects. In recent
years, there has been growing interest in the environmental
effects influencing EMRI formation [24–30]. More recently,
quantitative modeling of the nuclear star cluster and the accretion disk have shown that disk capture and migration of a
stellar mass object may also give rise to rapid formation of
wet EMRIs that eventually merge with the central massive
BHs [22]. Based on a class of the disk and cluster models,
the inferred rate is comparable to or larger than those EMRIs formed through gravitational scattering within the nuclear
cluster (the “Dry EMRIs”) [31, 32].
In this work, we discuss several science opportunities associated with wet EMRIs. First, we propose the existence of
a class of X-ray transients broadly connected to the observed
quasi-periodic eruptions (QPEs [33–42]). If the accretion disk

∗ zwlyu@dlut.edu.cn
† hyangdoa@tsinghua.edu.cn

is inclined with respect to the spin direction of the massive
BH, a stellar-mass black hole (sBH) initially migration within
the disk at larger radii may exit the warped accretion disk at
a smaller distance, where the GW backreaction dominates the
orbital evolution. The sBH may collide with the warped disk
twice per orbit, with ejected gas forming expanding fireballs
that emit X-rays. This suggests that there is possibly a class
of QPE-like transients without the association of Tidal Disruption Events (TDEs), which we refer as type II QPEs.
Second, we point out two promising applications of multimessenger observation (GWs and the AGN) of wet EMRIs.
It turns out that to locate wet EMRIs in their host galaxy, the
LISA sensitivity limits the source redshift to ≤ 0.3. For these
wet EMRIs, the measurement precision of mass and spin is
generally on the order of O(10−4 ∼ 10−6 ) [2], which may
serve as an accurate calibration tool for other methods of measuring BH mass and spin, such as using the broad line Hβ or
the X-ray spectrum. In particular, to calibrate the X-ray measurement for BH spins, we find that only sources with redshift
≤ 0.1 may have enough X-ray luminosities detectable by flagship missions such as Athena and eXTP. On the other hand,
as GW observations can be used to measure the direction of
massive BH spin, the inclination of the sBH may be used to
constrain the normal direction of the accretion disk. If there is
radio observation of a possible jet associated with the AGN,
this multi-messenger measurement of the BH spin, jet, and
disk inclination may be used to test jet formation models.
Third, wet EMRIs offer new opportunities to study cosmology. Since we expect that wet EMRIs are associated
with AGNs, searching for candidates for AGN within the error volume determined by GW measurements greatly reduces
the number of candidates for wet EMRIs. This advantage
applies for both bright sirens with nearby wet EMRIs (with
host galaxy identification available) and dark sirens for more
distant wet EMRIs. Both methods are expected to produce

2
percent-level-precision measurement on the Hubble parameter with one-year observation of LISA. Taking into account
the possibility that only a faction of AGN is observed, e.g.
due to dust attenuation, does not significantly change this estimate.
These topics are by no means an exclusive list of astrophysical and cosmological applications of wet EMRIs. For example, if the surface density of the disk is sufficiently high at
O(10) gravitational radii [13, 14] and/or the orbital eccentricity is significant [17], the disk effect imprinted on the gravitational waveform may be detectable. Wet EMRIs may also be
used to probe intermediate-mass BHs that are captured in the
accretion disk [43], as these less massive objects may form
mean-motion resonance pairs or chains within the AGN disk
[44]. In addition, the population of unresolved wet EMRIs
may give rise to a stochastic GW background that is observable by space-borne GW detectors [45]. The scientific opportunities discussed in this work are complementary to these
previous studies, which we hope will motivate further exploration in this direction.
This work is organized as follows: in Sec. II A, we discuss
the formation and population of wet EMRIs, including their
formation mechanisms in accretion disks and population estimates based on updated SMBH mass functions. In Sec. II B,
we explore transient electromagnetic (EM) counterparts, focusing on the connection between wet EMRIs and QPEs. In
Sec. II C, we address how wet EMRIs can be used to calibrate
other methods of probing BH mass and spin. In Sec. II D, we
examine the potential of wet EMRIs to test accretion disk and
jet models. Finally, in Sec. II E, we discuss the application of
wet EMRIs as cosmic sirens. Resolvable host AGNs enable
their use as bright sirens (yielding luminosity distance and
redshift), while unresolvable hosts result in dark sirens. Finally, in Sec. III, we possible uncertainties and caveats in this
analysis, and motivate further studies in this emerging field.
All masses (e.g., M• , µ) used throughout the manuscript,
including those appearing in the Fisher matrix estimates, are
consistently expressed in the source frame unless explicitly
stated otherwise.

is given by [46, 47]
tmig,I ∼

M M h2
,
µ Σ r2 ωK

(1)

where M = M(< r) is the total mass enclosed within the orbital radius r, µ is the sBH mass, Σ(r) is the disk surface density, h(r) = H(r)/r is the disk aspect ratio (with H being the
characteristic vertical thickness of the disk at a given radius r
from the central object), and ωK is the Kepler angular velocity. For more massive sBHs capable of opening a gap in the
accretion disk, type II migration takes over. In this case, the
migration is slower and is governed by the viscous evolution
of the disk itself.
The structure and dynamics of the accretion disk also influence the migration and formation rates of EMRIs. In α-type
disks, the viscosity scales with the total pressure (which includes both the gas and radiation pressure), while in β-type
disks the viscosity scales with the surface density of the disk.
These differences affect the disk’s structure and, consequently,
the migration timescales and efficiency. Migration continues
until the sBH approaches the SMBH, where GW emission
dominates, driving the final inspiral, as illustrated in FIG. 2.
The presence of accretion flows accelerates both the capture
of sBHs into the disk and their inward migration, significantly
increasing the EMRI formation rate compared to the dry channel, where no disk is present [31].
The formation and population of wet EMRIs depend on
several factors, including the fraction of SMBHs hosted in
AGNs, the structure of the accretion disk, and the initial distribution of sBHs in the surrounding stellar cluster. Observational studies suggest that approximately 1% ∼ 10% of the
SMBHs reside in AGNs, the fraction varying by redshift. For
simplicity, we conservatively assume a constant AGN fraction
of fAGN = 1% throughout the universe.
The SMBH mass function is critical to estimate the wet
EMRI population. Two representative SMBH mass functions
are commonly used:
1. Population III seeded model [48–50]

II.

MULTI-MESSENGER SCIENCE OPPORTUNITIES
A.

Population estimation

For sBHs on inclined and/or eccentric orbits, strong interactions with the accretion disk of a rapidly accreting SMBH play
a crucial role in their evolution. These interactions, mediated
by dynamical friction and disk-induced density waves, damp
the orbital inclination and eccentricity of the sBH relative to
the disk plane and eventually capture the sBH into the disk.
Once captured, the sBH begins to migrate inward, driven by
the density waves it excites through its periodic motion within
the disk.
For lower-mass sBHs, type-I migration dominates, where
the sBH interacts with the surrounding disk material, resulting
in continuous inward drift. The timescale for type-I migration

dN•
M•
= 0.01
d log M•
3 × 106 M⊙

!−0.3
Mpc−3 .

2. Phenomenological model [51]
dN•
M•
= 0.002
d log M•
3 × 106 M⊙

!+0.3
Mpc−3 .

In both cases, dN• /d log M• represents the number density
of SMBHs per logarithmic mass interval. These mass functions were used in our previous studies [22, 31] to estimate
the abundance of SMBHs in the range 104 ∼ 107 M⊙ , which
is particularly relevant for the formation and detection of EMRIs. Our results demonstrated that wet EMRIs could significantly enhance total and detectable EMRI rates, often dominating over dry EMRIs.

3
TABLE I. Forecasted rates for stellar-mass black hole (sBH) EMRIs in the redshift range 0 < z < 4.5, with the mass of sBH µ = 10M⊙ . The
table presents total EMRI rates, LISA detection rates (with SNR≥ 20) and rates for which the host AGN galaxy is resolvable. Wet EMRI
models follow the configuration of our previous work [22, 31], assuming a conservative AGN fraction fAGN = 1% throughout the Universe.
For comparison, the last row shows dry EMRI rates with N p = 10 plunges per EMRI.
Wet EMRIs

AGN disk
α-disk

β-disk

Dry EMRIs

T disk [yr]
106
107
108
106
107
108

Np
10

Total rates [yr−1 ]
2700
1100
390
3500
1200
390
Total rates [yr−1 ]
480

Recent studies based on optical observations of TDEs have
provided an updated local SMBH mass function, which is
nearly flat in logarithmic space [52], given by
!β
dN•
M•
= 0.005
Mpc−3 ,
(2)
d log M•
3 × 106 M⊙
with a power index β set to zero in the simulation. This updated mass function provides an empirical measurement of
SMBH distribution, based on recent TDE observations [52].
Unlike other models—such as the Population III seed model,
which is derived from simulations, and the phenomenological model, which is constructed from theoretical assumptions—the TDE-based mass function is directly informed by
observational data, making it potentially more reliable.
In contrast to earlier studies that extrapolated SMBH populations from higher masses (∼ 107 M⊙ ) [2], the TDE-based estimates are grounded in observations of SMBHs with masses
as low as 105 M⊙ [52], making them particularly relevant for
modeling EMRI sources in the LISA band. Although current
TDE observations are limited to the local Universe (z < 0.5),
we assume this mass function to be universal and extrapolate
its shape to higher redshifts (z ∼ 4.5). This extrapolation
is motivated by the assumption that the fundamental black
hole demographics and EMRI formation mechanisms do not
evolve significantly over this redshift range.
1.

Population and detectability

With this updated mass function, we have reevaluated the
population and detection rates of wet EMRIs, as summarized
in Table I. The total wet EMRI rate across all SMBHs is calculated by integrating the differential EMRI rate over the mass
M• and redshift z. The differential rate is given by
d2 Rwet
fAGN dN• dVc (z)
=
Ccusp (M• , z) Γwet (M• ) ,
dM• dz 1 + z dM• dz

(3)

where the factor 1/(1 + z) arises from the cosmological redshift, Vc (z) is the comoving volume of the Universe up to redshift z, Ccusp (M• , z) is the fraction of SMBHs living in stellar cusps [53]. The time-averaged wet EMRI rate per AGN,

detection rates [yr−1 ]
90
22
9
100
30
8
detectable rates [yr−1 ]
32

resolvable hosts [yr−1 ]
5
1.3
0.4
6
1
0.6
-

Γwet (M• ), depends on the disk lifetime T disk , the rate of sBH
capture, and the migration timescale [22, 31, 32].
Table I summarizes the updated wet EMRI population estimates based on the revised SMBH mass function. The table provides the total wet EMRI rates for sBHs (µ = 10M⊙ )
over the redshift range 0 < z < 4.5, as well as the corresponding LISA detection rates (for a signal-to-noise ratio
SNR ≥ 20) and the fraction of resolvable host AGN galaxies.
A host galaxy is considered resolvable if the expected number of AGNs within the localization volume is less than 1.1
(as detailed in Sec. II E). These calculations are based on the
framework established in our previous work [22, 31], assuming a conservative AGN fraction of fAGN = 1% throughout
the Universe. For comparison, the final row includes the dry
EMRI rates, assuming N p = 10, where N p represents the number of plunges per EMRI.
To evaluate LISA detection rates and conduct the Fisher
matrix analyses presented in this work, we adopt the Augmented Analytic Kludge (AAK) waveform model [54–59], as
implemented in Fast EMRI Waveforms (FEW) [59–63]. All
analyses are carried out in a 14-dimensional parameter space
that includes the mass and spin of the SMBH, the mass of the
sBH, the luminosity distance, the initial semi-latus rectum,
initial eccentricity, sky location, orbital inclination, and the
initial orbital phases in ϕ, θ, r. For both dry and wet EMRIs,
we assume isotropic distributions for sky location and SMBH
spin direction. The three phase angles are sampled uniformly
from [0, 2π], and coalescence times are randomly drawn from
the interval [0, 2] years. For wet EMRIs, the cosine of the inclination angle is sampled uniformly from the range [0, 0.1],
reflecting alignment with the AGN disk, while for dry EMRIs
it is drawn from a uniform distribution over [−1, 1], allowing
for isotropic orientations. The initial eccentricity e0 is also assigned based on the formation channel: for dry EMRIs, e0 is
drawn from a uniform distribution in [0, 0.2], consistent with
their dynamical origin in dense stellar environments. In contrast, wet EMRIs are assumed to start on circular orbits with
e0 = 0, reflecting strong eccentricity damping due to AGN
disk interactions. We adopt a uniform spin distribution in the
range [0, 0.99] for dry EMRIs, which reduces the detection
rate for the dry channel by approximately 30% compared to

4
the case with fixed spin a = 0.98, while for wet EMRIs we
assume a fixed spin of a = 0.98 to reflect efficient spin alignment in AGN disks.
The LISA detector’s response to these waveforms is modeled using its two orthogonal channels (I and II), with the GW
signals projected as [64, 65]
hI (t) = h+ (t) F I+ (t) + h× (t) F I× (t) ,
+
×
hII (t) = h+ (t) F II
(t) + h× (t) F II
(t) ,

(4)
(5)

where h+ (t) and h× (t) are the two GW polarizations, and F I+ (t),
+
×
F I× (t), F II
(t), and F II
(t) are the antenna pattern functions of
the LISA detector for each channel. The SNR used to assess
the detectability of EMRIs is defined as
p
(6)
ρ = ⟨hI |hI ⟩ + ⟨hII |hII ⟩ ,
where the inner product is given by
⟨a, b⟩ = 4 Re

Z fmax
fmin

ã( f )b̃∗ ( f )
df ,
Pn ( f )

(7)

where ã( f ) and b̃( f ) are the Fourier transforms of the signals
a(t) and b(t), and Pn ( f ) represents the one-sided spectral noise
density of the LISA detector [1, 66, 67]. The detection threshold is set at ρ = 20 [2]. The corresponding LISA detection
rates are listed in the second-to-last column of Table I.
The inclusion of the TDE-based SMBH mass function enhances our ability to model wet EMRI populations and their
detectability, providing a refined picture of their contribution
to the GW event rate.

2.

Identifications of wet EMRIs and host AGNs

The distinction between wet and dry EMRIs can be drawn
based on their orbital characteristics and potential environmental signatures in the GW signal.
In wet environments, based on standard migration theory,
strong interactions between sBHs and the accretion disks of
rapidly accreting SMBHs—primarily via dynamical friction
and disk-induced density waves—efficiently damp the vertical momentum and eccentricity of an sBH, aligning it with
the disk plane and circularizing its orbit. Consequently, wet
EMRIs typically exhibit near-zero eccentricities and low inclinations by the time they enter the LISA band.
In contrast, dry EMRIs, which form through dynamical
scattering in gas-poor nuclear star clusters, where such dissipative effects are absent. These systems typically retain
high eccentricities and inclined orbits throughout their evolution [22, 31]. The capability of space-based GW detectors
such as LISA to measure orbital eccentricities with high precision—for instance, down to e ∼ 10−5 [53, 68]—enables the
potential classification of EMRIs based on their orbital morphology.
Beyond orbital shape, wet EMRIs may also be distinguished through other observational features. One such possibility arises from the influence of the AGN disk on the sBH’s

orbital evolution. If the disk is sufficiently dense, the orbiting sBH can experience torques or perturbations from the surrounding gas. These interactions may imprint detectable features on the GW waveform, such as phase shifts or resonant
modulations, offering direct evidence of a disk-assisted inspiral [69, 70]. Another avenue for distinction involves EM
counterparts. Wet EMRIs may generate Type II QPEs — transient X-ray flares that occur when the sBH crosses the warped
AGN disk twice per orbit (see Sec. II B). The contemporaneous detection of such QPEs alongside the GW signal would
provide compelling multi-messenger confirmation of a wet
EMRI event. Even in the absence of a direct EM counterpart,
the spatial association of an EMRI signal with a known AGN
within the GW localization volume increases the probability
that the event originated in a gas-rich environment.
To evaluate the potential for identifying the AGN host of
an EMRI event, we utilize Fisher matrix analysis, a wellestablished statistical method to estimate the precision of parameter measurements for expected signals. The Fisher information matrix, Γi j , is defined as
*
Γi j =

+
∂h ∂h
,
,
∂λi ∂λ j

(8)

where h is the signal, λi are the source parameters, and the
inner product is defined by Eq. 7. The covariance matrix,
Σi j = (Γ−1 )i j , is obtained by inverting the Fisher matrix, with
the diagonal elements, σ2λi = Σii , represent the variances of
the individual parameters, thereby quantifying the uncertainties and correlations associated with the source localization,
including angular resolution.
To illustrate the expected precision in intrinsic and extrinsic parameters, we performed a Fisher matrix analysis over
a population of ∼ 2000 wet EMRI events with SNR > 20.
FIG. 1 presents histograms of the 1σ uncertainties for the
central black hole mass M• , compact object mass µ (source
frame), luminosity distance dL , orbital inclination ι, initial eccentricity e0 , and SMBH spin a0 . These distributions reflect
the statistical spread of parameter precisions expected in the
LISA EMRI population.
These results demonstrate that LISA will achieve highprecision measurements for both intrinsic and extrinsic EMRI
parameters, consistent with prior studies (e.g., Ref. [2]).
Such precise parameter recovery will be instrumental in distinguishing EMRI formation channels and identifying host
galaxies [71] .
To compute the localization volume—the threedimensional region in which the EMRI source is likely
located—we use catalogs of wet EMRIs generated from a
range of astrophysical models (see Table I). These include,
for example, an α-disk model with a characteristic disk
lifetime T disk = 106 years. For each model, we estimate the
number of potential AGN hosts located within the expected
localization volumes.
The sky localization volume quantifies the threedimensional uncertainty in the inferred source location,
combining angular position and luminosity distance. In the
Fisher formalism, the solid angle uncertainty ∆Ω s is derived

5
redshifts (z < 0.3 [72]), depending on the SNR and the inclusion of higher order waveform harmonics, demonstrating the
high localization precision of LISA.
To assess whether an EMRI can be classified as a bright
siren, we adopt an average number of galaxies per comoving volume n̄gal = 10−2 Mpc−3 [74] and assume a conservative
AGN fraction of fAGN = 1%. Although observational studies
suggest that the AGN fraction is approximately 1% at low redshift and may increases to 1% − 10% at higher redshifts, we
adopt a constant, redshift-independent AGN fraction of 1%
throughout this work to ensure a conservative and robust estimate.
A system is defined as a bright siren if the expected number of AGNs within the localization volume is fewer than 1.1.
Across the various astrophysical models listed in Table I, we
find that approximately 20% ∼ 25% of detectable wet EMRIs
meet this criterion. This corresponds to an annual detection
rate of 3–30 bright sirens, depending on the model and detection assumptions.
In contrast, systems with multiple AGN candidates within
their localization volumes are classified as dark sirens, reflecting the ambiguity in host identification. To account for
observational limitations—such as interstellar extinction and
incomplete AGN catalogs — we conservatively assume that
10% of initially identified bright sirens should be reclassified
as dark sirens.

B.

FIG. 1. Histograms of 1σ parameter uncertainties from the Fisher
analysis, evaluated for ∼ 2000 EMRI events with SNR > 20. Shown
are distributions for ∆M• /M• , ∆µ/µ, ∆dL /dL , ∆ι, ∆e0 , and ∆a0 . Since
masses M• and µ are reported in the source frame, their relative uncertainties are larger by a factor of 1 + z compared to the detector
frame.

from the covariance matrix Σ = Γ−1 and is given by [72, 73]
q
∆Ω s = 2π sin θ s Σθs θs Σϕs ϕs − (Σθs ϕs )2 .
(9)
The full 68% confidence localization volume in comoving coordinates is computed by including the correlation between
angular position and luminosity distance. For a trivariate
Gaussian distribution, the 68% probability region corresponds
to an ellipsoid with volume
q 

Vsky = 28 r3 (z) sin θ s det Σln dL , θs , ϕs ,
(10)
where r(z) is the comoving distance to redshift z, and
Σln dL , θs , ϕs is the 3 × 3 submatrix of the full covariance matrix
corresponding to the parameters (ln dL , θ s , ϕ s ). The prefactor
28 arises from the volume of a 3D Gaussian ellipsoid enclosing 68% of the total probability (see Appendix A for a detailed
derivation). For EMRIs detected by LISA, Fisher analysis indicates that Vsky can be restricted to O(102 ) Mpc3 at moderate

Transient Electromagnetic Counterparts: type II QPEs

In a gas-rich environment, it is natural to expect EM emissions as the sBH travels through the gas around the SMBH.
If the sBH is aligned with and embedded in the gas disk, the
continuous EM emission arising from gas accretion into the
sBH will be reprocessed by the disk and will be hard to distinguish from the AGN background emission. In this case, the
environmental effects on the gravitational waveform of EMRI
have been investigated in previous studies [13–17]. Notice
that the disk orientation at larger radii may not be the same
as the local disk direction, where the local disk is likely perpendicular to the SMBH spin direction [75], while the outer
disk direction depends on the angular momentum of the gas
feeding at larger radii. The warpped disk will exert a torque
onto the central BH and align or antialign the BH spin with
the angular momentum of the outer disk. The warp radius is
approximately [76, 77]
!−4/3
 α 2/3
Rwarp
h
a2/3
≈ 12
,
M•
0.1
0.1

(11)

and the disk alignment timescale in the small warp case is
approximately [76–80]
Ṁ•
talign ≈ 1.2 × 10 yr
Ṁ•,Edd
6

!−1 

α 5/3 2/3 h
a
0.1
0.1

!2/3
, (12)

where α is the standard viscosity coefficient in thin disks, a
is the dimensionless spin of the SMBH, Ṁ• is the SMBH

6
accretion rate and the Eddington accretion rate Ṁ•,Edd =
M• /(5 × 107 yr), and h is the disk aspect ratio. If the accretion of the SMBH is coherent in a period much longer than
talign , we expect an equatorial accretion disk and an equatorial
EMRI when the EMRI enters the LISA band; therefore, no
detectable EM transient is produced. Otherwise, if the gas
feeding direction is random in each accretion episode with
an accretion time scale shorter than talign , EM transients arising from EMRI and disk collisions are possible: for an sBH
embedded in the disk, the Lense-Thirring precession tends to
drive its orbit out of the disk plane, while the disk interaction
tends to keep the sBH within the plane. We denote the critical radius as rdec (as illustrated in FIG. 2), where the alignment timescale for the sBH orbit with the disk is equal to the
Lense-Thirring precession timescale of the sBH. At smaller
radii r < rdec , the sBH orbiting around the SMBH may hit
the accretion disk and produce (quasi-)periodic EM transients,
similar to some of the discussion of X-ray quasi-periodic eruptions (QPEs) [33–42], where eruptions are highly likely due
to collisions between a low-frequency ( fobt ∼ 10−5 Hz) EMRI
and an accretion disk formed in a recent TDE [41, 42, 81–91].
For clarity, we will call the TDE-associated QPEs as type I
QPEs and the quasi-periodic EM transients produced by an
EMRI crossing an AGN disk as type II QPEs:
• Type I QPE: QPE associated with a TDE
• Type II QPE: QPE associated with an AGN and without
a TDE
Notice that Swift J023017 is likely a type II QPE source as analyzed in Ref. [87], which is associated with a low luminosity
AGN.

where ⃗a is the dimensionless spin vector of the central SMBH
and r is the orbital radius. The disk interaction tends to align
⃗ DI (in the
the sBH’s orbital plane with the disk plane at a rate ω
direction of ⃗L × ⃗ndisk ), where ⃗ndisk is the normal vector of the
disk and ⃗L is the angular momentum of the sBH’s orbit. The
orbital angular momentum ⃗L evolves according to

d ⃗L
⃗ LT + ω
⃗ DI × ⃗L .
= ω
dt

Denoting the inclination of the sBH orbit relative to the disk
as ιsd , the alignment is driven by dynamical friction at large
inclinations and by density waves at small inclinations [92,
93], with a rate
(
)
1.46h4
1
dιsd
= min. 0.544ιsd , 3
,
(15)
ωDI := −
dt
sin (ιsd /2) twav
where
twav =

M M h4
.
µ Σ r2 ωK

In the remainder of this section, we first estimate the decoupling radius rdec of wet EMRIs, then the energy budget
of type II QPEs and finally evaluate the possibility for multimessenger detections of wet EMRIs in the LISA era. Considering a sBH embedded in an accretion disk which is misaligned with the SMBH equator, the Lense-Thirring precession tends to drive the sBH out of the disk plane in a rate
2⃗a
⃗ LT = 3 ,
ω
r

(13)

(16)

It is straightforward to see ωDI reaches its maximum value
ωmax
DI ≈

h
twav

,

(17)

at ιsd ≈ 2h. The decoupling radius is determined by the equation ωLT (rdec ) = ωmax
DI (rdec ) as
1/2 −1/8
rdec = 430M• a1/8 α1/8
,
0.1 Ṁ•,0.1 µ30

(18)

for α disks, and
24/59 −2/59 −10/59
rdec = 410M• a10/59 α8/59
,
0.1 Ṁ•,0.1 M•,6 µ30

FIG. 2. Different effects act at different radial scales. Rwarp marks the
warp radius of the accretion disk, within which the disk is warped by
the relativistic Lense-Thirring effect (frame-dragging), and remains
flat beyond. For r < rdec , Lense-Thirring precession dominates the
orbital evolution of the sBH, potentially driving it out of the disk
plane and causing misalignment. When r < RGW , GW emission
governs the sBH’s migration (GW-dominated regime), while for r >
RGW , migration is dominated by disk effects, such as gas torques
(disk-dominated regime).

(14)

(19)

for β disks, where we have defined µ30 = µ/30M⊙ , M•,6 =
M• /106 M⊙ , Ṁ•,0.1 = Ṁ• /0.1 Ṁ•,Edd and we have used analytic
models of α and β disks [13, 14]. The two numerical factors
are nearly equal because the two disk models are similar at
large radii where the gas pressure dominates the total pressure in the accretion disk. Due to the sharp r dependence of
the two rates ωLT and ωDI , the decoupling radius rdec turns
out to be insensitive to M• , α, µ, and only has a mild dependence on the SMBH accretion rate Ṁ• . From Eq. (14), it is
straightforward to see that the sBH is nearly aligned with the
disk (⃗L/L ≈ ⃗ndisk ) for r > rdec and starts to precess around
the SMBH spin axis at r < rdec (as illustrated in FIG. 2). The
transition between the two regimes is very sharp due to the
sharp r dependence of the two rates ωLT and ωDI .
As an sBH crosses an accretion disk with relative velocity
vrel higher than the local gas sound speed vs , the gas within
the accretion radius racc := 2Gµ/v2rel will be shocked and the
total orbital energy loss of the sBH per collision turns out to
be [86]
G 2 µ2 Σ
,
v2rel sin(ιsd )
!
!−3
ln Λ
sin ιsd
46
2
≈ 2 × 10 ergs
Σ5 µ30 r100
,
10
0.1

δEsBH = 4π ln Λ

(20)

7
where ιsd is the angle of inclination between the EMRI orbital plane and the disk plane, and we have defined Σ5 =
Σ/105 g cm−3 , r100 = r/100M• . In the α-disk and the β-disk
models, the disk surface densities are formulated as
−1
2 3/2
Σ(r) = 1.7 × 106 g cm−2 α−1
0.1 Ṁ•,0.1 M•,6 r100 ,

(21)

3/5
1/5 −3/5
Σ(r) = 5.0 × 105 g cm−2 α−4/5
0.1 Ṁ•,0.1 M•,6 r100 ,

(22)

and

respectively. Therefore, wet EMRIs with a warped disk are a
natural mechanism to generate type II QPEs. If type II QPEs
are confirmed in future observations, their existence provides
indirect evidence for warped disks and the chaotic accretion
mode in AGNs.
As the EMRI enters the LISA sensitivity band with orbital
radius r ∼ 10M• and orbital frequency fobt ∼ mHz, the energy
budgets per collision for the two disk models are quite differ−5/3
ent. In the α-disk model, it scales as δEsBH ∝ r5/2 ∝ fobt
,
3
that is to say, the mHz QPEs will be O(10 ) times weaker than
their low-frequency counterparts. Although the identification
of mHz type II QPEs is difficult in a sea of much stronger
AGN variability, the joint GW measurement of the orbits may
help identify the detection of mHz type II QPEs. If the accretion disk can be modeled as a β-disk, the energy budget per
−4/15
collision scales as δEsBH ∝ r2/5 ∝ fobt
, i.e. the mHz QPEs
will be a few times weaker than their low-frequency counterparts. In this case, the identification of mHz QPEs is possible
even without the input of GW observations.
This multi-messenger source will be a convenient probe to
the two disk models. The EMRI parameters, including the
SMBH parameters M• , a• , the stellar-mass BH mass µ and the
EMRI orbital inclination angle ιsd , are expected to be tightly
constrained from the GW signal [2]. In combination with the
AGN luminosity L• , it is straightforward to calculate the the
SMBH accretion rate Ṁ• . With these information, viscosity
parameter α is the only unknown parameter in α- or β-disk
models, and the two disk models predict largely different disk
surface densities at r ≲ 10M• with a ratio
Σα (r)
−8/5 −1/5 21/10
= 2.7 × 10−2 α−1/5
,
0.1 Ṁ•,0.1 M•,6 r10
Σβ (r)

(23)

which is insensitive to the unknown parameter α. Since the
energy budget of EMRI-disk collisions is proportional to the
disk surface density δEsBH ∝ Σ, collisions with a β-disk naturally produce luminous QPEs that cannot be reconciled with
the α-disk prediction.
The other possible phenomenon to observe is the strong
lensing of flares processed by the central SMBH, similar to
self-lensing flares from SMBH binaries [94]. In this case, the
strong lensing of the EMRI-produced flares is probably more
likely to happen because the sBH is much closer to its host.
As shown in Ref. [95], the strong lensing probability of a flare
(either an EM flare or GWs) emitted at radius r is approximately
Pstrong lensing ≈

M•
.
4r

(24)

Therefore the chance of strong lensing of a single flare is
around O(1%) level, and the chance will be largely enhanced
considering multi-flares are produced as the EMRI orbiting
around the SMBH and crossing the accretion disk at different locations. Unlike the case of SMBH binaries with one
of them hosting a mini-accretion disk where the background
light source is stable and the variations in the light curve
mainly come from when the mini disk is lensed by the foreground BH, the light curve of mHz QPEs varies from flare to
flare even without lensing. A more detailed study is required
to confirm whether the lensing effect can be identified from
the QPE light curve.
To summarize, wet EMRIs are promising sources of EM
transients (dubbed as type II QPEs). If confirmed, they can be
used for distinguishing different accretion disk models, and
their existence provides indirect evidence for warped AGN
disks and chaotic AGN accretion. In addition, wet EMRIs in
the mHz band will be emitting multi-messenger signals that
are possibly detectable by both spaceborne GW detectors and
X-ray telescopes, where there is a chance that the X-ray flares
get lensed by the SMBH.

C.

Calibrating other Methods of Probing Black Hole Mass
and Spin

z

M•
M⊙

0.1 1.0 × 106
0.1 2.0 × 106
0.1 5.0 × 106
0.1 5.0 × 106
0.2 1.0 × 106
0.3 1.0 × 106

λEdd κ2−10 keV
erg s−1

L2−10 keV

F2−10 keV
erg s−1 cm−2

0.2
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.2
0.2

1.3 × 1042
8.7 × 1041
1.9 × 1042
2.6 × 1042
1.3 × 1042
1.3 × 1042

5.1 × 10−14
3.4 × 10−14
7.3 × 10−14
1.0 × 10−13
1.1 × 10−14
4.5 × 10−15

20
30
70
125
20
20

TABLE II. Exemplary estimations of the 2−10 keV X-ray luminosity
and flux for SMBH counterparts at redshift z = 0.1.

EMRI GWs provide precise (better than 0.1% [2, 68]) measurements of the mass and spin of SMBHs, which can be used
to calibrate traditional EM methods if the host AGN can be
identified. As discussed in the previous subsections and summarized in Table I, the host AGN identification are possible
for a few to a few tens of EMRI host AGNs.
Generally speaking, traditional EM wave methods perform
better for type I AGN than type II AGN because the latter
is obscured [97–99]. While wet EMRIs can occur in type I
galaxies with 4.0 < log10 (M• ) < 7.0, only a small fraction of
galaxies in this mass range are active. Limited by available
observational studies, we further limit the mass range to 5.5 <
log10 (M• ) < 7.0.
The active type I fraction of galaxies with 5.5 <
log10 (M• ) < 7.0 was estimated in a two-step process. First,
following Ref. [100], we adopt the active (λEdd > 10−3 ) fraction of ∼ 15% − 40% for galaxies with 5.5 < log10 (M• ) < 6.5,

8
TABLE III. Catalog of selected SMBHs with masses below 107 M⊙ , whose mass and spin have been determined through EM observations.
All masses are reported with 1σ errors (if provided), while spins are reported with 90% error ranges. The SNRs are calculated at a fixed
source redshift (z = 0.3 [72]) using four years of data from various detectors. According to the work by Babak et al. [2], the measurement
uncertainties for the mass and spin of the SMBH could range from approximately 10−6 ∼ 10−4 and 10−6 ∼ 10−3 , respectively.
SNR (z = 0.3)

Mass
[×106 M⊙ ]

Spin

UGC 01032

∼ 1.1

0.66+0.30
−0.54

0.01678

87

56

280

Mrk 359

UGC 12163

∼ 1.1

> 0.9

0.02468

92

61

290

Ark 564

Swift J2127.4+5654

∼ 1.5

0.6 ± 0.2

0.01400

66

38

210

NGC 4253

1.8+1.6
−1.4

> 0.92

0.01293

64

37

200

UGC 07344, Mrk 766

NGC 4051

1.91 ± 0.78

> 0.99

0.00234

33

19

110

UGC 07030

NGC 1365

∼2

> 0.97

0.00545

29

16

92

1H0707-495

∼ 2.3

> 0.94

0.04056

19

11

63

MCG-6-30-15

2.9+1.8
−1.6

0.91+0.06
−0.07

0.00749

10

6.8

36

0.93 ± 0.04 0.00608

Object

z

Alternate Names

LISA [66, 67] TianQin [8] TaiJi [96]

NGC 5506

∼5

3.0

2.3

11

IRAS13224-3809

∼ 6.3

> 0.975

0.06579

1.7

1.5

6.6

Ton S180

∼ 8.1

> 0.98

0.06198

0.9

0.9

3.7

where λEdd is the Eddington ratio. This is broadly consistent with the active fraction of ∼ 24% − 34% for the same
BH mass range estimated by Ref. [101], although a lower
Eddington ratio is adopted. For a larger BH mass range
6.5 < log10 (M• ) < 10.5, the active (λEdd > 10−3 ) fraction
is ∼ 10% − 16% [102]. Furthermore, Ref. [103] yielded an active fraction of ∼ 10% − 22% for the host galaxy stellar mass
range 9.0 < log10 (M⋆, host ) < 10.0. Assuming a M• − M⋆, host
relation (e.g., Eq. 39 of Ref. [100]), this translates to a BH
mass range of 5.0 < log10 (M• ) < 6.0.
Second, the active fraction of Ref. [100] should be multiplied by the type I fraction of active galaxies. The type
I fraction of active galaxies ranges from ∼ 7% [104] to
∼ 20% [105, 106]. Therefore, the active type I fraction of
galaxies with 5.5 < log10 (M• ) < 6.5 is ∼ 1% − 8% [100].
This is comparable to that of ∼ 4% for a larger BH mass range
6.5 < log10 (M• ) < 10.5 [102]. Hence, a few percent of galaxies with 5.5 < log10 (M• ) < 7.0 might be used to calibrate
traditional X-ray measurements of the SMBH spin and optical measurements of the SMBH mass using precise GW spin
and mass measurement.
For optical counterparts of such wet EMRI, the most commonly used method to estimate M• is the so-called virial mass
estimator, which is based on costly and time-consuming reverberation mapping or convenient yet less accurate single-epoch
spectra [107, 108]. It assumes that the regions emitting broad
emissions, known as broad-line region (BLR) clouds, are entirely governed by the gravitational force of the BH, so that
M• can be measured as long as the velocity (v) and distance
2
(r) of the BLR clouds from the BH are known, i.e. M• = f rvG .
There is a uniformly assigned coefficient f in the calculation,
which is calibrated by the M• − σ⋆ relation, assuming that active and inactive galaxies follow the same relation. Note that
the intrinsic scatter of the tightest M• − σ⋆ relation for local

Mrk 1376

massive galaxies is at least 0.3−0.5 dex [109–111], the uncertainty associated with the f used for AGNs could be considerably larger. Moreover, for a given AGN, it suffers from additional uncertainties from the kinematics, geometry, inclination
of the clouds, and even the nature of the bulges [112], making the real f hugely different from object to object. Recently,
some exciting progress has been made with the advanced NIR
interferometry GRAVITY, mounted on the Very Large Telescope Interferometer (VLTI), which has shown promise in
probing the BLR structure and thus improving the precision
of the M• measurement [113, 114]. Unfortunately, it can only
be applied to very few near-infrared luminous AGNs.
For X-ray counterparts of such wet EMRIs in type I AGNs,
the most commonly used method to estimate BH spin is Xray reflection spectroscopy [115, 116]. The reflection spectroscopy takes advantage of the skewed line profile of the 6.4
keV Fe line, which is featured with a sharp blueshifted peak
due to the relativistic beaming effect and an extended redshifted wing due to the gravitational redshift of matter close
to the innermost stable circular orbit. More technical details,
as well as descriptions of other techniques, can be found in
the recent review on the observational constraints on BH spin
[117].
For those active type I galaxies with wet EMRI signals,
their 2 − 10 keV luminosity is estimated as
!
!
M•
λEdd
44
−1
L2−10 keV = 1.3 × 10 erg s
, (25)
106 M⊙ κ2−10 keV
where M• is the BH mass, λEdd the Eddington ratio,
κ2−10 keV the 2 − 10 keV bolometric correction. The ratio
of λEdd /κ2−10 keV is in the range of 0.001 − 0.1 [118]. Generally speaking, κ2−10 keV ∼ 20 − 70 for 0.1 < λEdd < 0.2 and
κ2−10 keV ∼ 70 − 150 for λEdd > 0.2 [119]. The 2 − 10 keV
flux is obtained following the inverse square law of the lu-

9
minosity distance, where we assume the standard flat ΛCDM
cosmology with parameters H0 = 70 km s−1 Mpc−1 and Ωm =
1 − ΩΛ = 0.3. Table II lists exemplary estimations, mainly for
z = 0.1. The estimated 2 − 10 keV X-ray flux is low in general
(≲ 10−13 erg s−1 cm−2 ) but detectable. For comparisons, the
XMM-COSMOS survey can reach the 2 − 10 keV flux limit
of ∼ 9.3 × 10−15 erg s−1 cm−2 , with an average vignettingcorrected exposure of 40 ks [120]. To estimate the BH spin,
merely detection is not enough. Ideally, it is preferable to
match the spectral quality of the nearby AGN with the BH
spin measurement [117]. For comparisons, the 2 − 10 keV
flux of Mrk 359 (z = 0.01678, [121]) listed in Table III is
≳ 5 × 10−12 erg s−1 cm−2 . For the X-ray counterparts of wet
EMRIs, it is essential to take deep-exposure observations using future X-ray missions (e.g., eXTP [122] and Athena [123])
with significantly larger effective areas than those of current
missions.
Table III presents a catalog of selected SMBHs with masses
below 107 M⊙ , whose masses and spins have been determined
using EM observations [117, 124, 125]. The table also includes SNRs for GW detections from LISA, TianQin, and
Taiji, assuming a source with the same intrinsic parameters
placed at the redshift of z = 0.3 and with four years of observation. Although EM observations of SMBH spin typically
carry significant uncertainties due to the limitations of current methods, GW observations from wet EMRIs provide far
greater precision, with uncertainties as low as 10−8 ∼ 10−6 for
mass and 10−7 ∼ 10−5 for spin [2, 68], as also shown in FIG. 1.
This comparison highlights the potential of wet EMRIs to calibrate traditional EM techniques, which rely on indirect methods such as X-ray reflection or virial mass estimators, often
affected by large scatter and systematic biases. By integrating
EM and GW data, Table III illustrates the critical role of wet
EMRIs in improving the accuracy and reliability of SMBH
mass and spin measurements, especially in type I AGNs.

D.

from â due to disk warping or misalignment, as discussed in
Sec. II B.
Understanding the geometric relationships among the
SMBH spin axis â, the accretion disk L̂disk and the jet direction
(as illustrated in FIG. 4) is crucial for interpreting the physical processes behind the jet-launching. Disentangling these
directional vectors allows us to constrain the dominant jetlaunching mechanism and to better understand the interplay
between SMBH spin, disk dynamics, and magnetic fields.

FIG. 3. Posterior distribution of the inclination angle ι, shown for the
dimensionless semi-latus rectum at p0 ∼ 8M• (left panel), and after
tracing the evolution back to p ∼ 150M• due to GW radiation, and
further to p = 410M• using Eq. 14 with β-disk model (right panel).
The orange vertical lines indicate the mean value along with the 1−σ
uncertainty.

Testing Accretion Disk and Jet Models

Astrophysical jets, such as those observed in AGN and
X-ray binaries, are often believed to be launched through
two primary theoretical mechanisms or their variants: the
Blandford-Znajek (BZ) mechanism and the Blandford-Payne
(BP) mechanism, which differ in their energy sources and jetlaunching regions.
With the BZ mechanism [126], a jet extracts energy and angular momentum from a spinning SMBH through magnetic
fields that thread its event horizon. This process converts the
rotational energy of the BH into jet power via the Penrose process [127] to jet energy, so that the direction of the jet should
be highly correlated with the spin axis of the BH â.
In contrast, through the BP mechanism [128], a jet extracts
energy from the rotational motion of the accretion disk via
magnetic fields that thread the disk. These fields centrifugally
accelerate material along magnetic field lines and collimate
it into a jet [129]. The resulting jet aligns with the direction
of the disk magnetic field, which should be highly correlated
with the angular momentum L̂disk . Notice that L̂disk may differ

FIG. 4. Relationship among the orbital angular momentum of the
sBH L̂, the SMBH spin direction â, and the jet angle. The disk orientation L̂disk is inferred by tracing L̂ backward from the LISA band
(p0 ∼ 8M• ) to p ∼ 410M• (decoupling radius), where the sBH resides within the disk.

Among the three vectors, the SMBH spin axis â is the most
straightforward to measure using GW observations. The LISA
mission is expected to constrain the direction of the SMBH
spin with an angular uncertainty in the range of approximately
1 − 10 deg2 for z < 0.25 [72]. Additionally, GW signals allow
accurate extraction of the inclination angle ι, defined as the
angle between the SMBH spin axis (â) and the orbital angular

10

FIG. 5. Uncertainty in the Lense-Thirring precession angle at p ∼
150M• , traced back from a semi-latus rectum of p0 ∼ 8M• .

momentum vector (L̂). This measurement is typically made at
a semi-latus rectum of p ∼ 8M• , corresponding to the region
where LISA is most sensitive.
In warped disk scenarios, inferring the orientation of the
accretion disk (L̂disk ) is more challenging, as the evolution
of sBH depends on a complex interplay of forces acting at
different radii (as illustrated in FIG. 2). In the outer regions
of the disk, the motion of the sBH is primarily governed by
disk forces, while closer to the SMBH, GW radiation dominates its evolution. At larger radii, the sBH orbits within
the disk plane, but as it migrates inward, it gradually departs
from the disk due to Lense-Thirring precession induced by the
SMBH [130].
To estimate the disk orientation at larger radii, we perform a
backward evolution of the orbital trajectory—driven solely by
GW damping and neglecting other dynamical interactions for
simplicity—from the LISA band (p ∼ 8M• ) to p ∼ 150M• .
We then evolve the system further to p = 410M• using
Eq. 14 with the β-disk model. Under this assumption, the orbital angular momentum vector of the sBH, reconstructed at
p ∼ 410M• , serves as a proxy for the accretion disk orientation at that radius. This radius is significantly larger than the
warp radius Rwarp (see Eq. 11) and corresponds to the outer
region of the accretion disk, where disk forces are expected to
dominate over relativistic effects, as discussed in Sec. II B.
At this outer location, the disk orientation can be described
by two angles measured relative to the SMBH spin axis: the
inclination angle, which captures the tilt of the disk, and
the precession angle, which describes its azimuthal orientation. Together, these angles define the full 3D geometry of
the disk and provide essential input for understanding the jetlaunching mechanism in the context of disk–black hole interactions.
The inclination angle ι of the sBH’s orbit is defined as [131]
cos ι = q

Lz

,

(26)

Q + Lz2

where Lz represents the z-component of the orbital angular
momentum of the sBH, and Q is the Carter constant. The
inclination angle ι represents the orientation of the orbital angular momentum relative to the spin of SMBH. However, as ι

increases over time due to the radiation reaction [132–134],
it no longer reliably indicates the orientation of the accretion disk. Thus, to estimate the disk’s orientation, the orbital
trajectory must be evolved backward to regions far from the
SMBH, where ι can, in principle, reflect the orientation of the
accretion disk.
The measurement uncertainty of ι as the EMRI system enters the LISA band (p0 ∼ 8M• ) is estimated by performing Fisher analysis with the AAK waveform model [56, 59].
The posterior samples obtained from this analysis are propagated backward by evolving the orbital trajectory first to
p ∼ 150M• , and then to p ∼ 410M• . At this larger radius, the
orbital angular momentum of the sBH serves as a proxy for
the orientation of the accretion disk. As an illustrative example, we consider a simulated EMRI system with the following
key parameters:
• SMBH mass: M• = 106 M⊙
• SMBH spin: a = 0.98
• sBH mass: µ = 10M⊙
• initial eccentricity: e = 0.01
• observation time: T = 2 years
• inclination angle: ι ≈ 30◦
• SNR: fixed at 50 by adjusting the luminosity distance
The initial eccentricity of the system is set to e = 0.01, consistent with expectations for disk-driven (wet) EMRIs. While
idealized wet EMRI models often assume perfectly circular
orbits (e = 0), recent studies suggest that AGN disk interactions do not fully circularize the orbit. In particular, turbulence
and multi-body resonances within the disk can induce residual
eccentricities in the range e ∼ 10−4 to 10−2 in the LISA band,
depending on specific disk properties such as the surface density and coherence time [71]. The choice of e = 0.01 thus
reflects a realistic and observationally motivated value for wet
EMRIs, rather than a purely idealized scenario.
Furthermore, this residual eccentricity has implications for
parameter estimation and waveform modeling. As shown
in FIG. 1, LISA’s eccentricity measurement precision is expected to reach ∼ 10−5 , enabling the detection of such small
but nonzero values. In this work, we do not incorporate eccentricity when propagating posterior samples of the inclination
angle ι to larger radii (e.g., p ∼ 150 and 410 M• ) for estimating uncertainties in disk geometry. The eccentricity contributes weakly to this propagation compared to inclination
and spin, but its inclusion ensures a more realistic assessment
of EMRI dynamics in AGN environments.
We find that the 1σ uncertainty in ι at p ∼ 410M• is approximately ∼ 0.05◦ (see FIG. 3). This result demonstrates
that GW observations can provide a highly precise estimate
of the disk inclination.
To estimate the uncertainty in the precession angle, we similarly propagate samples of orbital configurations measured at
p0 ∼ 8M• (within the LISA band) backward to a semi-latus
rectum of p ∼ 150M• . Ideally, the backward propagation
should extend to p ∼ 400M• as illustrated in FIG. 2. However,
for p > 150M• , the disk begins to dominate the orbital evolution. Beyond this point, the uncertainty no longer improves
significantly due to the increasing influence of disk-induced

11
torques. At these outer radii, the precession angle reflects the
azimuthal orientation of the disk. However, unlike the inclination, the uncertainty in the precession angle grows approximately linearly with distance, reaching a value of around 10◦
already at p ∼ 150M• , as shown in FIG. 5. This level of
uncertainty makes it challenging to resolve the azimuthal orientation of the warped disk.
In addition to GW-derived measurements of the SMBH spin
and the inclination angle, EM observations can estimate the
jet direction if the host AGN of the EMRI is resolvable. For
AGNs with small jet viewing angles (∼ 10◦ ), radio observations, such as those conducted by the MOJAVE program, can
determine the jet angle with an accuracy of approximately
1◦ by analyzing jet kinematics [135–142]. Furthermore, for
gamma-ray bright AGNs, observations from Fermi-LAT typically measure larger jet viewing angles and greater accuracy
on average compared to non-LAT-detected AGNs [136, 139].
The ability to measure the directions of the SMBH spin,
accretion disk, and jet opens a promising avenue for testing
jet-launching models. As illustrated in FIG. 4, GW observations provide precise measurements of the spin axis and the
disk inclination angle, while EM observations reveal the jet
orientation. However, due to the uncertainty in the precession angle, the relative angle between the jet direction and
the accretion disk remains inaccessible in individual events.
As a result, while we can constrain the angle between the jet
and the SMBH spin, which is most relevant for testing the
BZ mechanism, we cannot yet directly compare the jet to the
disk orientation, limiting our ability to test the BP mechanism
on a case-by-case basis. In addition, to statistically establish
the correlations, it will likely require studying a population
of wet EMRIs (those with significant disk interactions) with
well-resolved EM counterparts.

E.

Cosmology with Wet EMRIs

Wet EMRIs provide a promising avenue for probing cosmological models by serving as both “bright” and “dark” sirens.
These systems combine GW measurements of the luminosity distance with EM observations to determine the redshift
of their possible host galaxies. When the host galaxy can be
unambiguously identified, wet EMRIs act as bright sirens, enabling an independent measurement of the Hubble parameter.
However, to qualify as a bright siren, a wet EMRI requires
high localization precision and a unique association with its
host AGN. In practice, selection effects including galaxy survey incompleteness and AGN luminosity function need to be
taken into account in a self-consistent way, e.g., a Bayesian
approach that has been widely used for population inference
in previous GW cosmology works [143, 144]. As a proof
of concept, we idealize the host identification by assuming
a complete galaxy survey where galaxies are either detectable
AGNs or others (non-detectable AGNs or normal galaxies).
With this simplification, the host AGN identification is established as long as the EMRI error volume is sufficiently small
containing only one AGN. As shown by forecast in Sec. II A 2,
only low-redshift (z ≲ 0.3) host AGNs can be identified with

EMRI GW signals. In the following forecast of host AGN
identification, we adopt a conservative assumption that 1% of
low-redshift galaxies are detectable AGNs (see Sec. II C for a
brief summary of AGN detection).
Dark sirens, despite the absence of unambiguous host
galaxy identification, still play a significant role in measuring the Hubble parameter. In such cases, statistical methods
can be employed, utilizing galaxy catalogs to infer redshift
distributions within the localization volume. Although this
approach offers reduced precision compared to bright sirens,
it enables dark sirens to complement bright sirens in constraining cosmological parameters, as dark sirens primarily
use EMRIs with higher redshift than bright sirens. In addition, to account for observational challenges, such as interstellar extinction or incomplete AGN catalogs, we conservatively
reclassify 10% of the initially identified bright sirens as dark
sirens.
In summary, wet EMRIs offer a unique opportunity to probe
the Hubble parameter through bright and dark sirens. Bright
sirens provide precise, independent measurements when host
galaxies are resolvable, while dark sirens contribute through
statistical inference methods. The following sections will explore the respective roles of bright and dark sirens in constraining the Hubble parameter.

1.

Wet EMRIs as bright sirens

The groundbreaking detection of GW170817, with its wellidentified host galaxy (NGC 4993) and associated kilonova
AT 2017gfo, marked the first GW-based measurement of the
−1
−1
Hubble constant, yielding H0 = 70.0+12
[145].
−8 km s Mpc
This pioneering result demonstrated the potential of joint GW
and EM observations to independently constrain cosmological parameters. Building on this framework, wet EMRIs represent another promising class of bright sirens, particularly in
the context of future cosmological studies.
Wet EMRIs, which involve compact objects spiraling into
SMBHs within AGN disks, are ideal candidates for joint GWEM observations. Similar to past events such as GW170817,
wet EMRIs can act as bright sirens if their host AGNs are
uniquely identified, allowing for precise redshift measurements. In addition, wet EMRIs have several advantages over
other sources, such as binary neutron star (BNS) or neutron
star–black hole mergers. These advantages include higher expected detection rates, the ability to probe greater cosmological distances, and robust EM counterparts. Their relatively
high localization precision and strong association with AGNs
allow for a confident identification of host galaxies and their
corresponding redshifts, making them powerful tools for constraining H0 and other cosmological parameters at cosmological scales.
To measure H0 using wet EMRI bright sirens, the luminosity distance dL obtained from GW signals is combined
with the redshift z of the host AGN. Redshift uncertainties
from spectroscopic measurements are typically in the range
z ∼ 0.001 − 0.01, consistent with forecasts from DESI [146]
and LSST [147]. Since almost all host-identified EMRIs

12
(bright sirens) are expected to lie at z < 0.3, where spectroscopic redshifts are more accurate, the influence of redshift
uncertainty is negligible for our analysis.
Assuming a flat ΛCDM cosmology, the relationship between luminosity distance and redshift (dL − z relation) is expressed as
Z z
dz′
,
(27)
dL (z) = c(1 + z)
′
0 H(z )
where the Hubble parameter, H(z), is given by
q
H(z) = H0 Ωm,0 (1 + z)3 + ΩΛ,0 ,

(28)

and Ωm,0 and ΩΛ,0 are the present-day matter and dark energy densities, respectively, satisfying Ωm,0 + ΩΛ,0 = 1. The
present value of the Hubble parameter, H0 , can be expressed
in terms of the dimensionless parameter h, such that H0 =
h × 100 km s−1 Mpc−1 .

FIG. 6. 1-σ relative uncertainty of the Hubble parameter H0 as a
function of the number of bright EMRIs is shown for two representative wet EMRI models. As expected, the uncertainty on H0 decreases
with increasing numbers of bright EMRIs, reaching 1% with seven
bright sirens. Other simulated wet EMRI models exhibit similar behavior. The colored dots represent the calculated data points

For each EMRI model listed in Table I, the Hubble parameter H0 can be constrained by statistically combining the luminosity distance derived from GW, dL , and its associated uncertainty, σ(dL ), with the redshift of the host AGN. To achieve
this, we randomly sample N bright sirens from the catalog corresponding to the chosen EMRI model and perform MarkovChain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulations to derive the posterior distributions of dimensionless Hubble parameter h and
other cosmological parameters, such as matter density Ωm,0 .
To reduce the effects of randomness in the sampling process, this procedure is repeated 90 times for each value of N.
By averaging the results across these repetitions, we estimate
the mean value of H0 and its corresponding uncertainty, ∆H0 ,
ensuring statistical robustness. This approach ensures that the
constraints derived from H0 are reliable and representative of

the underlying EMRI population for the selected astrophysical
model.
FIG. 6 shows the 1-σ relative uncertainty in H0 as a function of the number of bright EMRIs, based on two representative wet EMRI models. As expected, the uncertainty on H0
decreases as the number of bright EMRIs increases. The results suggest that with approximately seven bright EMRI detections, H0 can be restricted to within 1% uncertainty. This
level of precision is comparable to that achieved using EM
standard candles, such as Type Ia supernovae [148], and has
the potential to help resolve the “Hubble tension” between
early- and late-universe H0 measurements. Furthermore, the
higher redshifts accessible to wet EMRIs provide an opportunity to probe additional cosmological parameters, such as
the matter density Ωm,0 and the dark energy equation of state
parameter.
The inclusion of wet EMRI bright sirens in cosmological studies enhances the scope of GW-based standard siren
measurements, complementing those from massive black hole
binaries (MBHBs), BHSs, and binary black holes (BBHs).
In parallel, MBHBs detected by space-based interferometers
like LISA also serve as powerful bright sirens. As demonstrated by Tamanini et al. [149], LISA can constrain H0 to
sub-percent precision, particularly in its most optimistic configurations, with uncertainties reaching as low 0.5%. Importantly, MBHB standard sirens extend to redshifts as high as
z ∼ 8, significantly beyond the range accessible to wet EMRIs
and EM probes. This broader redshift coverage allows MBHBs to provide independent and complementary constraints
on cosmological parameters.
The inclusion of wet EMRI bright sirens in cosmological studies enhances the scope of GW-based standard siren
measurements, complementing those from BNS and BBH
mergers. Future multimessenger detections will enable combined constraints from bright sirens across various GW source
classes, significantly refining measurements of H0 and other
cosmological parameters. This, in turn, will deepen our understanding of the expansion history of the Universe and the
underlying physics of dark energy.

2.

Wet EMRIs as dark sirens

The dark siren analysis technique is a powerful statistical method for inferring cosmological parameters from GW
events that lack identifiable EM counterparts. Instead of requiring a uniquely resolved host galaxy, this approach utilizes the spatial localization of the GW source and statistically matches it with the galaxy or AGN catalogs [150, 151].
By assigning probabilities to potential host galaxies within the
GW localization volume, the technique extracts redshift information and combines it with the GW-derived luminosity
distance to constrain parameters such as the Hubble parameter H0 . This method is particularly well-suited for EMRIs or
BBH mergers that lack direct observable EM counterparts.
The technique operates within the framework of Bayesian
inference. For a set of GW events D = {D1 , . . . , DN }, the
posterior distribution of the cosmological parameters Θ =

13
{H0 , Ωm,0 , . . . } is given by
p(Θ | D, H, I) =

p(D | Θ, H, I) p(Θ | H, I)
,
p(D | H, I)

(29)

where H is the assumed cosmological model, I represents
prior information, and p(Θ | H, I) is the prior on the parameters. The evidence p(D | H, I) serves as a normalization constant, while the likelihood p(D | Θ, H, I) encodes the probability of the data given the parameters. For a single GW event,
the likelihood is expressed as
Z Z
p(Di | Θ, H, I) =
dzgw ddL p(dL | zgw , Θ, H, I)
p(zgw | Θ, H, I) p(Di | dL , zgw , Θ, H, I) ,
(30)
where dL is the luminosity distance, zgw is the redshift of the
GW source, and p(dL | zgw , Θ, H, I) = δ(dL −d(zgw , Θ)) relates
the luminosity distance to the redshift through the assumed
cosmological model. The term p(zgw | Θ, H, I) represents the
prior probability of the source redshift, which is informed by
the galaxy catalog. The final term, p(Di | dL , zgw , Θ, H, I), is
the likelihood of GW data, which is typically modeled as a
Gaussian centered on the observed dL with uncertainties from
GW parameter estimation and weak lensing [149].
Although the general dark-siren method applies to all GW
events, wet EMRIs offer a distinct advantage due to their
strong association with AGNs. For BBH mergers, all galaxies
within the error volume of a single GW event must be considered as potential hosts. In contrast, for wet EMRIs, the search
is limited to galaxies that host AGNs (we conservatively take
an AGN fraction fAGN = 1%), significantly reducing the number of candidates. This reduction improves the statistical association between the GW source and its host galaxy, leading
to tighter constraints on cosmological parameters.
To statistically associate host galaxies with the GW source,
the redshift prior p(zgw | Θ, H, I) is constructed by summing
over all potential hosts – specifically, the host AGN galaxies
in this study – within the GW localization volume, as follows:
Ng
X



 (z j − zgw )2 
 ,
p(zgw | Θ, H, I) ∝
w j exp −
2σ2z, j 
j=1

(31)

where Ng is the number of candidate host galaxies, z j is the
catalog redshift of the j-th galaxy, σz, j includes uncertainties
from peculiar velocities and w j is the weight assigned to each
galaxy based on its spatial position to the GW sky localization.
As summarized in Table I, the wet EMRI models used predict the detection of 10–150 events per year, and most of the
host AGNs are still poorly identified. For dark siren analysis, we adopt the first model (a α-disk model with T disk = 106
years) as an example. This model predicts approximately 100
wet EMRIs per year with unresolvable host AGNs. In this
simulation, we randomly select 30 dark EMRIs from the first
model’s catalog to constrain the Hubble parameter H0 . The
sample size allows us to study a representative sample of the
dark EMRI population while maintaining computational efficiency.

FIG. 7. Posterior distributions of the dimensionless Hubble parameter h and matter density Ωm,0 inferred from 30 wet EMRI dark sirens
randomly selected from the first α-disk model. The solid red lines
represent the true values, while the dashed lines indicate the mean
and 1-σ standard deviation of the distributions.

Each dark EMRI event is matched with an AGN catalog, using the reduced number of AGNs within the GW localization
volume to build a redshift prior to dark siren analysis. The
GW localization volume of each dark EMRI typically contains O(102 ) ∼ O(103 ) potential host galaxies. However, considering that only about 1% of galaxies host AGNs, the pool
of candidate AGNs is reduced to O(10) ∼ O(102 ). This reduction significantly improves the statistical association between
the source of GW and its host AGN compared to dry EMRIs, resulting in tighter constraints on H0 and other cosmological parameters. By statistically matching the 30 selected
dark EMRIs with AGN catalogs, the Hubble parameter can be
constrained to 3% precision, as shown in FIG. 7. This level
of precision, while slightly less than that achieved with bright
sirens, underscores the power of dark sirens for independent
cosmological measurements.
This method offers a promising pathway for advancing
GW cosmology, particularly in scenarios where EM counterparts are absent. Furthermore, the combination of bright and
dark sirens provides complementary constraints across different redshift ranges: bright sirens probe lower redshifts with
uniquely identifiable hosts, while dark sirens extend measurements to higher redshifts using statistical associations. By
combining the complementary strengths of bright and dark
sirens, GW cosmology offers a robust and independent means
of investigating the Universe’s expansion history, leading to a
more comprehensive understanding of its evolution.

14
III.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

The various science opportunities discussed in Sec. II are
still subject to several caveats and uncertainties, two of which
are highlighted below.
First, there are still theoretical uncertainties regarding the
profile of the disk and the migration of stars and stellar-mass
objects within the disk. Previously, most work assumed the
thin-disk profile, although at larger radii additional heating
from stars is included to balance out the gravitational instabilites [152]. However, it is still unclear how many embedded objects are present within the disk and how they modify
the structure of the disk. Between the GW dominated region
and the Broad-Line region, some work has suggested that the
disk becomes clumpy and rather turbulent, which further affect both the migration of stellar-mass objects within the disk
and the rate of capturing from the nuclear star cluster. Although eventually the quasi-equilibrium wet EMRI formation
is mainly determined by the supply rate of sBHs to the nuclear
star cluster [32] rather than by detailed migration dynamics, it
is necessary to understand these underlying physical processes
before one can make further quantitative predictions.
Second, in Sec. II we have made the implicit assumption
that wet EMRIs are associated with visible AGNs. We have
tried to include an estimation of the “dark” sources because of
dust absorption, especially in the Hubble parameter measurement. There is, however, another scenario that the EMRI is
brought to the vicinity of the massive BH because of disk migration, but the disk becomes quiescent during the time that
this EMRI is observed by space-borne GW detectors. This
scenario mainly affects wet EMRIs formed at the end of disk
life cycles. If the lifetime of the disk is on average T disk and the
wet EMRI formation rate for that disk-assisted system is approximately once per T EMRI (see the discussion in Ref. [22]),
then this effect may affect a fraction of T EMRI /T disk wet EMRIs. A more detailed study of this effect may include the timedependent formation rate of wet EMRIs as the system starts to
deplete sBHs within the nuclear star cluster.
Despite these uncertainties, the multi-messenger aspects of
wet EMRIs are still less explored, partly because their abundance has only started to be quantitatively studied in recent
years [22, 31, 32]. The applications in EM transients, in
calibrating disk mass and spin measurements, in testing disk
and jet models, and in cosmology discussed in this work are
likely still a small subset of what one can learn from multimessenger observations of wet EMRIs. We believe there is
significant scientific potential in studying joint science cases
for wet EMRIs with GW and/or X-ray, optical and radio ob-

servations, as well as multiband events coming from stellarmass binary mergers within AGN disks.
Acknowledgements— We thank Jian-Ming Wang and
Lianggui Zhu for interesting discussions. Zhenwei Lyu
is supported by “the Fundamental Research Funds for the
Central Universities” and Leicester International Institute,
Dalian University of Technology. This research has made use
of the NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database, which is funded
by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and
operated by the California Institute of Technology.
Data Availability— The data that support the
findings of this article are openly available at
https://github.com/gwlyu/wet_EMRIs.git.

Appendix A: Derivation of Sky Localization Volume
1.

Fisher-matrix (quadratic) approximation

In the main text, the detector response is modeled using two
orthogonal TDI channels α ∈ {I, II}. For stationary Gaussian
noise, the log-likelihood for parameters λ = {λi } is
ln L(λ) = −

1 X
⟨sα − hα (λ), sα − hα (λ)⟩ ,
2 α∈{I,II}

where sα is the (mock) data, hα (λ) is the waveform template,
and ⟨·, ·⟩ is the noise-weighted inner product defined in Eq. (7).
Let λ̂ denote the maximum-likelihood (ML) point and define offsets ∆λi ≡ λi − λ̂i . Expanding each channel waveform
to first order about λ̂ gives
hα (λ) ≃ hα (λ̂) +

X ∂hα
∂λi λ̂

i

∆λi ,

(A2)

where the sum runs over model parameters.
Defining the residual at the ML point in each channel,
rα ≡ sα − hα (λ̂) .

(A3)

Using Eq. (A2), the residual away from the ML point is
sα − hα (λ) ≃ rα −

X ∂hα
i

∂λi λ̂

∆λi .

(A4)

Substituting into Eq. (A1) and expanding yields



+
+
X * ∂hα
X*

1 X 
∂hα
∂hα
⟨rα , rα ⟩ − 2
∆λi +
∆λi ∆λ j  ,
ln L(λ) ≃ −
,
rα ,
2 α
∂λi λ̂
∂λi λ̂ ∂λ j λ̂
i, j
i

The linear term vanishes because the score is zero at the

(A1)

(A5)

ML point, as follow:
+
X*
∂ ln L
∂hα
0=
=
rα ,
.
∂λi λ̂
∂λi λ̂
α

(A6)

15
P
Subtracting the ML value ln L(λ̂) = −(1/2) α ⟨rα , rα ⟩ then
gives the standard quadratic (Fisher) approximation,
−2 ln

L(λ)
L(λ̂)

≃

X

∆λi Γi j ∆λ j ,

(A7)

i, j

where the Fisher information matrix is
+
X * ∂hα
∂hα
Γi j ≡
,
.
∂λi λ̂ ∂λ j λ̂
α∈{I,II}

(A8)

If the prior is approximately flat across the region of significant likelihood, the posterior is locally Gaussian with covariance
Σi j ≃ (Γ−1 )i j .

(A9)

The off-diagonal elements Σi j encode covariances (and hence
correlations) between parameters λi and λ j , Cov(λi , λ j ) = Σi j ,
while the diagonal elements give the marginalized variances,
Var(λi ) = Σii ≡ σ2λi .
2.

3.

Hypervolume of the ellipsoid and numerical prefactors

To compute the hypervolume enclosed by Eq. (A12), we
apply a whitening transformation. Let Σϑ = LLT be a
Cholesky factorization and define
y ≡ L−1 ∆ϑ .

(A17)

T
2
Q = ∆ϑT Σ−1
ϑ ∆ϑ = y y = ∥y∥ ,

(A18)

Then,

so E p maps to the N-ball ∥y∥ ≤ A p,N . The Jacobian determinant is
p
∂∆ϑ
(A19)
= | det L| = det Σϑ .
∂y
Hence the p-probability ellipsoid hypervolume is
p
V p(N) = Vball,N (A p,N ) det Σϑ ,
where the N-ball volume of radius A is
πN/2
 AN .
Vball,N (A) = 
Γ N2 + 1

Joint p-probability ellipsoid in N dimensions

Consider an N-dimensional subset of parameters ϑ (e.g.
ϑ = (ln r, θ, ϕ)) with covariance sub-matrix Σϑ (the corresponding sub-block of Σi j ). Define the Mahalanobis quadratic
form
Q ≡ ∆ϑT Σ−1
ϑ ∆ϑ .

(A10)

If ∆ϑ is multivariate Gaussian with covariance Σϑ , then
Q ∼ χ2N ,

(A11)

The joint p-probability region is the ellipsoid
n
o
E p ≡ ∆ϑ : Q ≤ A2p,N ,

(A12)

where A2p,N is fixed by the χ2N quantile, as follow:


p = P(χ2N ≤ A2p,N ) =

A2p,N

γ N2 , 2
 
Γ N2


.

(A13)

Here γ(·, ·) and Γ(·) are the lower incomplete and complete Γ
functions (not to be confused with the Fisher matrix Γi j ).
Equivalently, one may write
A2p,N = χ2N,p ,

(A20)

(A14)

where χ2N,p denotes the p-quantile of the χ2 distribution with
N degrees of freedom. For the commonly used p = 0.6827
joint credible regions,
N=2:

A20.68, 2 = χ22, 0.68 ≃ 2.296 , A0.68, 2 ≃ 1.515 , (A15)

N=3:

A20.68, 3 = χ23, 0.68 ≃ 3.527 , A0.68, 3 ≃ 1.878 . (A16)

(A21)

In particular, the N-ball volumes are
Vball,2 (A) = πA2

(area) ,

Vball,3 (A) =

4π 3
A
3

(volume) .
(A22)

For the joint p = 0.6827 region, this yields
p
p
(2)
N = 2 : V0.68
= πA20.68,2 det Σϑ ≃ 7.21 det Σϑ , (A23)
(3)
N = 3 : V0.68
=

4.

p
p
4π 3
A0.68,3 det Σϑ ≃ 27.74 det Σϑ .
3
(A24)

Sky solid angle and 3D localization volume

We specialize the joint p-ellipsoid construction to (i) sky
angles and (ii) the 3D localization volume.
Solid-angle (sky) uncertainty. Let ϑ = (θ, ϕ) with covariance sub-matrix Σθ,ϕ (the 2 × 2 sub-block of Σi j evaluated at
λ̂). The area of the joint p ellipse in the coordinate plane (θ, ϕ)
is
q
V p(2) = πA2p,2 det Σθ,ϕ ,
A2p,2 = χ22,p .
(A25)
The physical solid-angle element on the unit sphere is
dΩ = sin θ dθ dϕ .

(A26)

If the uncertainty region is sufficiently small that sin θ may
be treated as constant across it, evaluated at the best-fit sky
location θ̂, then the joint p solid-angle uncertainty is
q
(A27)
∆Ω p ≃ sin θ̂ V p(2) = πA2p,2 sin θ̂ det Σθ,ϕ .

16
This expression accounts for correlations among (ln r, θ, ϕ)
through the determinant of the full 3×3 covariance sub-matrix.

For p = 0.6827, A0.68, 2 ≃ 1.515
∆Ω0.68 ≃ 7.21 sin θ̂

q

det Σθ,ϕ .

(A28)
5.

Physical sky-localization volume. For 3D localization take
ϑ = (ln r, θ, ϕ) with covariance sub-matrix Σln r,θ,ϕ . The physical volume element is
dV = r2 sin θ dr dθ dϕ = r3 sin θ d(ln r) dθ dϕ .

(A29)

Remark on factorized approximations

A common shortcut is to “factorize” the 3D localization
volume into a radial part and a sky part, as follows:
∆V ≈ r̂3 σln r ∆Ω .

(A33)

(A31)

This approximation is valid only if: (i) ln r is (nearly) uncorrelated with the sky angles (θ, ϕ), so the 3D covariance is approximately block-diagonal; and (ii) σln r and ∆Ω are defined
so that they correspond to the same joint probability content
p.
In general the posterior in (ln r, θ, ϕ) is a correlated 3D
Gaussian (under the Fisher approximation), so the correct
joint p region is a 3D ellipsoid. Its physical volume for
p = 0.6827 is expressed as Eq. (A31). Therefore an expression such as
q
∆V0.68 = r̂3 σln r π sin θ̂ det(Σθ,ϕ ) .
(A34)

(A32)

is generally inconsistent: it (a) ignores correlations between
distance and sky position, and (b) mixes a 1D and 2D uncertainty in a way that does not represent a joint 68% region; the
correct joint-3D numerical factor is ≃ 28, not π.

[1] P. Amaro-Seoane, H. Audley, S. Babak, J. Baker, E. Barausse,
P. Bender, E. Berti, P. Binetruy, M. Born, D. Bortoluzzi,
J. Camp, C. Caprini, V. Cardoso, M. Colpi, J. Conklin, N. Cornish, C. Cutler, K. Danzmann, R. Dolesi, L. Ferraioli, V. Ferroni, E. Fitzsimons, J. Gair, L. G. Bote, D. Giardini, F. Gibert, C. Grimani, H. Halloin, G. Heinzel, T. Hertog, M. Hewitson, K. Holley-Bockelmann, D. Hollington, M. Hueller,
H. Inchauspe, P. Jetzer, N. Karnesis, C. Killow, A. Klein,
B. Klipstein, N. Korsakova, S. L. Larson, J. Livas, I. Lloro,
N. Man, D. Mance, J. Martino, I. Mateos, K. McKenzie, S. T.
McWilliams, C. Miller, G. Mueller, G. Nardini, G. Nelemans,
M. Nofrarias, A. Petiteau, P. Pivato, E. Plagnol, E. Porter,
J. Reiche, D. Robertson, N. Robertson, E. Rossi, G. Russano, B. Schutz, A. Sesana, D. Shoemaker, J. Slutsky, C. F.
Sopuerta, T. Sumner, N. Tamanini, I. Thorpe, M. Troebs,
M. Vallisneri, A. Vecchio, D. Vetrugno, S. Vitale, M. Volonteri, G. Wanner, H. Ward, P. Wass, W. Weber, J. Ziemer,
and P. Zweifel, Laser interferometer space antenna (2017),
arXiv:1702.00786 [astro-ph.IM].
[2] S. Babak, J. Gair, A. Sesana, E. Barausse, C. F. Sopuerta,
C. P. L. Berry, E. Berti, P. Amaro-Seoane, A. Petiteau, and
A. Klein, Science with the space-based interferometer lisa. v.
extreme mass-ratio inspirals, Phys. Rev. D 95, 103012 (2017).
[3] P. A. Seoane et al. (LISA), Astrophysics with the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna, Living Rev. Rel. 26, 2 (2023),
arXiv:2203.06016 [gr-qc].
[4] P. Auclair et al. (LISA Cosmology Working Group), Cosmology with the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna, Living Rev.
Rel. 26, 5 (2023), arXiv:2204.05434 [astro-ph.CO].

[5] M. Colpi et al. (LISA), LISA Definition Study Report (2024),
arXiv:2402.07571 [astro-ph.CO].
[6] J. Luo, L.-S. Chen, H.-Z. Duan, Y.-G. Gong, S. Hu, J. Ji,
Q. Liu, J. Mei, V. Milyukov, M. Sazhin, C.-G. Shao, V. T.
Toth, H.-B. Tu, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, H.-C. Yeh, M.-S. Zhan,
Y. Zhang, V. Zharov, and Z.-B. Zhou, Tianqin: a space-borne
gravitational wave detector, Classical and Quantum Gravity
33, 035010 (2016).
[7] J. Luo, Y.-Z. Bai, L. Cai, B. Cao, W.-M. Chen, Y. Chen, D.-C.
Cheng, Y.-W. Ding, H.-Z. Duan, X. Gou, C.-Z. Gu, D.-F. Gu,
Z.-Q. He, S. Hu, Y. Hu, X.-Q. Huang, Q. Jiang, Y.-Z. Jiang,
H.-G. Li, H.-Y. Li, J. Li, M. Li, Z. Li, Z.-X. Li, Y.-R. Liang,
F.-J. Liao, Y.-C. Liu, L. Liu, P.-B. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Liu, X.-F. Lu,
Y. Luo, J. Mei, M. Ming, S.-B. Qu, D.-Y. Tan, M. Tang, L.C. Tu, C.-R. Wang, F. Wang, G.-F. Wang, J. Wang, L. Wang,
X. Wang, R. Wei, S.-C. Wu, C.-Y. Xiao, M.-Z. Xie, X.-S.
Xu, L. Yang, M.-L. Yang, S.-Q. Yang, H.-C. Yeh, J.-B. Yu,
L. Zhang, M.-H. Zhao, and Z.-B. Zhou, The first round result
from the tianqin-1 satellite, Classical and Quantum Gravity
37, 185013 (2020).
[8] J. Mei, Y.-Z. Bai, J. Bao, E. Barausse, L. Cai, E. Canuto,
B. Cao, W.-M. Chen, Y. Chen, Y.-W. Ding, H.-Z. Duan,
H. Fan, W.-F. Feng, H. Fu, Q. Gao, T. Gao, Y. Gong, X. Gou,
C.-Z. Gu, D.-F. Gu, Z.-Q. He, M. Hendry, W. Hong, X.-C.
Hu, Y.-M. Hu, Y. Hu, S.-J. Huang, X.-Q. Huang, Q. Jiang,
Y.-Z. Jiang, Y. Jiang, Z. Jiang, H.-M. Jin, V. Korol, H.-Y.
Li, M. Li, M. Li, P. Li, R. Li, Y. Li, Z. Li, Z. Li, Z.-X.
Li, Y.-R. Liang, Z.-C. Liang, F.-J. Liao, Q. Liu, S. Liu, Y.C. Liu, L. Liu, P.-B. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Liu, X.-F. Lu, Y. Lu,

Over a sufficiently small region around the best-fit parameters, we approximate the Jacobian factor r3 sin θ as constant
and evaluate it at (r̂, θ̂). The joint p ellipsoid in (ln r, θ, ϕ) has
parameter-space hypervolume
V p(3) =

4π 3
A
3 p,3

q 

det Σln r,θ,ϕ .

A2p,3 = χ23,p .

(A30)

Multiplying by the physical Jacobian factor from Eq. (A29)
gives the physical localization volume
∆V p ≃ r̂ 3 sin θ̂

4π 3
A
3 p,3

q



det Σln r,θ,ϕ .

For p = 0.6827, A0.68, 3 ≃ 1.878, hence
∆V0.68 ≃ 27.74 r̂ 3 sin θ̂

q 

det Σln r,θ,ϕ .

17
Z.-H. Lu, Y. Luo, Z.-C. Luo, V. Milyukov, M. Ming, X. Pi,
C. Qin, S.-B. Qu, A. Sesana, C. Shao, C. Shi, W. Su, D.-Y.
Tan, Y. Tan, Z. Tan, L.-C. Tu, B. Wang, C.-R. Wang, F. Wang,
G.-F. Wang, H. Wang, J. Wang, L. Wang, P. Wang, X. Wang,
Y. Wang, Y.-F. Wang, R. Wei, S.-C. Wu, C.-Y. Xiao, X.-S.
Xu, C. Xue, F.-C. Yang, L. Yang, M.-L. Yang, S.-Q. Yang,
B. Ye, H.-C. Yeh, S. Yu, D. Zhai, C. Zhang, H. Zhang, J.-d.
Zhang, J. Zhang, L. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Zhou,
M.-Y. Zhou, Z.-B. Zhou, D.-D. Zhu, T.-G. Zi, and J. Luo,
The tianqin project: Current progress on science and technology, Progress of Theoretical and Experimental Physics
2021, 05A107 (2020), https://academic.oup.com/ptep/articlepdf/2021/5/05A107/37953035/ptaa114.pdf.
[9] Y. Gong, J. Luo, and B. Wang, Concepts and status of chinese space gravitational wave detection projects, Nature Astronomy 5, 881–889 (2021).
[10] W.-R. Hu and Y.-L. Wu, The taiji program in space for gravitational wave physics and the nature of gravity, National Science
Review 4, 685 (2017), https://academic.oup.com/nsr/articlepdf/4/5/685/31566708/nwx116.pdf.
[11] W.-H. Ruan, Z.-K. Guo, R.-G. Cai, and Y.-Z. Zhang,
Taiji program:
Gravitational-wave sources, International Journal of Modern Physics A 35, 2050075 (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1142/S0217751X2050075X.
[12] B. Bonga, H. Yang, and S. A. Hughes, Tidal resonance in
extreme mass-ratio inspirals, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 101103
(2019), arXiv:1905.00030 [gr-qc].
[13] B. Kocsis, N. Yunes, and A. Loeb, Observable signatures of
extreme mass-ratio inspiral black hole binaries embedded in
thin accretion disks, Phys. Rev. D 84, 024032 (2011).
[14] N. Yunes, B. Kocsis, A. Loeb, and Z. Haiman, Imprint of Accretion Disk-Induced Migration on Gravitational Waves from
Extreme Mass Ratio Inspirals, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 171103
(2011), arXiv:1103.4609 [astro-ph.CO].
[15] L. Speri, A. Antonelli, L. Sberna, S. Babak, E. Barausse, J. R.
Gair, and M. L. Katz, Probing accretion physics with gravitational waves, Phys. Rev. X 13, 021035 (2023).
[16] S. Chatterjee, S. Mondal, and P. Basu, Detectability of gasrich E/IMRI’s in LISA band: observable signature of transonic
accretion flow, MNRAS 526, 5612 (2023), arXiv:2307.12144
[astro-ph.HE].
[17] F. Duque, S. Kejriwal, L. Sberna, L. Speri, and J. Gair,
Constraining accretion physics with gravitational waves
from eccentric extreme-mass-ratio inspirals (2024),
arXiv:2411.03436 [gr-qc].
[18] J. Zhang and H. Yang, Dynamic Signatures of Black Hole Binaries with Superradiant Clouds, Phys. Rev. D 101, 043020
(2020), arXiv:1907.13582 [gr-qc].
[19] J. Zhang and H. Yang, Gravitational floating orbits around
hairy black holes, Phys. Rev. D 99, 064018 (2019),
arXiv:1808.02905 [gr-qc].
[20] R. Brito and S. Shah, Extreme mass-ratio inspirals into
black holes surrounded by scalar clouds, Phys. Rev. D 108,
084019 (2023), [Erratum: Phys.Rev.D 110, 109902 (2024)],
arXiv:2307.16093 [gr-qc].
[21] F. Duque, C. F. B. Macedo, R. Vicente, and V. Cardoso,
Extreme-Mass-Ratio Inspirals in Ultralight Dark Matter, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 133, 121404 (2024), arXiv:2312.06767 [gr-qc].
[22] Z. Pan and H. Yang, Formation Rate of Extreme Mass Ratio
Inspirals in Active Galactic Nuclei, Phys. Rev. D 103, 103018
(2021), arXiv:2101.09146 [astro-ph.HE].
[23] Y. Levin, Starbursts near supermassive black holes: young
stars in the Galactic Center, and gravitational waves in
LISA band, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 374, 515 (2007),

arXiv:astro-ph/0603583.
[24] H. Khalvati, A. Santini, F. Duque, L. Speri, J. Gair, H. Yang,
and R. Brito, Impact of relativistic waveforms in LISA’s science objectives with extreme-mass-ratio inspirals, Phys. Rev.
D 111, 082010 (2025), arXiv:2410.17310 [gr-qc].
[25] S. Kejriwal, F. Duque, A. J. K. Chua, and J. Gair,
Bias-Corrected Importance Sampling for Inferring Beyond
Vacuum-GR Effects in Gravitational Wave Sources (2025),
arXiv:2503.01120 [gr-qc].
[26] C. Dyson, T. F. M. Spieksma, R. Brito, M. van de Meent,
and S. Dolan, Environmental effects in extreme mass ratio
inspirals: perturbations to the environment in Kerr (2025),
arXiv:2501.09806 [gr-qc].
[27] L. Copparoni, L. Speri, L. Sberna, A. Derdzinski, and E. Barausse, The implications of stochastic gas torques for asymmetric binaries in the LISA band (2025), arXiv:2502.10087
[gr-qc].
[28] A. Derdzinski and L. Zwick, Multimessenger Astronomy
with Black Holes: Extreme mass ratio inspirals (2023),
arXiv:2310.16900 [astro-ph.HE].
[29] L. Zwick, A. Derdzinski, M. Garg, P. R. Capelo, and
L. Mayer, Dirty waveforms: multiband harmonic content of
gas-embedded gravitational wave sources, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 511, 6143 (2022), arXiv:2110.09097 [astro-ph.HE].
[30] M. Garg, A. Derdzinski, L. Zwick, P. R. Capelo, and
L. Mayer, The imprint of gas on gravitational waves from
LISA intermediate-mass black hole binaries, Mon. Not. Roy.
Astron. Soc. 517, 1339 (2022), arXiv:2206.05292 [astroph.GA].
[31] Z. Pan, Z. Lyu, and H. Yang, Wet extreme mass ratio inspirals
may be more common for spaceborne gravitational wave detection, Phys. Rev. D 104, 063007 (2021), arXiv:2104.01208
[astro-ph.HE].
[32] Z. Pan, Z. Lyu, and H. Yang, Mass-gap extreme mass ratio
inspirals, Phys. Rev. D 105, 083005 (2022), arXiv:2112.10237
[astro-ph.HE].
[33] L. Sun, X. Shu, and T. Wang, RX J1301.9+2747: A Highly
Variable Seyfert Galaxy with Extremely Soft X-Ray Emission, Astrophys. J. 768, 167 (2013), arXiv:1304.3244 [astroph.GA].
[34] G. Miniutti, R. D. Saxton, M. Giustini, K. D. Alexander,
R. P. Fender, I. Heywood, I. Monageng, M. Coriat, A. K.
Tzioumis, A. M. Read, C. Knigge, P. Gandhi, M. L. Pretorius, and B. Agı́s-González, Nine-hour X-ray quasi-periodic
eruptions from a low-mass black hole galactic nucleus, Nature
(London) 573, 381 (2019), arXiv:1909.04693 [astro-ph.HE].
[35] M. Giustini, G. Miniutti, and R. D. Saxton, X-ray
quasi-periodic eruptions from the galactic nucleus of RX
J1301.9+2747, Astronomy&Astrophysics 636, L2 (2020),
arXiv:2002.08967 [astro-ph.HE].
[36] R. Arcodia, A. Merloni, K. Nandra, J. Buchner, M. Salvato,
D. Pasham, R. Remillard, J. Comparat, G. Lamer, G. Ponti,
A. Malyali, J. Wolf, Z. Arzoumanian, D. Bogensberger,
D. A. H. Buckley, K. Gendreau, M. Gromadzki, E. Kara,
M. Krumpe, C. Markwardt, M. E. Ramos-Ceja, A. Rau,
M. Schramm, and A. Schwope, X-ray quasi-periodic eruptions
from two previously quiescent galaxies, Nature (London) 592,
704 (2021), arXiv:2104.13388 [astro-ph.HE].
[37] R. Arcodia, G. Miniutti, G. Ponti, J. Buchner, M. Giustini, A. Merloni, K. Nandra, F. Vincentelli, E. Kara,
M. Salvato, and D. Pasham, The complex time and energy evolution of quasi-periodic eruptions in eRO-QPE1, Astronomy&Astrophysics 662, A49 (2022), arXiv:2203.11939
[astro-ph.HE].

18
[38] J. Chakraborty, E. Kara, M. Masterson, M. Giustini, G. Miniutti, and R. Saxton, Possible X-Ray Quasi-periodic Eruptions
in a Tidal Disruption Event Candidate, Astroph.J.Lett. 921,
L40 (2021), arXiv:2110.10786 [astro-ph.HE].
[39] P. A. Evans, C. J. Nixon, S. Campana, P. Charalampopoulos, D. A. Perley, A. A. Breeveld, K. L. Page, S. R. Oates,
R. A. J. Eyles-Ferris, D. B. Malesani, L. Izzo, M. R. Goad,
P. T. O’Brien, J. P. Osborne, and B. Sbarufatti, Monthly
quasi-periodic eruptions from repeated stellar disruption by
a massive black hole, Nature Astronomy 7, 1368 (2023),
arXiv:2309.02500 [astro-ph.HE].
[40] S. Kejriwal, V. Witzany, M. Zajacek, D. R. Pasham, and
A. J. K. Chua, Repeating nuclear transients as candidate
electromagnetic counterparts of LISA extreme mass ratio
inspirals, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 532, 2143 (2024),
arXiv:2404.00941 [astro-ph.HE].
[41] M. Guolo, D. R. Pasham, M. Zajaček, E. R. Coughlin,
S. Gezari, P. Suková, T. Wevers, V. Witzany, F. Tombesi,
S. van Velzen, K. D. Alexander, Y. Yao, R. Arcodia, V. Karas,
J. C. A. Miller-Jones, R. Remillard, K. Gendreau, and E. C.
Ferrara, X-ray eruptions every 22 days from the nucleus
of a nearby galaxy, Nature Astronomy 10.1038/s41550-02302178-4 (2024), arXiv:2309.03011 [astro-ph.HE].
[42] R. Arcodia, Z. Liu, A. Merloni, A. Malyali, A. Rau,
J. Chakraborty, A. Goodwin, D. Buckley, J. Brink, M. Gromadzki, Z. Arzoumanian, J. Buchner, E. Kara, K. Nandra,
G. Ponti, M. Salvato, G. Anderson, P. Baldini, I. Grotova,
M. Krumpe, C. Maitra, J. C. A. Miller-Jones, and M. E.
Ramos-Ceja, The more the merrier: SRG/eROSITA discovers
two further galaxies showing X-ray quasi-periodic eruptions,
arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2401.17275 (2024), arXiv:2401.17275
[astro-ph.HE].
[43] P. Peng, A. Franchini, M. Bonetti, A. Sesana, and X. Chen,
The fate of EMRI-IMRI pairs in AGN accretion disks: longterm simulations (2024), arXiv:2411.16070 [astro-ph.HE].
[44] H. Yang, B. Bonga, Z. Peng, and G. Li, Relativistic Mean
Motion Resonance, Phys. Rev. D 100, 124056 (2019),
arXiv:1910.07337 [gr-qc].
[45] M. Wang, Y. Ma, and Q. Wu, Accretion-modified
stellar-mass black hole distribution and milli-hz gravitational wave backgrounds from galaxy centre, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 520,
4502
(2023),
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/articlepdf/520/3/4502/49286887/stad422.pdf.
[46] H. Tanaka, T. Takeuchi, and W. R. Ward, Three-dimensional
interaction between a planet and an isothermal gaseous disk.
i. corotation and lindblad torques and planet migration, The
Astrophysical Journal 565, 1257 (2002).
[47] H. Tanaka and W. R. Ward, Three-dimensional interaction between a planet and an isothermal gaseous disk. ii. eccentricity
waves and bending waves, The Astrophysical Journal 602, 388
(2004).
[48] E. Barausse, The evolution of massive black holes
and their spins in their galactic hosts, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 423,
2533
(2012),
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/articlepdf/423/3/2533/7994573/mnras0423-2533.pdf.
[49] F. Shankar, D. H. Weinberg, and J. Miralda-Escudé, Selfconsistent models of the agn and black hole populations: Duty
cycles, accretion rates, and the mean radiative efficiency, The
Astrophysical Journal 690, 20–41 (2008).
[50] F. Shankar, Black hole demography: from scaling relations to
models, Classical and Quantum Gravity 30, 244001 (2013).
[51] J. R. Gair, C. Tang, and M. Volonteri, Lisa extreme-mass-ratio

inspiral events as probes of the black hole mass function, Phys.
Rev. D 81, 104014 (2010).
[52] Y. Yao, V. Ravi, S. Gezari, S. van Velzen, W. Lu, S. Schulze,
J. J. Somalwar, S. R. Kulkarni, E. Hammerstein, M. Nicholl,
M. J. Graham, D. A. Perley, S. B. Cenko, R. Stein, A. Ricarte,
U. Chadayammuri, E. Quataert, E. C. Bellm, J. S. Bloom,
R. Dekany, A. J. Drake, S. L. Groom, A. A. Mahabal, T. A.
Prince, R. Riddle, B. Rusholme, Y. Sharma, J. Sollerman, and
L. Yan, Tidal disruption event demographics with the zwicky
transient facility: Volumetric rates, luminosity function, and
implications for the local black hole mass function (2023),
arXiv:2303.06523 [astro-ph.HE].
[53] S. Babak, J. Gair, A. Sesana, E. Barausse, C. F. Sopuerta,
C. P. L. Berry, E. Berti, P. Amaro-Seoane, A. Petiteau, and
A. Klein, Science with the space-based interferometer LISA.
V: Extreme mass-ratio inspirals, Phys. Rev. D 95, 103012
(2017), arXiv:1703.09722 [gr-qc].
[54] L. Barack and C. Cutler, LISA capture sources: Approximate waveforms, signal-to-noise ratios, and parameter estimation accuracy, Phys. Rev. D 69, 082005 (2004), arXiv:grqc/0310125.
[55] A. J. Chua and J. R. Gair, Improved analytic extreme-massratio inspiral model for scoping out eLISA data analysis,
Class. Quant. Grav. 32, 232002 (2015), arXiv:1510.06245 [grqc].
[56] A. J. K. Chua, C. J. Moore, and J. R. Gair, Augmented kludge
waveforms for detecting extreme-mass-ratio inspirals, Phys.
Rev. D 96, 044005 (2017).
[57] L. C. Stein and N. Warburton, Location of the last stable
orbit in Kerr spacetime, Phys. Rev. D 101, 064007 (2020),
arXiv:1912.07609 [gr-qc].
[58] A. J. Chua, C. R. Galley, and M. Vallisneri, Reduced-order
modeling with artificial neurons for gravitational-wave inference, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 211101 (2019), arXiv:1811.05491
[astro-ph.IM].
[59] M. L. Katz, A. J. K. Chua, L. Speri, N. Warburton, and S. A.
Hughes, Fast extreme-mass-ratio-inspiral waveforms: New
tools for millihertz gravitational-wave data analysis, Phys.
Rev. D 104, 064047 (2021).
[60] A. J. Chua, M. L. Katz, N. Warburton, and S. A. Hughes,
Rapid generation of fully relativistic extreme-mass-ratioinspiral waveform templates for lisa data analysis, Physical
Review Letters 126, 10.1103/physrevlett.126.051102 (2021).
[61] R. Fujita and M. Shibata, Extreme mass ratio inspirals on the
equatorial plane in the adiabatic order, Physical Review D 102,
10.1103/physrevd.102.064005 (2020).
[62] L. Speri, M. L. Katz, A. J. K. Chua, S. A. Hughes, N. Warburton, J. E. Thompson, C. E. A. Chapman-Bird, and J. R. Gair,
Fast and Fourier: Extreme Mass Ratio Inspiral Waveforms in
the Frequency Domain (2023), arXiv:2307.12585 [gr-qc].
[63] M. L. Katz, L. Speri, A. J. K. Chua, C. E. A. ChapmanBird, N. Warburton, and S. A. Hughes, BlackHolePerturbationToolkit/FastEMRIWaveforms: Frequency Domain Waveform Added! (2023).
[64] L. J. Rubbo, N. J. Cornish, and O. Poujade, Forward modeling
of space-borne gravitational wave detectors, Physical Review
D 69, 10.1103/physrevd.69.082003 (2004).
[65] L. Barack and C. Cutler, Lisa capture sources: Approximate
waveforms, signal-to-noise ratios, and parameter estimation
accuracy, Physical Review D 69, 10.1103/physrevd.69.082005
(2004).
[66] T. Robson, N. J. Cornish, and C. Liu, The construction and use
of lisa sensitivity curves, Classical and Quantum Gravity 36,
105011 (2019).

19
[67] S. Babak, M. Hewitson, and A. Petiteau, Lisa sensitivity and
snr calculations (2021), arXiv:2108.01167 [astro-ph.IM].
[68] H.-M. Fan, Y.-M. Hu, E. Barausse, A. Sesana, J.-d. Zhang,
X. Zhang, T.-G. Zi, and J. Mei, Science with the tianqin
observatory: Preliminary result on extreme-mass-ratio inspirals, Physical Review D 102, 10.1103/physrevd.102.063016
(2020).
[69] B. Kocsis, N. Yunes, and A. Loeb, Observable signatures of
extreme mass-ratio inspiral black hole binaries embedded in
thin accretion disks, Physical Review D 84, 10.1103/physrevd.84.024032 (2011).
[70] N. Yunes, B. Kocsis, A. Loeb, and Z. Haiman, Imprint of accretion disk-induced migration on gravitational waves from
extreme mass ratio inspirals, Physical Review Letters 107,
10.1103/physrevlett.107.171103 (2011).
[71] H. Sun, Y.-P. Li, Z. Pan, and H. Yang, Probing formation channels of extreme mass-ratio inspirals (2025), arXiv:2509.00469
[gr-qc].
[72] Z. Pan and H. Yang, Probing the growth of massive black holes
with black hole–host galaxy spin correlations, The Astrophysical Journal 901, 163 (2020).
[73] M. Katz, CChapmanbird, L. Speri, N. Karnesis, and N. Korsakova, mikekatz04/lisaanalysistools: First main release.
(2024).
[74] K. A. Kuns, H. Yu, Y. Chen, and R. X. Adhikari, Astrophysics and cosmology with a decihertz gravitational-wave
detector: Tiango, Physical Review D 102, 10.1103/physrevd.102.043001 (2020).
[75] J. M. Bardeen and J. A. Petterson, The Lense-Thirring Effect
and Accretion Disks around Kerr Black Holes, Astroph.J.Lett.
195, L65 (1975).
[76] P. Natarajan and J. E. Pringle, The Alignment of Disk and
Black Hole Spins in Active Galactic Nuclei, Astroph.J.Lett.
506, L97 (1998), arXiv:astro-ph/9808187 [astro-ph].
[77] G. Lodato and D. Gerosa, Black hole mergers: do gas
discs lead to spin alignment?, MNRAS 429, L30 (2013),
arXiv:1211.0284 [astro-ph.CO].
[78] P. A. G. Scheuer and R. Feiler, The realignment of a black hole
misaligned with its accretion disc, MNRAS 282, 291 (1996).
[79] A. R. King, S. H. Lubow, G. I. Ogilvie, and J. E. Pringle,
Aligning spinning black holes and accretion discs, MNRAS
363, 49 (2005), arXiv:astro-ph/0507098 [astro-ph].
[80] D. Gerosa, G. Rosotti, and R. Barbieri, The Bardeen-Petterson
effect in accreting supermassive black hole binaries: a systematic approach, MNRAS 496, 3060 (2020), arXiv:2004.02894
[astro-ph.GA].
[81] J. Xian, F. Zhang, L. Dou, J. He, and X. Shu, X-Ray Quasiperiodic Eruptions Driven by Star-Disk Collisions: Application to GSN069 and Probing the Spin of Massive Black Holes,
Astroph.J.Lett. 921, L32 (2021), arXiv:2110.10855 [astroph.HE].
[82] I. Linial and B. D. Metzger, EMRI + TDE = QPE: Periodic XRay Flares from Star–Disk Collisions in Galactic Nuclei, Astrophys. J. 957, 34 (2023), arXiv:2303.16231 [astro-ph.HE].
[83] A. Franchini, M. Bonetti, A. Lupi, G. Miniutti, E. Bortolas,
M. Giustini, M. Dotti, A. Sesana, R. Arcodia, and T. Ryu,
Quasi-periodic eruptions from impacts between the secondary
and a rigidly precessing accretion disc in an extreme massratio inspiral system, Astronomy&Astrophysics 675, A100
(2023), arXiv:2304.00775 [astro-ph.HE].
[84] H. Tagawa and Z. Haiman, Flares from stars crossing active
galactic nuclei disks on low-inclination orbits, arXiv e-prints ,
arXiv:2304.03670 (2023), arXiv:2304.03670 [astro-ph.HE].
[85] I. Linial and B. D. Metzger, Ultraviolet Quasiperiodic Erup-

tions from Star–Disk Collisions in Galactic Nuclei, Astrophys.
J. Lett. 963, L1 (2024), arXiv:2311.16231 [astro-ph.HE].
[86] C. Zhou, L. Huang, K. Guo, Y.-P. Li, and Z. Pan, Probing
orbits of stellar mass objects deep in galactic nuclei with
quasiperiodic eruptions, Phys. Rev. D 109, 103031 (2024),
arXiv:2401.11190 [astro-ph.HE].
[87] C. Zhou, B. Zhong, Y. Zeng, L. Huang, and Z. Pan, Probing orbits of stellar mass objects deep in galactic nuclei with
quasiperiodic eruptions. II. Population analysis, Phys. Rev. D
110, 083019 (2024), arXiv:2405.06429 [astro-ph.HE].
[88] C. Zhou, Y. Zeng, and Z. Pan, Probing orbits of stellar mass
objects deep in galactic nuclei with quasi-periodic eruptions
– iii: Long term evolution (2024), arXiv:2411.18046 [astroph.HE].
[89] D. R. Pasham, E. R. Coughlin, M. Zajacek, I. Linial,
P. Sukova, C. J. Nixon, A. Janiuk, M. Sniegowska, V. Witzany,
V. Karas, M. Krumpe, D. Altamirano, T. Wevers, and R. Arcodia, Alive but Barely Kicking: News from 3+ years of
Swift and XMM-Newton X-ray Monitoring of Quasi-Periodic
Eruptions from eRO-QPE1, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2402.09690
(2024), arXiv:2402.09690 [astro-ph.HE].
[90] J. Chakraborty, R. Arcodia, E. Kara, G. Miniutti, M. Giustini, A. J. Tetarenko, L. Rhodes, A. Franchini, M. Bonetti,
K. B. Burdge, A. J. Goodwin, T. J. Maccarone, A. Merloni,
G. Ponti, R. A. Remillard, and R. D. Saxton, Testing EMRI
models for Quasi-Periodic Eruptions with 3.5 years of monitoring eRO-QPE1, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2402.08722 (2024),
arXiv:2402.08722 [astro-ph.HE].
[91] I. Linial and B. D. Metzger, Coupled disk-star evolution
in galactic nuclei and the lifetimes of qpe sources (2024),
arXiv:2404.12421 [astro-ph.HE].
[92] L. Arzamasskiy, Z. Zhu, and J. M. Stone, Threedimensional disc-satellite interaction: torques, migration,
and observational signatures, MNRAS 475, 3201 (2018),
arXiv:1710.11128 [astro-ph.EP].
[93] Z. Zhu, Inclined massive planets in a protoplanetary disc: gap
opening, disc breaking, and observational signatures, MNRAS
483, 4221 (2019), arXiv:1812.01262 [astro-ph.EP].
[94] J. Davelaar and Z. Haiman, Self-Lensing Flares from Black
Hole Binaries: Observing Black Hole Shadows via Light
Curve Tomography, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 191101 (2022),
arXiv:2112.05829 [astro-ph.HE].
[95] S. H. W. Leong, J. Janquart, A. K. Sharma, P. Martens,
P. Ajith, and O. A. Hannuksela, Constraining binary mergers
in agn disks using the non-observation of lensed gravitational
waves (2024), arXiv:2408.13144 [astro-ph.HE].
[96] C. Liu, W.-H. Ruan, and Z.-K. Guo, Confusion noise from
galactic binaries for taiji, Phys. Rev. D 107, 064021 (2023).
[97] F. Ricci, E. Treister, F. E. Bauer, J. E. Mejı́a-Restrepo, M. J.
Koss, J. S. den Brok, M. Baloković, R. Bär, P. Bessiere,
T. Caglar, F. Harrison, K. Ichikawa, D. Kakkad, I. Lamperti, R. Mushotzky, K. Oh, M. C. Powell, G. C. Privon,
C. Ricci, R. Riffel, A. F. Rojas, E. Sani, K. L. Smith, D. Stern,
B. Trakhtenbrot, C. M. Urry, and S. Veilleux, BASS. XXIX.
The Near-infrared View of the Broad-line Region (BLR): The
Effects of Obscuration in BLR Characterization, Astroph.J.S.
261, 8 (2022), arXiv:2111.13720 [astro-ph.GA].
[98] J. S. den Brok, M. J. Koss, B. Trakhtenbrot, D. Stern,
S. Cantalupo, I. Lamperti, F. Ricci, C. Ricci, K. Oh, F. E.
Bauer, R. Riffel, A. Rodrı́guez-Ardila, R. Bär, F. Harrison,
K. Ichikawa, J. E. Mejı́a-Restrepo, R. Mushotzky, M. C. Powell, R. Boissay-Malaquin, M. Stalevski, E. Treister, C. M.
Urry, and S. Veilleux, BASS. XXVIII. Near-infrared Data Release 2: High-ionization and Broad Lines in Active Galactic

20
Nuclei, Astroph.J.S. 261, 7 (2022), arXiv:2207.12426 [astroph.GA].
[99] J. E. Mejı́a-Restrepo, B. Trakhtenbrot, M. J. Koss, K. Oh,
J. den Brok, D. Stern, M. C. Powell, F. Ricci, T. Caglar,
C. Ricci, F. E. Bauer, E. Treister, F. A. Harrison, C. M.
Urry, T. T. Ananna, D. Asmus, R. J. Assef, R. E. Bär, P. S.
Bessiere, L. Burtscher, K. Ichikawa, D. Kakkad, N. Kamraj,
R. Mushotzky, G. C. Privon, A. F. Rojas, E. Sani, K. Schawinski, and S. Veilleux, BASS. XXV. DR2 Broad-line-based
Black Hole Mass Estimates and Biases from Obscuration, Astroph.J.S. 261, 5 (2022), arXiv:2204.05321 [astro-ph.GA].
[100] H. Cho and J.-H. Woo, Constraining the Low-mass End of
the Black Hole Mass Function and the Active Fraction of the
Intermediate-mass Black Holes, Astrophys. J. 969, 93 (2024),
arXiv:2405.09441 [astro-ph.GA].
[101] E. Gallo, T. Treu, P. J. Marshall, J.-H. Woo, C. Leipski, and
R. Antonucci, AMUSE-Virgo. II. Down-sizing in Black Hole
Accretion, Astrophys. J. 714, 25 (2010), arXiv:1002.3619
[astro-ph.HE].
[102] T. T. Ananna, A. K. Weigel, B. Trakhtenbrot, M. J. Koss,
C. M. Urry, C. Ricci, R. C. Hickox, E. Treister, F. E. Bauer,
Y. Ueda, R. Mushotzky, F. Ricci, K. Oh, J. E. Mejı́a-Restrepo,
J. D. Brok, D. Stern, M. C. Powell, T. Caglar, K. Ichikawa,
O. I. Wong, F. A. Harrison, and K. Schawinski, BASS. XXX.
Distribution Functions of DR2 Eddington Ratios, Black Hole
Masses, and X-Ray Luminosities, Astroph.J.S. 261, 9 (2022),
arXiv:2201.05603 [astro-ph.HE].
[103] F. Pacucci, M. Mezcua, and J. A. Regan, The Active Fraction
of Massive Black Holes in Dwarf Galaxies, Astrophys. J. 920,
134 (2021), arXiv:2107.09069 [astro-ph.GA].
[104] E. C. Moran, K. Shahinyan, H. R. Sugarman, D. O. Vélez,
and M. Eracleous, Black Holes At the Centers of Nearby
Dwarf Galaxies, Astronomical Journal 148, 136 (2014),
arXiv:1408.4451 [astro-ph.GA].
[105] Y. Lu, T.-G. Wang, X.-B. Dong, and H.-Y. Zhou, Type 1 active
galactic nucleus fraction in the SDSS/FIRST survey, MNRAS
404, 1761 (2010), arXiv:1002.0632 [astro-ph.CO].
[106] K. Oh, S. K. Yi, K. Schawinski, M. Koss, B. Trakhtenbrot,
and K. Soto, A New Catalog of Type 1 AGNs and its Implications on the AGN Unified Model, Astroph.J.S. 219, 1 (2015),
arXiv:1504.07247 [astro-ph.GA].
[107] Y. Shen, The mass of quasars, Bulletin of the Astronomical Society of India 41, 61 (2013), arXiv:1302.2643 [astroph.CO].
[108] B. M. Peterson, Measuring the Masses of Supermassive Black
Holes, Space Science Reviews 183, 253 (2014).
[109] K. Gültekin, D. O. Richstone, K. Gebhardt, T. R. Lauer,
S. Tremaine, M. C. Aller, R. Bender, A. Dressler, S. M. Faber,
A. V. Filippenko, R. Green, L. C. Ho, J. Kormendy, J. Magorrian, J. Pinkney, and C. Siopis, The M-σ and M-L Relations in
Galactic Bulges, and Determinations of Their Intrinsic Scatter, Astrophys. J. 698, 198 (2009), arXiv:0903.4897 [astroph.GA].
[110] J. Kormendy and L. C. Ho, Coevolution (Or Not) of Supermassive Black Holes and Host Galaxies, ARA&A 51, 511 (2013),
arXiv:1304.7762 [astro-ph.CO].
[111] N. J. McConnell and C.-P. Ma, Revisiting the Scaling Relations of Black Hole Masses and Host Galaxy Properties, Astrophys. J. 764, 184 (2013), arXiv:1211.2816 [astro-ph.CO].
[112] L. C. Ho and M. Kim, The Black Hole Mass Scale of Classical
and Pseudo Bulges in Active Galaxies, Astrophys. J. 789, 17
(2014), arXiv:1406.6137 [astro-ph.GA].
[113] Gravity Collaboration, E. Sturm, J. Dexter, O. Pfuhl, M. R.
Stock, R. I. Davies, D. Lutz, Y. Clénet, A. Eckart, F. Eisen-

hauer, R. Genzel, D. Gratadour, S. F. Hönig, M. Kishimoto, S. Lacour, F. Millour, H. Netzer, G. Perrin, B. M.
Peterson, P. O. Petrucci, D. Rouan, I. Waisberg, J. Woillez,
A. Amorim, W. Brandner, N. M. Förster Schreiber, P. J. V.
Garcia, S. Gillessen, T. Ott, T. Paumard, K. Perraut, S. Scheithauer, C. Straubmeier, L. J. Tacconi, and F. Widmann,
Spatially resolved rotation of the broad-line region of a
quasar at sub-parsec scale, Nature (London) 563, 657 (2018a),
arXiv:1811.11195 [astro-ph.GA].
[114] R. Abuter, F. Allouche, A. Amorim, C. Bailet, A. Berdeu,
J. P. Berger, P. Berio, A. Bigioli, O. Boebion, M. L. Bolzer,
H. Bonnet, G. Bourdarot, P. Bourget, W. Brandner, Y. Cao,
R. Conzelmann, M. Comin, Y. Clénet, B. Courtney-Barrer,
R. Davies, D. Defrère, A. Delboulbé, F. Delplancke-Ströbele,
R. Dembet, J. Dexter, P. T. de Zeeuw, A. Drescher, A. Eckart,
C. Édouard, F. Eisenhauer, M. Fabricius, H. Feuchtgruber,
G. Finger, N. M. Förster Schreiber, P. Garcia, R. Garcia
Lopez, F. Gao, E. Gendron, R. Genzel, J. P. Gil, S. Gillessen,
T. Gomes, F. Gonté, C. Gouvret, P. Guajardo, S. Guieu,
W. Hackenberg, N. Haddad, M. Hartl, X. Haubois, F. Haußmann, G. Heißel, T. Henning, S. Hippler, S. F. Hönig, M. Horrobin, N. Hubin, E. Jacqmart, L. Jocou, A. Kaufer, P. Kervella,
J. Kolb, H. Korhonen, S. Lacour, S. Lagarde, O. Lai,
V. Lapeyrère, R. Laugier, J. B. Le Bouquin, J. Leftley, P. Léna,
S. Lewis, D. Liu, B. Lopez, D. Lutz, Y. Magnard, F. Mang,
A. Marcotto, D. Maurel, A. Mérand, F. Millour, N. More,
H. Netzer, H. Nowacki, M. Nowak, S. Oberti, T. Ott, L. Pallanca, T. Paumard, K. Perraut, G. Perrin, R. Petrov, O. Pfuhl,
N. Pourré, S. Rabien, C. Rau, M. Riquelme, S. Robbe-Dubois,
S. Rochat, M. Salman, J. Sanchez-Bermudez, D. J. D. Santos, S. Scheithauer, M. Schöller, J. Schubert, N. Schuhler,
J. Shangguan, P. Shchekaturov, T. T. Shimizu, A. Sevin,
F. Soulez, A. Spang, E. Stadler, A. Sternberg, C. Straubmeier,
E. Sturm, C. Sykes, L. J. Tacconi, K. R. W. Tristram, F. Vincent, S. von Fellenberg, S. Uysal, F. Widmann, E. Wieprecht,
E. Wiezorrek, J. Woillez, and G. Zins, A dynamical measure
of the black hole mass in a quasar 11 billion years ago, Nature
(London) 627, 281 (2024), arXiv:2401.14567 [astro-ph.GA].
[115] Y. Tanaka, K. Nandra, A. C. Fabian, H. Inoue, C. Otani,
T. Dotani, K. Hayashida, K. Iwasawa, T. Kii, H. Kunieda,
F. Makino, and M. Matsuoka, Gravitationally redshifted emission implying an accretion disk and massive black hole in
the active galaxy MCG-6-30-15, Nature (London) 375, 659
(1995).
[116] J. Garcı́a, T. Dauser, A. Lohfink, T. R. Kallman, J. F. Steiner,
J. E. McClintock, L. Brenneman, J. Wilms, W. Eikmann, C. S.
Reynolds, and F. Tombesi, Improved Reflection Models of
Black Hole Accretion Disks: Treating the Angular Distribution of X-Rays, Astrophys. J. 782, 76 (2014), arXiv:1312.3231
[astro-ph.HE].
[117] C. S. Reynolds, Observational constraints on black hole spin,
Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 59, 117–154
(2021).
[118] S. G. H. Waddell and L. C. Gallo, A Suzaku sample of
unabsorbed narrow-line and broad-line Seyfert 1 galaxies
- I. X-ray spectral properties, MNRAS 498, 5207 (2020),
arXiv:2009.04378 [astro-ph.HE].
[119] R. V. Vasudevan and A. C. Fabian, Simultaneous Xray/optical/UV snapshots of active galactic nuclei from XMMNewton: spectral energy distributions for the reverberation
mapped sample, MNRAS 392, 1124 (2009), arXiv:0810.3777
[astro-ph].
[120] N. Cappelluti, M. Brusa, G. Hasinger, A. Comastri,
G. Zamorani, A. Finoguenov, R. Gilli, S. Puccetti, T. Miyaji,

21
M. Salvato, C. Vignali, T. Aldcroft, H. Böhringer, H. Brunner, F. Civano, M. Elvis, F. Fiore, A. Fruscione, R. E. Griffiths, L. Guzzo, A. Iovino, A. M. Koekemoer, V. Mainieri,
N. Z. Scoville, P. Shopbell, J. Silverman, and C. M. Urry, The
XMM-Newton wide-field survey in the COSMOS field. The
point-like X-ray source catalogue, Astronomy&Astrophysics
497, 635 (2009), arXiv:0901.2347 [astro-ph.HE].
[121] M. J. Koss, C. Ricci, B. Trakhtenbrot, K. Oh, J. S. den
Brok, J. E. Mejı́a-Restrepo, D. Stern, G. C. Privon, E. Treister, M. C. Powell, R. Mushotzky, F. E. Bauer, T. T. Ananna,
M. Baloković, R. E. Bär, G. Becker, P. Bessiere, L. Burtscher,
T. Caglar, E. Congiu, P. Evans, F. Harrison, M. Heida,
K. Ichikawa, N. Kamraj, I. Lamperti, F. Pacucci, F. Ricci,
R. Riffel, A. F. Rojas, K. Schawinski, M. J. Temple, C. M.
Urry, S. Veilleux, and J. Williams, BASS. XXII. The BASS
DR2 AGN Catalog and Data, Astroph.J.S. 261, 2 (2022),
arXiv:2207.12432 [astro-ph.GA].
[122] S. N. Zhang, M. Feroci, A. Santangelo, Y. W. Dong, H. Feng,
F. J. Lu, K. Nandra, Z. S. Wang, S. Zhang, E. Bozzo, S. Brandt,
A. De Rosa, L. J. Gou, M. Hernanz, M. van der Klis, X. D. Li,
Y. Liu, P. Orleanski, G. Pareschi, M. Pohl, J. Poutanen, J. L.
Qu, S. Schanne, L. Stella, P. Uttley, A. Watts, R. X. Xu, W. F.
Yu, J. J. M. in ’t Zand, S. Zane, L. Alvarez, L. Amati, L. Baldini, C. Bambi, S. Basso, Bhattacharyya S., R. , Bellazzini,
T. Belloni, P. Bellutti, S. Bianchi, A. Brez, M. Bursa, V. Burwitz, C. Budtz-Jørgensen, I. Caiazzo, R. Campana, X. Cao,
P. Casella, C. Y. Chen, L. Chen, T. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Chen,
Y. P. Chen, M. Civitani, F. Coti Zelati, W. Cui, W. W. Cui,
Z. G. Dai, E. Del Monte, D. de Martino, S. Di Cosimo,
S. Diebold, M. Dovciak, I. Donnarumma, V. Doroshenko,
P. Esposito, Y. Evangelista, Y. Favre, P. Friedrich, F. Fuschino,
J. L. Galvez, Z. L. Gao, M. Y. Ge, O. Gevin, D. Goetz,
D. W. Han, J. Heyl, J. Horak, W. Hu, F. Huang, Q. S. Huang,
R. Hudec, D. Huppenkothen, G. L. Israel, A. Ingram, V. Karas,
D. Karelin, P. A. Jenke, L. Ji, S. Korpela, D. Kunneriath,
C. Labanti, G. Li, X. Li, Z. S. Li, E. W. Liang, O. Limousin,
L. Lin, Z. X. Ling, H. B. Liu, H. W. Liu, Z. Liu, B. Lu,
N. Lund, D. Lai, B. Luo, T. Luo, B. Ma, S. Mahmoodifar, M. Marisaldi, A. Martindale, N. Meidinger, Y. Men,
M. Michalska, R. Mignani, M. Minuti, S. Motta, F. Muleri,
J. Neilsen, M. Orlandini, A. T. Pan, A. Patruno, E. Perinati, A. Picciotto, C. Piemonte, M. Pinchera, Rachevski A.,
M. Rapisarda, N. Rea, E. M. R. Rossi, A. Rubini, G. Sala,
X. W. Shu, C. Sgro, Z. X. Shen, P. Soffitta, L. Song, G. Spandre, G. Stratta, T. E. Strohmayer, L. Sun, J. Svoboda, G. Tagliaferri, G. Tenzer, T. Hong, R. Taverna, G. Torok, R. Turolla, S. Vacchi, J. Wang, D. Walton, K. Wang, J. F. Wang,
R. J. Wang, Y. F. Wang, S. S. Weng, J. Wilms, B. Winter,
X. Wu, X. F. Wu, S. L. Xiong, Y. P. Xu, Y. Q. Xue, Z. Yan,
S. Yang, X. Yang, Y. J. Yang, F. Yuan, W. M. Yuan, Y. F. Yuan,
G. Zampa, N. Zampa, A. Zdziarski, C. Zhang, C. L. Zhang,
L. Zhang, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, W. D. Zhang, S. J. Zheng,
P. Zhou, and Zhou X. L., eXTP: Enhanced X-ray Timing and
Polarization mission, in Space Telescopes and Instrumentation
2016: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 9905,
edited by J.-W. A. den Herder, T. Takahashi, and M. Bautz
(2016) p. 99051Q, arXiv:1607.08823 [astro-ph.IM].
[123] K. Nandra, D. Barret, X. Barcons, A. Fabian, J.-W. den
Herder, L. Piro, M. Watson, C. Adami, J. Aird, J. M.
Afonso, D. Alexander, C. Argiroffi, L. Amati, M. Arnaud,
J.-L. Atteia, M. Audard, C. Badenes, J. Ballet, L. Ballo,
A. Bamba, A. Bhardwaj, E. Stefano Battistelli, W. Becker,
M. De Becker, E. Behar, S. Bianchi, V. Biffi, L. Bı̂rzan,

F. Bocchino, S. Bogdanov, L. Boirin, T. Boller, S. Borgani, K. Borm, N. Bouché, H. Bourdin, R. Bower, V. Braito,
E. Branchini, G. Branduardi-Raymont, J. Bregman, L. Brenneman, M. Brightman, M. Brüggen, J. Buchner, E. Bulbul,
M. Brusa, M. Bursa, A. Caccianiga, E. Cackett, S. Campana, N. Cappelluti, M. Cappi, F. Carrera, M. Ceballos,
F. Christensen, Y.-H. Chu, E. Churazov, N. Clerc, S. Corbel,
A. Corral, A. Comastri, E. Costantini, J. Croston, M. Dadina, A. D’Ai, A. Decourchelle, R. Della Ceca, K. Dennerl, K. Dolag, C. Done, M. Dovciak, J. Drake, D. Eckert, A. Edge, S. Ettori, Y. Ezoe, E. Feigelson, R. Fender,
C. Feruglio, A. Finoguenov, F. Fiore, M. Galeazzi, S. Gallagher, P. Gandhi, M. Gaspari, F. Gastaldello, A. Georgakakis,
I. Georgantopoulos, M. Gilfanov, M. Gitti, R. Gladstone,
R. Goosmann, E. Gosset, N. Grosso, M. Guedel, M. Guerrero, F. Haberl, M. Hardcastle, S. Heinz, A. Alonso Herrero,
A. Hervé, M. Holmstrom, K. Iwasawa, P. Jonker, J. Kaastra, E. Kara, V. Karas, J. Kastner, A. King, D. Kosenko,
D. Koutroumpa, R. Kraft, I. Kreykenbohm, R. Lallement,
G. Lanzuisi, J. Lee, M. Lemoine-Goumard, A. Lobban,
G. Lodato, L. Lovisari, S. Lotti, I. McCharthy, B. McNamara,
A. Maggio, R. Maiolino, B. De Marco, D. de Martino, S. Mateos, G. Matt, B. Maughan, P. Mazzotta, M. Mendez, A. Merloni, G. Micela, M. Miceli, R. Mignani, J. Miller, G. Miniutti, S. Molendi, R. Montez, A. Moretti, C. Motch, Y. Nazé,
J. Nevalainen, F. Nicastro, P. Nulsen, T. Ohashi, P. O’Brien,
J. Osborne, L. Oskinova, F. Pacaud, F. Paerels, M. Page, I. Papadakis, G. Pareschi, R. Petre, P.-O. Petrucci, E. Piconcelli,
I. Pillitteri, C. Pinto, J. de Plaa, E. Pointecouteau, T. Ponman, G. Ponti, D. Porquet, K. Pounds, G. Pratt, P. Predehl,
D. Proga, D. Psaltis, D. Rafferty, M. Ramos-Ceja, P. Ranalli,
E. Rasia, A. Rau, G. Rauw, N. Rea, A. Read, J. Reeves,
T. Reiprich, M. Renaud, C. Reynolds, G. Risaliti, J. Rodriguez, P. Rodriguez Hidalgo, M. Roncarelli, D. Rosario,
M. Rossetti, A. Rozanska, E. Rovilos, R. Salvaterra, M. Salvato, T. Di Salvo, J. Sanders, J. Sanz-Forcada, K. Schawinski,
J. Schaye, A. Schwope, S. Sciortino, P. Severgnini, F. Shankar,
D. Sijacki, S. Sim, C. Schmid, R. Smith, A. Steiner, B. Stelzer,
G. Stewart, T. Strohmayer, L. Strüder, M. Sun, Y. Takei,
V. Tatischeff, A. Tiengo, F. Tombesi, G. Trinchieri, T. G.
Tsuru, A. Ud-Doula, E. Ursino, L. Valencic, E. Vanzella,
S. Vaughan, C. Vignali, J. Vink, F. Vito, M. Volonteri,
D. Wang, N. Webb, R. Willingale, J. Wilms, M. Wise, D. Worrall, A. Young, L. Zampieri, J. In’t Zand, S. Zane, A. Zezas,
Y. Zhang, and I. Zhuravleva, The Hot and Energetic Universe:
A White Paper presenting the science theme motivating the
Athena+ mission, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:1306.2307 (2013),
arXiv:1306.2307 [astro-ph.HE].
[124] C. S. Reynolds, Measuring black hole spin using x-ray reflection spectroscopy, Space Science Reviews 183, 277–294
(2013).
[125] NED, The nasa/ipac extragalactic database (ned) (2024).
[126] R. D. Blandford and R. L. Znajek, Electromagnetic
extraction of energy from kerr black holes, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 179,
433
(1977),
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/articlepdf/179/3/433/9333653/mnras179-0433.pdf.
[127] A. Tchekhovskoy, R. Narayan, and J. C. McKinney,
Efficient generation of jets from magnetically arrested
accretion on a rapidly spinning black hole, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society:
Letters
418, L79 (2011), https://academic.oup.com/mnrasl/articlepdf/418/1/L79/56939896/mnrasl 418 1 l79.pdf.
[128] R. D. Blandford and D. G. Payne, Hydromagnetic flows from

22
accretion disks and the production of radio jets., MNRAS 199,
883 (1982).
[129] D. L. Meier, D. G. Payne, and K. R. Lind, The Production
of Jets from Magnetized Accretion Disks: Simulation of the
Blandford-Payne Mechanism, in Extragalactic Radio Sources,
IAU Symposium, Vol. 175, edited by R. D. Ekers, C. Fanti,
and L. Padrielli (1996) p. 433.
[130] J. M. Bardeen and J. A. Petterson, The Lense-Thirring Effect
and Accretion Disks around Kerr Black Holes, Astrophys. J.
Lett. 195, L65 (1975).
[131] F. D. Ryan, Effect of gravitational radiation reaction on circular orbits around a spinning black hole, Phys. Rev. D 52,
R3159 (1995).
[132] S. A. Hughes, Evolution of circular, nonequatorial orbits of
kerr black holes due to gravitational-wave emission, Phys.
Rev. D 61, 084004 (2000).
[133] K. Glampedakis, S. A. Hughes, and D. Kennefick, Approximating the inspiral of test bodies into kerr black holes, Phys.
Rev. D 66, 064005 (2002).
[134] J. R. Gair and K. Glampedakis, Improved approximate inspirals of test bodies into kerr black holes, Phys. Rev. D 73,
064037 (2006).
[135] T. Hovatta, E. Valtaoja, M. Tornikoski, and A. Lähteenmäki,
Doppler factors, lorentz factors and viewing angles for
quasars, bl lacertae objects and radio galaxies, Astronomy&Astrophysics 494, 527–537 (2008).
[136] A. B. Pushkarev, Y. Y. Kovalev, M. L. Lister, and
T. Savolainen, Jet opening angles and gamma-ray brightness
of agn, Astronomy&Astrophysics 507, L33–L36 (2009).
[137] M. L. Lister, M. H. Cohen, D. C. Homan, M. Kadler, K. I.
Kellermann, Y. Y. Kovalev, E. Ros, T. Savolainen, and J. A.
Zensus, Mojave: Monitoring of jets in active galactic nuclei
with vlba experiments. vi. kinematics analysis of a complete
sample of blazar jets, The Astronomical Journal 138, 1874
(2009).
[138] M. L. Lister, M. F. Aller, H. D. Aller, D. C. Homan, K. I.
Kellermann, Y. Y. Kovalev, A. B. Pushkarev, J. L. Richards,
E. Ros, and T. Savolainen, Mojave. xiii. parsec-scale agn jet
kinematics analysis based on 19 years of vlba observations at
15 ghz, The Astronomical Journal 152, 12 (2016).
[139] A. B. Pushkarev, Y. Y. Kovalev, M. L. Lister, and
T. Savolainen, MOJAVE – XIV. Shapes and opening angles of
AGN jets, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
468, 4992 (2017), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/articlepdf/468/4/4992/17155561/stx854.pdf.
[140] M. L. Lister, M. F. Aller, H. D. Aller, M. A. Hodge, D. C.
Homan, Y. Y. Kovalev, A. B. Pushkarev, and T. Savolainen,
Mojave. xv. vlba 15 ghz total intensity and polarization maps
of 437 parsec-scale agn jets from 1996 to 2017, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series 234, 12 (2018).
[141] M. L. Lister, D. C. Homan, T. Hovatta, K. I. Kellermann,

S. Kiehlmann, Y. Y. Kovalev, W. Max-Moerbeck, A. B.
Pushkarev, A. C. S. Readhead, E. Ros, and T. Savolainen, Mojave. xvii. jet kinematics and parent population properties of
relativistically beamed radio-loud blazars, The Astrophysical
Journal 874, 43 (2019).
[142] M. L. Lister, D. C. Homan, K. I. Kellermann, Y. Y. Kovalev,
A. B. Pushkarev, E. Ros, and T. Savolainen, Monitoring of jets
in active galactic nuclei with vlba experiments. xviii. kinematics and inner jet evolution of bright radio-loud active galaxies,
The Astrophysical Journal 923, 30 (2021).
[143] H.-Y. Chen, M. Fishbach, and D. E. Holz, A two per cent
Hubble constant measurement from standard sirens within
five years, Nature 562, 545 (2018), arXiv:1712.06531 [astroph.CO].
[144] L.-G. Zhu, H.-M. Fan, X. Chen, Y.-M. Hu, and J.-d. Zhang,
Improving Cosmological Constraints by Inferring the Formation Channel of Extreme-mass-ratio Inspirals, Astrophys. J.
Suppl. 273, 24 (2024), arXiv:2403.04950 [astro-ph.CO].
[145] B. P. Abbott et al. (LIGO Scientific, Virgo, 1M2H, Dark Energy Camera GW-E, DES, DLT40, Las Cumbres Observatory,
VINROUGE, MASTER), A gravitational-wave standard siren
measurement of the Hubble constant, Nature 551, 85 (2017),
arXiv:1710.05835 [astro-ph.CO].
[146] A. G. Adame, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, G. Aldering,
D. M. Alexander, R. Alfarsy, C. Allende Prieto, M. Alvarez,
and e. a. Alves, The early data release of the dark energy
spectroscopic instrument, The Astronomical Journal 168, 58
(2024).
[147] L. S. Collaboration, Lsst science book, version 2.0 (2009),
arXiv:0912.0201 [astro-ph.IM].
[148] A. G. Riess, S. Casertano, W. Yuan, J. B. Bowers, L. Macri,
J. C. Zinn, and D. Scolnic, Cosmic distances calibrated to 1%
precision with gaia edr3 parallaxes and hubble space telescope
photometry of 75 milky way cepheids confirm tension with
Λcdm, The Astrophysical Journal Letters 908, L6 (2021).
[149] N. Tamanini, C. Caprini, E. Barausse, A. Sesana, A. Klein, and
A. Petiteau, Science with the space-based interferometer elisa.
iii: probing the expansion of the universe using gravitational
wave standard sirens, Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle
Physics 2016 (04), 002.
[150] D. Laghi, N. Tamanini, W. Del Pozzo, A. Sesana, J. Gair,
S. Babak, and D. Izquierdo-Villalba, Gravitational-wave cosmology with extreme mass-ratio inspirals, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 508, 4512 (2021), arXiv:2102.01708 [astro-ph.CO].
[151] W. Del Pozzo and D. Laghi, mikekatz04/lisaanalysistools:
First main release. (2020).
[152] T. A. Thompson, E. Quataert, and N. Murray, Radiation pressure supported starburst disks and AGN fueling, Astrophys. J.
630, 167 (2005), arXiv:astro-ph/0503027.

