MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

Preprint 29 May 2018

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style file v3.0

Detecting outliers and learning complex structures with
large spectroscopic surveys - a case study with APOGEE
stars
Itamar Reis1? , Dovi Poznanski1 , Dalya Baron1 , Gail Zasowski2 , and Sahar Shahaf1
1 School of Physics and Astronomy, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, 69978, Israel

arXiv:1711.00022v2 [astro-ph.IM] 28 May 2018

2 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA

Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ

ABSTRACT

In this work we apply and expand on a recently introduced outlier detection algorithm
that is based on an unsupervised random forest. We use the algorithm to calculate
a similarity measure for stellar spectra from the Apache Point Observatory Galactic
Evolution Experiment (APOGEE). We show that the similarity measure traces nontrivial physical properties and contains information about complex structures in the
data. We use it for visualization and clustering of the dataset, and discuss its ability to
find groups of highly similar objects, including spectroscopic twins. Using the similarity
matrix to search the dataset for objects allows us to find objects that are impossible to
find using their best fitting model parameters. This includes extreme objects for which
the models fail, and rare objects that are outside the scope of the model. We use the
similarity measure to detect outliers in the dataset, and find a number of previously
unknown Be-type stars, spectroscopic binaries, carbon rich stars, young stars, and a
few that we cannot interpret. Our work further demonstrates the potential for scientific
discovery when combining machine learning methods with modern survey data.
Key words: methods: data analysis – methods: machine learning – stars: general –
stars: peculiar

1

INTRODUCTION

Extracting and analyzing information from ongoing and future astronomical surveys, with their increasing size and
complexity, requires astronomers to take advantage of the
tools developed in the (also rapidly growing) fields of data
science and machine learning. Most commonly in astronomy,
these methods enable detection or classification of specified
objects using supervised machine learning (ML) algorithms,
while unsupervised ML is used to search for correlations or
clusters in high dimensional data. Recent examples for such
work are Bloom et al. (2012) - identification and classification of transits and variable stars using imaging, Meusinger
et al. (2012) - outlier detection with quasar spectra, Masci
et al. (2014) - classification of periodic variable stars using photometric time-series, Baron et al. (2015) - clustering
diffuse interstellar band lines based on their pairwise correlation, Miller et al. (2017) - Star-Galaxy classification based
on imaging. A review of data science applications in astronomy can be found in Ball & Brunner (2010).

?

E-mail: itamarreis@mail.tau.ac.il

© 2017 The Authors

In this work we focus on unsupervised exploration of a
dataset based on a similarity matrix, containing a pair-wise
similarity measure between every two objects (the simplest
possible measure being the euclidean distance between the
features of two objects). We show that such a similarity matrix (or its inverse, the distance matrix) is a powerful tool
for exploring a dataset in a data-driven way. We calculate
an unsupervised Random Forest based similarity measure
for stellar spectra and show that, without any additional input other than the spectra themselves, the similarity matrix
traces physical properties such as metallicity, effective temperature and surface gravity. This allows us to visualize the
complex structure of the dataset, to query for similar objects
based on their spectra alone, to put an object in the context
of the general population, to scan the dataset for different
object types, and to detect outliers.
These possibilities are only partly available with traditional representation of an object in an astronomical
database, i.e. by its fit parameters. Fitting a model requires
making assumptions about the object. This can work well
for a large fraction of the data, but usually cannot account
for all the objects nor all of the features. In datasets com-

2

I. Reis et al.

posed of astronomical spectra, the model fitting is usually
based on spectral templates, that do not cover the entire
range of parameters available in the dataset. Furthermore,
templates are usually not available for rare or unexpected
objects. This leaves a fraction of the objects, even if well
understood, not well fitted, and impossible to query using
the database.
Generative models have recently gained popularity
within the astronomical community and outside of it, as
they solve some of the issues raised above. Generative models are generated from the dataset, with few to no assumption about the data structure and distribution of information content. These models, which are purely data-driven,
have been shown to generalise well, and describe even the
most extreme objects in the sample without the need for
dedicated treatment. An example of generative models is
generative adversarial neural networks (GANs), for a recent
use in astrophysics see Schawinski et al. (2017). In this work,
we show that the unsupervised RF algorithm can be viewed
as a generative model, as it grasps complex features in the
dataset, and is able to describe the most extreme objects in
the sample in the same context as the common ones.
Perhaps the most intriguing usage of a similarity matrix
is outlier detection. Outliers in a dataset can have different
origins and interpretations. Some are measurement or data
processing errors, and others are objects not expected to be
in the dataset, extreme and rare objects, and most importantly, unknown unknowns - objects we did not know we
should be looking for. In addition, in astronomy, rare objects could actually be important and common evolutionary
phases that are short lived, and therefore challenging to observe. It is worth noting that finding the mundane outliers
is still useful in order to clean the dataset from erroneous
and unwanted objects, to allow for a better analysis of the
rest of the sample.
Outlier detection algorithms can be divided into different types: (i) Distance based algorithms, which we use in
this work, relying on a (case specific) definition of a pair-wise
distance between the objects, (ii) Probabilistic algorithms,
based on estimating the probability density function of the
data, (iii) Domain based algorithms, which create boundaries in feature space, (iv) Reconstruction based algorithms,
which model the data and calculate the reconstruction error
as a measure for novelty, and (v) Information-theoretic algorithms, which use the information content of the data (for
example by computing the entropy of the data), and measure how specific objects in the dataset change this value.
For a review see Pimentel et al. (2014). We use a distance
based algorithm as it allows us to explore the data in additional ways, as discussed above. One thing to note is that for
a large and complex enough dataset it is likely that there is
not a single outlier detection algorithm that is best, i.e. one
algorithm that detects all the interesting outliers. In general,
different algorithms could be sensitive to different types of
outliers. An obvious test for such an algorithm is whether
it detects the expected outliers, if it does then it could be
worthwhile to investigate all the detected outliers. But even
then there is no guarantee that a different algorithm would
not detect additional interesting objects.
In this work we expand the outlier detection algorithm

presented in Baron & Poznanski (2017) 1 and apply it to
infrared stellar spectra. The core of the algorithm is calculating a distance matrix of the objects in the sample This distance is based on Random Forest Dissimilarity. For Random
Forest (RF) see Breiman et al. (1984); Breiman (2001), for
RF Dissimilarity see Breiman & Cutler (2003); Shi & Horvath (2006). There are many possible choices for a similarity measure, a simple example being the euclidian distance
between the features of the objects. See Yang (2006) for
a survey of distance metric learning. It is known (see Yang
(2006) and references therein) that a good choice of distance
metric can improve the accuracy of K-nearest-neighbor classification (a common application of a distance metric), over
simple euclidian distances. Similarly to outlier detection algorithms, there is no best distance metric, even for a specific
dataset. As there are many possible usages for a distance
metric, it is even less clear how such best distance metric
would be defined. An intuitive reason to use RF dissimilarity
is that, as described below, it is sensitive to the correlation
between different features. This is is often of importance in
spectra. For instance line ratios are usually of more interest
then the strength of a single line. A euclidian distance metric
will be more sensitive to strength of single lines. See GarciaDias et al. (2018) for an application of an euclidian distance
metric in a clustering algorithm with APOGEE spectra.
Baron & Poznanski (2017) applied this algorithm to find
outliers in galaxy spectra from Sloan Digital Sky Survey
(SDSS; Eisenstein et al. 2011) and used the distance matrix to detect outliers. They found spectra showing various
rare phenomena such as supernovae, galaxy-galaxy gravitational lenses, and double peaked emission-lines, as well as
the first reported evidence for AGN-driven outflows, traced
by ionized gas, in post starburst E+A galaxies. The last discovery is discussed in Baron et al. (2017). The algorithm was
applied to galaxy spectra using the flux values at every wavelength as features for the RF (i.e., without generating user
defined features). Here we do the same with stellar spectra
from the Apache Point Observatory Galactic Evolution Experiment (APOGEE, Majewski et al. 2016), which is part
of the SDSS-III, and explore additional applications of the
distance matrix produced by the algorithm. We visualize the
distance matrix using the t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor
Embedding (t-SNE) algorithm (van der Maaten & Hinton
2008), find objects which are similar to objects of interest,
and find the most similar objects in the dataset (that is spectroscopic twins).
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes
the APOGEE dataset we use in this work. In section 3 we
use t-SNE to visualize the distance matrix produced by our
algorithm, and show that it traces stellar parameters. We
use the distance matrix to find groups of similar objects, and
spectroscopic twins. In section 4 we discuss ways to select
and classify outliers efficiently. In section 5 we present the
classification of the outliers we detected. We summarize in
section 6.

1

Code can be found at https://github.com/dalya/WeirdestGalaxies
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

Outliers and similarity in APOGEE
2

APOGEE SPECTRA

The 14th SDSS data release (DR14; Abolfathi et al. 2017)
contains the first data release for the APOGEE-2 survey.
The APOGEE-2 survey consists of high resolution (R ∼
22,500), high signal to noise ratio (typically S/N > 100), infrared H-band (1.51-1.70 µm) spectra for ∼ 263,000 different
stars. The APOGEE-2 main survey spans all galactic environments (bulge, disk, and halo) and is composed mainly of
red giant stars. The main survey targets were chosen using a
cut on the H-band magnitude, gravity-sensitive optical photometry, and dereddened (J − Ks )0 color limits. The color
limit and optical photometry criteria are intended to separate red giants from main sequence dwarfs. The APOGEE-2
dataset contains ∼ 32,000 non main survey targets, including ∼ 13,300 ancillary targets, and ∼ 27,000 hot stars used
for telluric correction. More details on the target selection
in APOGEE-2 are in Zasowski et al. (2017). A large fraction
of the work done with APOGEE data is devoted to investigating the Milky Way structure and evolution using chemical abundances and radial velocities (RVs) derived from the
spectra; for examples see Frinchaboy et al. (2013); Nidever
et al. (2014); Bovy et al. (2014); Ness et al. (2015); Chiappini
et al. (2015); Hayden et al. (2015). We note that APOGEE
spectra are rich with information, and a single spectrum can
contain hundreds of absorption lines.
The input to our algorithm is the pseudo-continuum
normalized (PCN) spectrum. The pseudo-continuum normalization procedure is done with the APOGEE Stellar
Parameters and Chemical Abundances Pipeline (ASPCAP;
Garcı́a Pérez et al. 2016) in order to remove variations of
spectral shape arising from interstellar reddening, errors in
relative fluxing, detector response, and broad band atmospheric absorption. The APOGEE spectra contain two gaps
in wavelength. Our preprocessing stage consists of removing
flux values in these gaps (these values are set to zero in the
original PCN spectrum), as well as interpolating the spectra
to the same wavelength grid. This leaves us with 7,514 flux
values per object, which are the features used by the outlier
detection algorithm.
Applying our algorithm to the APOGEE-2 spectra from
DR14, it became clear that many objects have faulty PCN
spectra (these objects are discussed in section 5). Our algorithm naturally classifies these objects as outliers, making
it harder to find the more interesting outliers. For this reason, since DR13 does not suffer from this contamination, we
apply the algorithm to DR13 data as well. DR13 contains
spectra for 163,000 stars, 25,000 of which are non main survey. DR13 contains results from APOGEE-1, for which the
target selection is somewhat different, and is described in
Zasowski et al. (2013). Unless otherwise stated the results
presented in this paper refer to DR14, APOGEE-2 (which
we will refer to as APOGEE) data.
We use only objects with S/N > 100, of which there are
193,556 in DR14 (107,390 in DR13). The input data size
is therefore the product of the number of objects by the
number of features (wavelengths). The reason for not using
low S/N objects is that when included, objects with spectra
dominated by noise are detected as outliers. We note that
for the high S/N objects we used, the weirdness score and
the S/N are not correlated.
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

3

3

EXPLORING THE APOGEE DATASET
USING A DISTANCE MATRIX

Using our distance matrix to find physically interesting outliers and study the structure of the dataset requires it to
retain the complex information that we see in each object
in the sample, which is a non-trivial task. In this section we
explore what type of information our distance matrix contains. Baron & Poznanski (2017) have seen some hints that
the RF distance matrix contains a wealth of complex spectral information aggregated to a single number, the pair-wise
distance, here to explore that question using visualization
and dimensionality reduction tools.
3.1

Random Forest Dissimilarity

Briefly, the distance is calculated by the following procedure.
First, synthetic data are created with the same marginal distributions as the original data in every feature, but stripped
of the correlation between different features (the features in
our application are the flux values at each wavelength of the
spectra, as described below). Having two types of objects,
one real and one synthetic, an RF classifier is trained to
separate between the two. In the process of separating the
synthetic objects with un-correlated features from the real
ones, the RF learns to recognize correlations in the spectra
of real objects. The RF is composed of a large number of
classification trees, each tree is trained to separate real and
synthetic objects using a subset of the data (the ’Random’
in ’Random Forest’ is referring to the randomness in which a
subset of the data is selected for each tree, see Breiman et al.
(1984); Breiman (2001) for details). Having a large number
of trees, the similarity S between two objects (objects in
the original dataset, i.e. real objects) is then calculated by
counting the number of trees in which the two objects ended
up on the same leaf (a leaf being a tree node with no children nodes), and dividing by the number of trees. This is
done only for the trees in which both objects are classified
as real. We define the distance matrix to be D = 1 − S. Using
the distance matrix we can calculate a ’weirdness score’ for
every object, defined to be the average distance to all other
objects. Below we refer to this weirdness score as Wall . See
Baron & Poznanski (2017) for a detailed description of the
algorithm.
To build the distance matrix we use the scikit-learn implementation of Random Forest. The number of trees we
used is 5000. We note that this number was necessary to
reach convergence, i.e. increasing this number further does
not alter the results. Every 200 trees are built using a random subset of 10000 objects.
3.2

The t-SNE algorithm

t-SNE is a dimensionality reduction algorithm that is particularly well suited for the visualization of high-dimensional
datasets. We use t-SNE to visualize our distance matrix.
A-priori, these distances could define a space with almost
as many dimensions as objects, i.e., tens of thousand of dimensions. Obviously, since many stars are quite similar, and
their spectra are defined by a few physical parameters, the
minimal spanning space might be smaller. By using t-SNE
we can examine the structure of our sample projected into

4

I. Reis et al.

2D. We use our distance matrix as input to the t-SNE algorithm and in return get a 2D map of the objects in our
dataset. In this map, nearby objects have a small pair-wise
distance, and distant objects have a large pair-wise distance.
The two t-SNE dimensions have no physical interpretation.
Since the dimensionality in greatly reduced in the process,
this is approximate, and breaks for large distances. That is,
the map does not show the relative pair-wise distance between ”far away” and ”very far away” objects. The map does
preserve small scale structure.
The general idea of the t-SNE algorithm is quite simple - trying to preserve the distances of each object to its
nearest neighbors (the number of which is determined by
the perplexity parameter), while forcing the distances to reside on a lower dimensional plane, in our case 2D. There
is usually no single best t-SNE map. Maps calculated with
different numbers of nearest neighbors can provide the user
with different information about the dataset. For example a
map calculated with 10000 nearest neighbors is not likely to
show a cluster that contains 100 objects, while a map with
100 nearest neighbors is. Other free parameters in t-SNE
are of computational nature, and control speed vs. accuracy
(accuracy of approximations done in different calculations
inside the algorithm). A bad choice of parameters is usually manifested by a large fraction of the objects distributed
randomly on the map. We consider a map in which all or
almost all of the objects are located in structures to be a
good map. Once we have that we can change the perplexity
to determine the ’scale’ in which the objects are clustered.
A guide for effective use of t-SNE is available in Wattenberg
et al. (2016).
We use the scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al. 2011) implementation of t-SNE. We note that to get informative maps
we had to significantly increase the learning rate parameter
(in the t-SNE map shown below it was set to 40,000) from its
default value of 1000. The perplexity we used was 2000. Both
of these parameters required adjustment when changing the
number of objects in the distance matrix. Building the map
took about 3 days of computation on a machine with 32
cores and 1TB of RAM. When using the current version of
scikit-learn (0.17), t-SNE is using memory of about 8 times
the size of the distance matrix. The memory usage will be
significantly reduced in future scikit-learn versions. We used
the development version of t-SNE which will be included in
scikit-learn 0.19. With this version the memory usage was
reduced by roughly a factor of 4, depending on the perplexity.
3.3

A t-SNE map of the APOGEE dataset

We apply the t-SNE algorithm to our RF dissimilarity distance matrix. The map produced can be especially informative when using different object attributes to color the
points.
In Figure 1 we use the following for color: Teff , highlight of M-type stars, metallicity, and log (g), based on the
ASPCAP fit. Most of the objects lie in a right hand, mainly
vertical, component of the map. In this part we see that
the stars are sequenced by their surface gravity, where giants are located at the top and dwarfs at the bottom, as
well as their effective temperature for which we get two separate sequences, one for dwarfs at the bottom of the map

and one for giants at the top of the map. We also see an
horizontal sequence that follows the metallicity, high metallicity on the right. On the left hand side of the map we have
the hotter stars in the APOGEE sample, including the stars
used for telluric calibration. The very low metallicity stars
are located near these telluric objects, both having mainly
featureless spectra.
In panel 1d we see that some M-type stars are located
far from the rest. We manually inspect these objects as an
example to see if this is due to the algorithm mis-locating
a few objects, or if these objects are really different from
the rest of their respective groups. We find that in this case
the objects really have different looking spectra, with poor
ASPCAP fitting. For example, some of these misplaced-Mtype stars turn out to be B-type emission line stars (Be
stars).
From the t-SNE maps we learn that our distance matrix is capable of aggregating non-trivial information about
the objects in the sample. Figure 1 shows that the distance
matrix holds information about various physical properties,
namely the figure is showing sequences in the effective temperature, surface gravity, and metallicity. These properties,
in addition to the chemical abundances, affect the spectral
features in non-trivial and partly degenerate ways, which we
see are captured in the distance matrix.
The APOGEE pipeline derives the stellar parameters
by means of best fitting templates. We see that some of the
stars in the sample do not have derived parameter values.
This is usually because these stars are extreme, at least with
respect to the rest of the sample, and their stellar parameters fall outside the grid of spectral templates used by the
pipeline. One can use the distance matrix to find these objects. As seen on the t-SNE map, the algorithm places the
extreme objects next to the less extreme ones in a continuous
sequence. In this sense we say that the similarity measure
could be viewed as a generative model of the data.
Seeing here that globally the distance matrix captures
the structure of the dataset, in the next two subsections we
see that it could also be used to investigate the dataset at a
’smaller scale’ - by looking at the most similar objects.
3.4

Object retrieval

We can use the distance matrix to query the dataset for
similar objects based on their spectra alone. We use the example of carbon rich stars to show that the algorithm can
find objects that were not possible to find using their ASPCAP fit parameters. Carbon-rich stars have atmospheres
with over-abundance of carbon compared to oxygen. In this
case the excess carbon (i.e., carbon that is not tied in CO)
will allow CN (and other carbon molecules) to form. In regular stars there will be excess oxygen, that will form OH.
In Figure 2 we show a t-SNE map colored by the carbon to
oxygen abundance ratio, from ASPCAP.
Focusing on a cluster of carbon rich stars we see that
the objects are sequenced on the map according the the C/O
abundance ratio. Most importantly we see that a number
of objects without pipeline abundance value are located at
the top of the sequence. We suggest that the pipeline is
not able to fit these objects due to them having extreme
abundances, and due to the difficulty of abundance analysis
of spectra with very strong molecular lines. We manually
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

Outliers and similarity in APOGEE

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

5

Figure 1. t-SNE map of our distance matrix. Each point on the map represents a star, where spectrally similar objects cluster on
small scales. The axes do not have any physical significance. In the different panels, different coloring schemes are presented. Panel
(a): effective temperature, panel (b): surface gravity, panel (c): metallicity, panel (d): highlighted M-type stars. The values used for the
different coloring are taken from ASPCAP. Stars with no available value for a parameter do not appear on the map. For example, many
dwarf stars do not have log g values, so the clusters containing dwarfs disappear from the log g map. The complex structure of the sample
is apparent. In panels (e) and (f) we color the map by the weirdness score. Wall is in panel (e), and W250 is in panel (f). We see that
when using W250 , low Teff stars no longer dominate the high weirdness score population, and we get a more diverse outlier population
that is spread on the t-SNE map.

inspect the 51 objects with no ASPCAP value shown in
Figure 2 and see that they all show strong CN and weak
OH, typical for carbon rich stars. Moreover, all of the 35
objects that have SIMBAD (Wenger et al. 2000) entry are
classified as carbon stars, making the 15 objects without
SIMBAD entry carbon star candidates. We note that many
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

of these objects were observed as part of the APOGEE-2
AGB stars ancillary program, see Zasowski et al. (2017).
This in an example of a query for objects based on their
spectra, instead of on their fit parameters. This is of importance for objects with bad or nonexistent fit parameters,
that would otherwise be lost in the dataset. In a large enough

6

I. Reis et al.

Figure 2. A t-SNE map colored by the carbon to oxygen abundance ratio, from ASPCAP. We focus on a cluster of carbon rich
stars. We see that, according to a sequence visibly detectable on
the map, objects at the high end of the sequence are not fitted by
ASPCAP. Detecting these objects is possible using the similarity
matrix.

dataset it is very likely such objects will exist, these can be
extreme cases of known phenomenon outside the range of
the model, rare objects outside the scope of the model, or
other types of outliers in the dataset.
3.5

Spectroscopic twins

The distance matrix produced by the algorithm can be used
for finding objects with spectra similar to each other, objects
sometimes referred to as spectroscopic twins. This is trivially
achieved by sorting the distance matrix.
One use of spectroscopic twins is measuring distances
(Jofré et al. 2015). Twin stars will have the same luminosity,
and if we know the distance to one of the stars (e.g. using
parallax), we can calculate the distance to the other by comparing observed magnitudes. Jofré et al. (2015) looked for
spectroscopic twins among 536 FGK stars, and detected 175
pairs with spectra indistinguishable within the errors. As we
work with a rather homogeneous sample of ∼ 105 stars, we
expect a large fraction of (multiple) twins.
Example spectra for spectroscopic twins are shown in
A1b. It can be seen that the pairs have virtually identical
spectra. Note that in the top example in Figure A1b one of
the spectra lacks an ASPCAP fit, preventing identification
of a twin via these parameters. The middle pair have very
similar parameters, while the bottom twins show more significantly different parameters. Our method finds them all,
irrespectively.
One thing we note is that this method for finding twins
works well for the common object types (common in terms
of representation in the dataset), but might be less so for
underrepresented types of objects (in which case we still get
similar spectra, but not identical). The reason being that our
unsupervised RF uses more extensively the features that are
important for regular objects, and as a result it can separate objects based on subtle differences in these features. For
other features that might not be important to most of the
objects (for example hydrogen absorption or emission), the
RF uses cruder cuts to separate objects.
As a test for the selection of twin objects we look at the

Figure 3. A comparison between angular separation of pairs of
stars detected as having similar spectra, and random pairs of
stars. The similar spectra stars shown here are each star in our
sample and its nearest neighbor according to our distance matrix.

angular separation of stars with similar spectra. APOGEE
stars living in the same environment are more likely to have
similar physical properties, and thus similar spectra. We expect that pairs of stars we detect as having similar spectra
will have higher probability to be located near each other
compared with random pairs of stars. We note that there is
an observational effect playing a role here - the APOGEE
sample is not uniform in different parts of the galaxy (for
example, dwarfs from the galactic bulge are too faint for
APOGEE and are not observed). In Figure 3 we show the
distribution of the angular separation of each star in our
sample with its nearest neighbor (as defined by our distance matrix), compared to random pairs of stars. Clearly
the twins we find are physically associated. We release our
entire distance matrix, and we will update it with future
data releases, allowing others to use the twins for further
study. We note that our methodology does not allow one to
compare well objects with different S/N, nor does it give a
statistically meaningful similarity measure. However, it bypasses the difficulties of comparing spectra in data or model
space, while producing very robust results. An additional
example for using a distance metric to find similar objects is
found in Jofré et al. (2017), who looked for nearest neighbors
on a t-SNE map of RAVE stars in search for spectroscopic
twins. To build the t-SNE map euclidian distance were used.

4

EFFICIENT OUTLIER DETECTION

An important usage of the distance matrix is outlier detection. For this purpose we calculate a weirdness score for each
object in the sample. This weirdness score is calculated by
summing over the distance matrix. In this section we use the
t-SNE visualization in order to understand the properties
of this weirdness score. We present a new, local, definition
of a weirdness score. We use this local weirdness score for
APOGEE stars, and find it is more suitable for detecting
outliers.
We can use the t-SNE map in order learn about the
weirdness score properties. In Figure 1e we color the t-SNE
map by the weirdness score. The central, low Wall part of the
t-SNE map contains about half of the objects in the sample.
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

Outliers and similarity in APOGEE

Figure 4. Wall distribution for all objects in the sample. The
two bumps in the distribution are composed mostly of objects
with no ASPCAP fit parameters. Inspecting the spectra of these
objects, we see that one bump contains low Teff stars, while the
other contains low metallicity and hot telluric calibration stars
(i.e. stars with weak or non existent absorption lines).

These objects are G and K giant stars, with weak molecular
features in their spectra, but with prominent metallic features. They comprise one large group of objects with similar
spectra. Below we refer to these objects as the main group.
Example spectra for such objects are presented in Figure
A1a. For each object in the figure we present the percentile
of the object’s weirdness score, i.e. the percent of the objects
with lower weirdness score.
In order to better understand the properties of Wall ,
we examine its distribution in Figure 4. The distribution
decreases smoothly to high weirdness except for two bumps.
We interpret the bumps as clusters of stars in our similarity
space. One bump consists partially of low-temperature stars,
and the other is due to stars with weak or non existent
absorption lines - - metal poor stars and telluric calibration
targets. The bumps in the distribution of Wall are due to
the fact that there is one dominant cluster of objects in
the dataset, and the objects in smaller clusters receive a
weirdness score based on how different they are from objects
in the main cluster. These results might be useful to detect
clusters, or to clean up the dataset from objects outside the
main group, but in order to find small classes of interesting
outliers, we need a better outlier definition.
To address the issue described above we introduce the
’nearest neighbors weirdness score’, a modification to the
algorithm that produces ’better outliers’ for the APOGEE
dataset. When looking for better outliers, we wish to get
several different types of objects detected as outliers, in contrast to a weirdness score that strongly correlates to a single
attribute (e.g. the effective temperature). In addition we expect to be able to detect known outliers such as binaries and
bad spectra.
Instead of defining outliers based on their average distance to the entire sample, we use a more local measure,
and for every object we calculate distances to its nearest
neighbors. This measure of unusualness is used for distancebased outlier detection in other fields (Knorr & Ng 1999;
Knorr et al. 2000). The resulting weirdness score distribution is shown in figure 5. We can see that the bumps in
the weirdness score distribution go away for a small enough
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

7

Figure 5. Weirdness score distribution for different numbers of
nearest neighbors included in the calculation.

number of nearest neighbors. When choosing the number of
nearest neighbors to use in the weirdness score calculation,
one can check at what point the weirdness score distribution
does not contain bumps.
A t-SNE map with the 250 nearest neighbors weirdness score (W250 ) is shown in Figure 1f . Clearly, there is a
group of stars that have persistently high (percentile) weirdness score for any number of nearest neighbors used. On the
other hand, the high Teff stars no longer have high weirdness
score for small numbers of nearest neighbors. This results
in various other groups of stars receiving higher percentile
weirdness score.
An open question regarding many outlier detection algorithms is setting a threshold on the weirdness score, i.e.,
determining above which weirdness score we mark an object
as an ”outlier” and inspect it further. The t-SNE map could
be of help here too: looking at the W250 t-SNE map (Figure 1f) we can see that for each group of stars on the map,
the edges receive higher weirdness score. We do not want to
mark these edges as outliers, and from the t-SNE map we
determine that this would be achieved with a threshold of
0.6, for this specific dataset.
The classification of the outliers is made easier by sorting the objects using their position on the t-SNE map. This
way we can classify groups of similar objects instead of one
object at a time. Another method we try for outlier inspection is called DEMUD (Wagstaff et al. 2013). Instead of examining the outliers sequentially, one starts from the weirdest object, and then inspects the weird object that is the
farthest from the first, followed by the one farthest from the
first two, and so forth. The idea is to sample the different
populations of outliers quickly, stopping once we start seeing
the same types of objects repeating. For the final classification of the outliers we chose a threshold on the weirdness
score (as discussed above) and use the t-SNE map to help
with the classification. This is followed by taking a lower
threshold on the weirdness score and using DEMUD to look
for additional types of outliers. This second step did not
result in new types of outliers.

8

I. Reis et al.
H-Br emission lines and weak absorption lines. For some
Be stars, metallic emission is also present. ASPCAP fails to
derive radial velocities for these objects, due to their unusual
spectra.

5.2

Figure 6. Results of the manual classification of 348 highest
W250 . In the next sections we discuss each of these groups. The
Non GK giants group contains mostly M dwarfs. This figure refers
to DR13.

5

Example spectra of SB2s are shown in Figure A1c along with
their best fitting synthetic spectra. As seen, ASPCAP does
not account for binarity. For some of the SB2s ASPCAP fits
broad lines, and for others it fits only one of the two sets
of lines. In general the APOGEE reduction pipeline does
not have an automatic binary identification routine (Nidever
et al. 2015).
Chojnowski et al. (2015b) compiled a catalog of spectroscopic binaries in APOGEE 2 . The catalog is constructed by
searching for multiple peaks in the spectra cross correlation
function, when comparing to the synthetic template spectra.
15 of the 72 binaries we find as outliers are not listed in the
catalog of Chojnowski et al. (2015b) and are therefore new.

APOGEE OUTLIERS

In this section we present the results of manual classification of the highest W250 stars. Here we use results from both
DR14 and DR13, as in DR14 many objects have poorly determined continua. In total we look at 577 objects. The distribution of the different groups of outliers for DR13 only is
shown in Figure 6. We find the following large groups: Be
stars, young stellar objects, carbon enriched stars, double
lined spectroscopic binaries (SB2), fast rotators, M dwarfs,
M giants and cool K giants (these stars have the highest
Wall ), and stars with bad spectra. In addition we find a number of objects that do not fit into any of the above classes.
“Bad spectra” are objects with ASPCAP warn flags,
combined with a strange looking spectrum. The flags we
encounter for the outliers are commissioning, persist high,
and persist jump neg(high). Other ”bad spectra” objects are
not flagged but have faulty spectra. These appear only in
DR14 and we discuss them below.
We note that these classes are not mutually exclusive (in
Figure 6 each object is assigned to a single class we believe
describes it best).
5.1

Spectroscopic binaries

B-type emission line stars

The objects in this group are Be stars. APOGEE targeted
approximately 50 known Be stars in an ancillary program,
while the additional Be stars in the APOGEE sample were
originally targeted as telluric standard stars. Chojnowski
et al. (2015a, 2017) compiled a catalog of 238 Be stars in
the APOGEE dataset. They identified these stars by visual
inspection.
We find 40 Be stars not included in the Chojnowski
et al. (2015a) catalog. These new Be stars first appeared in
DR14. For 26 of these stars emission was never reported before. We list these objects in table A2. Some of these stars
were detected as outliers, while the rest were found by inspecting the neighbors, in the distance matrix and t-SNE
map, of the outliers.
As seen in Figure A1j, these stars have double peaked

5.3

Fast rotators

Broad line stars are also detected as outliers. ASPCAP fits
broad lines well for dwarf stars but not for giants, as can be
seen in Figure A1d. These stars are all flagged with suspect
broad lines by the ASPCAP pipeline.

5.4

Carbon rich stars

Carbon rich stars (discussed in section 3.4) are also detected
as outliers. In Figure A1e we can see the strong CN compared
to OH lines for a few carbon enriched stars. The weirdness
score increases with the strength of the CN features.

5.5

Young stellar objects

Stars in this group show both H-Br emission lines as well
as regular metallic absorption lines. They are mostly young
stars included in the INfrared Survey of Young Nebulous
Clusters (IN-SYNC, Cottaar et al. 2014). We detect stars
with both broad and narrow emission, and with absorption
that can be broad or narrow as well as double lined (SB2s).
SIMBAD classification for stars in this group include ’Variable star of Orion type’, ’T Tau-type Star’, ’Pre-main sequence Star’, and ’Young stellar object’.

5.6

M dwarfs

M dwarf stars are also detected as outliers. This is due to
the small number of M dwarf stars in the APOGEE sample.
Example spectra are in Figure A1g.

2

Their
catalog
can
be
found
here
http://astronomy.nmsu.edu/drewski/apogee-sb2/apSB2.html
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

Outliers and similarity in APOGEE
5.7

Other outliers

Some of the objects detected as outliers did not fall into any
of the above classes. These include a brown dwarf, a WolfRayet star, a few AGB stars including an OH-IR star, and
known variable stars, as well as three red supergiants observed in the massive stars ancillary program. Also detected
as outliers are special non stellar targets, such as the center
of M32, a few M31 globular clusters, and three planetary
nebulae.
Two outliers show double peaked H-Br emission lines,
as well as absorption lines typical to the APOGEE
dataset. Both of these objects show RV modulations,
suggesting they are multiple star systems. For the first,
2M04052624+5304494, the RV modulation of the absorption lines (determined from APOGEE visit spectra), could
be modeled with a period of P = 11.152 ± 0.072 days, and
amplitude of K = 78 ± 15 km s−1 . The emission lines in
the APOGEE spectra show smaller RV modulation, if any.
For the second, 2M06415063-0130177, the absorption lines
RV changes by ∼ 160 km s−1 between two APOGEE visits.
The visits are separated by 28 days. For the emission lines
we could not get a good estimate on the RVs, as the emission line profiles change significantly between the visits. A
CoRoT light-curve is available for this system, showing clear
periodic modulation. A period of P = 29.04 days was derived
for this light-curve by Affer et al. (2012). We note that this
period does not agree with the RV modulation. For both of
these systems additional work is required to determine their
nature.
We also detect a group of objects with similar, very
broad features. Most of these objects have SIMBAD classifications as contact binaries, mainly W Ursae Majoris.
A few objects remain unexplained. We divide these objects into two groups. In the first group we have objects
with spectra that seems to have similar features to typical
APOGEE red giants (by means of visual inspection). The
second group contains stars with spectra that are clearly different from typical APOGEE red giants. We refer to the first
group as unexplained red giants, and to the second group
as unexplained non red giants. Some of the unexplained
red giants stars have low carbon and high nitrogen ASPCAP abundances. Inspecting their spectra, we do see significantly weaker CO features relative to low weirdness score
stars with similar stellar parameters. One of these stars,
2M17534571-2949362, is discussed in Fernández-Trincado
et al. (2017) as having low Mg, but high Al and N abundances. There are three unexplained non red giants, the first
is 2M03411288+2453344, which was targeted as a telluric
calibrator target. As could be seen in Figure A1h, the ASPCAP fit does not catch many of the features in the spectrum,
in particular there is no H-Br absorption. The cross correlation function shows a single peak, suggesting it is not a
binary star. There are 3 visits to this star, all showing the
same features. The objects most similar to this one, according to the distance matrix, do not show similar features.
2M05264478+1049152 has very broad features that we do
not identify. Same goes for 2M23375653+8534449 which also
has a single emission line centered at λ = 16055[Å] that we
cannot identify. We show the spectra of the unexplained non
red giants in Figure 7.
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

5.8

9

Bad reductions

In DR14 roughly half of the high weirdness score objects
have badly determined continua. We show a few examples in
Figure A1. These objects can be divided into two groups. For
the first group, the issue seems to be a bug in the ASPCAP
PCN process. For objects in this group the combined unnormalized spectra looks regular, as well as the DR13 PCN
spectra (for objects with available DR13 data). For the second group already at least one of the visit spectra is faulty,
and this error propagates down the pipeline. Examples for
both of these errors are presented in Figure A1i.

6

SUMMARY

In this work we calculate a similarity measure for APOGEE
infrared spectra of stars. We show that this similarity matrix traces physical properties such as effective temperature, metallicity and surface gravity. Such a similarity matrix could be used for object retrieval, i.e., finding objects
that are similar to a given example, it can be used to detect outliers, and more generally to assist learning about
the structure of a dataset. The similarity is obtained without inputing information derived by model fitting, and thus
the similarity could be used to query and learn about objects that are not well fitted by the pipeline and as such are
hard to find using the fit parameters database.
As noted above, we find that the unsupervised RF is
capable of aggregating complex spectral information into a
single number, the pair-wise distance between two objects.
We find that various stellar parameters are encoded into
this distance, and that the resulting RF represents a general
model of stellar spectra (Baron & Poznanski (2017) showed
that this is true for spectra of galaxies). As such, one can
imagine inverting the process, and using the trained RF to
generate “real-looking” objects, which is in turn a generative
model.
Using this unsupervised RF distance matrix and dimensionality reduction techniques, one can study the structure
of the data, and the relations between different classes of
objects within a dataset. However, it is worth noting that
much of the insight gained about the APOGEE sample was
made possible using the derived ASPCAP stellar parameters. Without these labels, coloring the t-SNE map would
not have been possible. While our proposed unsupervised
distance matrix contains various types of information, the
extraction of this information still heavily depends on annotations of the distance matrix. Thus, for many applications, it is only the combination of our approach and existing knowledge about the dataset that can be useful to gain
additional insight.
Using our distance matrix to detect outliers, we find
objects from the following types of known classes: B-type
emission-line stars, carbon rich stars, spectroscopic binaries,
broad line stars, young stars, bad spectra, and M dwarfs
(which are ordinary but underrepresented in the dataset),
showing that the algorithm is capable of detecting a wide
variety of phenomena. A few dozens of objects that were detected as outliers did not fall into any of the large groups,
these include special targets such as galaxies, globular clusters, and planetary nebulae, stars with unusual abundances,

10

I. Reis et al.

Figure 7. Spectra for the three unclassified outliers. Top spectrum is a typical APOGEE red giant, for comparison. The red line is the
ASPCAP fit and the blue line is the PCN spectrum, except where indicated. PR (W250 ) indicates the percentile of objects with lower
weirdness score. Relative fluxes are offset by a constant for display purposes.

contact binaries, stars observed with the massive star ancillary program and more. Three outliers remain without
explanation.
Some of the carbon rich outliers have a poor ASPCAP
fit, though these groups are included in the ASPCAP stellar
spectral library. Possibly the objects without a good fit are
extreme cases and could be used to improve and test the
pipeline. The SB2s detected as outliers have diverse types of
spectra and could be used to test SB2 detection specific algorithms. Bad spectra objects and underrepresented objects
are not interesting by themselves, but detecting them could
be useful in order to clean the sample and find bugs in the
pipeline. Finding new Be stars is an example for detection
of new objects of known types using the distance matrix or
t-SNE map. This is especially useful in larger surveys, where
visual inspection is not feasible.
The use of t-SNE to visualize the distance matrix was
also useful for the purpose of outlier detection. This enabled
us to speed up the classification of the outliers by classifying
nearby objects together. More importantly, the t-SNE map
proved to be useful in learning about the regular objects
in the data set, an important step to take before looking
at the outliers. Viewing spectra of objects located in different regions of the t-SNE map allowed us to quickly review
the different classes of regular objects. For the APOGEE
dataset, in which there is one large group of similar objects,
a nearest neighbors weirdness score, or a ’local’ weirdness
score, was needed in order to detect the interesting outliers.
Although this was not required to detect the interesting outlying galaxies in Baron & Poznanski (2017), we believe the
the local weirdness score is more general and should be used
in future work. The number of nearest neighbors to use when

calculating the local weirdness score is dataset dependent.
Coloring the t-SNE map by the different weirdness scores
or building t-SNE maps with different perplexities, can help
decide on which number of nearest neighbors is appropriate.
It is also possible that in order to detect all interesting objects one type of nearest neighbors weirdness score would not
be enough, as different types of outliers can come in different (small) cluster sizes. In our case the outliers population
seemed robust to a number of nearest neighbors from a few
to a few thousands. We note that for the map shown in Figure 1 we used perplexity of 2000. This value was chosen in order to make the visualization relatively simple. With smaller
perplexity we obtained maps with more complex small scale
structure, such as small clusters. These maps could be useful
for investigating the data further but for a clean visualization of the large scale structure we used a high perplexity
map.
Future work could involve combining the distance matrix, which is based on spectral data alone, with other types
of available data. A natural direction is the physical position
of a star. For example, one can look for stars that are normal compared to the entire population of stars, but are weird
when compared to their local environment. A table with the
100 nearest neighbors of each object, including their respective distances, is available online. We also include the coordinates for the t-SNE map shown above. Examples for using
these data products are available in a Jupyter Notebook 3 .

3

github.com/ireis/APOGEE tSNE nb
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

Outliers and similarity in APOGEE
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank D. Hogg for suggesting the use of t-SNE, and
other useful comments, and D. Chojnowski for discussing
some of the outliers. We also thank the reviewer for helpful
suggestions to improve this manuscript.
This research made use of: the NASA Astrophysics Data
System Bibliographic Services, scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al.
2011), SciPy (Jones et al. 01 ), IPython (Pérez & Granger
2007), matplotlib (Hunter 2007), astropy (Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013) and the SIMBAD database (Wenger et al.
2000).
This work made extensive use of SDSS data. Funding
for the Sloan Digital Sky Survey IV has been provided by
the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science, and the Participating Institutions.
SDSS-IV acknowledges support and resources from the Center for High-Performance Computing at the University of
Utah. The SDSS web site is www.sdss.org.
SDSS-IV is managed by the Astrophysical Research
Consortium for the Participating Institutions of the SDSS
Collaboration including the Brazilian Participation Group,
the Carnegie Institution for Science, Carnegie Mellon University, the Chilean Participation Group, the French Participation Group, Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, Instituto de Astrofı́sica de Canarias, The Johns
Hopkins University, Kavli Institute for the Physics and
Mathematics of the Universe (IPMU) / University of Tokyo,
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Leibniz Institut für
Astrophysik Potsdam (AIP), Max-Planck-Institut für Astronomie (MPIA Heidelberg), Max-Planck-Institut für Astrophysik (MPA Garching), Max-Planck-Institut für Extraterrestrische Physik (MPE), National Astronomical Observatories of China, New Mexico State University, New
York University, University of Notre Dame, Observatário
Nacional / MCTI, The Ohio State University, Pennsylvania State University, Shanghai Astronomical Observatory,
United Kingdom Participation Group, Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de México, University of Arizona, University
of Colorado Boulder, University of Oxford, University of
Portsmouth, University of Utah, University of Virginia, University of Washington, University of Wisconsin, Vanderbilt
University, and Yale University.

REFERENCES
Abolfathi B., et al., 2017, preprint, (arXiv:1707.09322)
Affer L., Micela G., Favata F., Flaccomio E., 2012, MNRAS, 424,
11
Astropy Collaboration et al., 2013, A&A, 558, A33
Ball N. M., Brunner R. J., 2010, International Journal of Modern
Physics D, 19, 1049
Baron D., Poznanski D., 2017, MNRAS, 465, 4530
Baron D., Poznanski D., Watson D., Yao Y., Cox N. L. J.,
Prochaska J. X., 2015, MNRAS, 451, 332
Baron D., Netzer H., Poznanski D., Prochaska J. X., Förster
Schreiber N. M., 2017, MNRAS, 470, 1687
Bloom J. S., et al., 2012, PASP, 124, 1175
Bovy J., 2016, ApJ, 817, 49
Bovy J., et al., 2014, ApJ, 790, 127
Breiman L., 2001, Machine Learning, 45, 5
Breiman L., Cutler A., 2003, Thechnical Report
Breiman L., Friedman J. H., Olshen R. A., Stone C. J., 1984, MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

11

Chiappini C., et al., 2015, A&A, 576, L12
Chojnowski S. D., et al., 2015a, AJ, 149, 7
Chojnowski S. D., et al., 2015b, in American Astronomical Society
Meeting Abstracts. p. 340.05
Chojnowski S. D., et al., 2017, AJ, 153, 174
Cottaar M., et al., 2014, ApJ, 794, 125
Eisenstein D. J., et al., 2011, AJ, 142, 72
Fernández-Trincado J. G., et al., 2017, ApJ, 846, L2
Frinchaboy P. M., et al., 2013, ApJ, 777, L1
Garcia-Dias R., Allende Prieto C., Sánchez Almeida J., OrdovásPascual I., 2018, preprint, (arXiv:1801.07912)
Garcı́a Pérez A. E., et al., 2016, AJ, 151, 144
Hayden M. R., et al., 2015, ApJ, 808, 132
Hunter J. D., 2007, Computing In Science & Engineering, 9, 90
Jofré P., Mädler T., Gilmore G., Casey A. R., Soubiran C., Worley
C., 2015, MNRAS, 453, 1428
Jofré P., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 472, 2517
Jones E., Oliphant T., Peterson P., et al., 2001–, SciPy: Open
source scientific tools for Python, http://www.scipy.org/
Knorr E. M., Ng R. T., 1999, in Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases. VLDB ’99.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA,
pp 211–222, http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=645925.
671529
Knorr E. M., Ng R. T., Tucakov V., 2000, The VLDB Journal, 8,
237
Majewski S. R., APOGEE Team APOGEE-2 Team 2016, Astronomische Nachrichten, 337, 863
Masci F. J., Hoffman D. I., Grillmair C. J., Cutri R. M., 2014,
AJ, 148, 21
Meusinger H., Schalldach P., Scholz R.-D., in der Au A., Newholm
M., de Hoon A., Kaminsky B., 2012, A&A, 541, A77
Miller A. A., Kulkarni M. K., Cao Y., Laher R. R., Masci F. J.,
Surace J. A., 2017, AJ, 153, 73
Ness M., Hogg D. W., Rix H.-W., Ho A. Y. Q., Zasowski G., 2015,
ApJ, 808, 16
Nidever D. L., et al., 2014, ApJ, 796, 38
Nidever D. L., et al., 2015, AJ, 150, 173
Pedregosa F., et al., 2011, Journal of Machine Learning Research,
12, 2825
Pérez F., Granger B. E., 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering, 9, 21
Pimentel M. A., Clifton D. A., Clifton L., Tarassenko L., 2014,
Signal Processing, 99, 215
Schawinski K., Zhang C., Zhang H., Fowler L., Santhanam G. K.,
2017, MNRAS, 467, L110
Shi T., Horvath S., 2006, Journal of Computational and Graphical
Statistics, 15, 118
Wagstaff K. L., Lanza N. L., Thompson D. R., Dietterich
T. G., Gilmore M. S., 2013, in Proceedings of the TwentySeventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. AAAI’13.
AAAI Press, pp 905–911, http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?
id=2891460.2891586
Wattenberg M., Viégas F., Johnson I., 2016, Distill
Wenger M., et al., 2000, A&AS, 143, 9
Yang L., 2006, Distance Metric Learning: A Comprehensive Survey
Zasowski G., et al., 2013, AJ, 146, 81
Zasowski G., et al., 2017, preprint, (arXiv:1708.00155)
van der Maaten L., Hinton G., 2008, -

APPENDIX A: SPECTRA AND TABLES
In Figure A1 we show example spectra of objects from the
different outlying groups, as well as spectroscopic twins.

12

I. Reis et al.

(a) Regular objects, i.e. objects with low weirdness scores. Clearly, all have similar spectra. PR (W250 ) indicates the
percentile of objects with lower weirdness score.

(b) Three example pairs of spectroscopic twins. The twin spectra are over-plotted, one in green and the other in blue.
Note that in the top example one of the stars lacks an ASPCAP fit, preventing identification as a twin via these
parameters.
Figure A1. Example spectra for different groups of objects. The spectra plots were made using the APOGEE toolkit by Bovy (2016).
The red line is the ASPCAP fit and the blue line is the PCN spectrum, except where indicated. PR (W250 ) indicates the percentile of
objects with lower weirdness score. Relative fluxes are offset by a constant for display purposes. In every panel we choose the most
informative wavelength range.
MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

Outliers and similarity in APOGEE

(c) Spectroscopic binaries.

(d) Fast rotators. Top spectrum is a typical APOGEE red giant, for comparison.
Figure A1. Continued.

MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

13

14

I. Reis et al.

(e) Carbon enriched stars. Top spectrum is a typical APOGEE red giant, for comparison.

(f) Stars with both absorption and hydrogen emission. Top spectrum is a typical APOGEE red giant, for comparison.
We see both narrow and broad emission stars, and also both narrow and broad absorption. The second spectra from
the top is also an SB2. The bottom spectrum has bad RV determination.
Figure A1. Continued.

MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

Outliers and similarity in APOGEE

(g) M dwarfs. Top spectrum is a typical APOGEE red giant, for comparison. M dwarfs are detected as outliers due
to their underrepresentation in the APOGEE dataset.

(h) Stars from the ’others’ pile. Top spectrum is a typical APOGEE red giant, for comparison. Starting from the second
from top, the four outlying spectra are brown dwarf, massive star target, unexplained red giant, and a Wolf-Rayet
star.
Figure A1. Continued.

MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

15

16

I. Reis et al.

(i) DR14 Faulty spectra. For the top two objects the problems are due to an issue in the PCN process, for the bottom
three one of the visit spectra is bad.

(j) B-type emission line stars showing double peaked hydrogen emission. The emission lines are not on the dotted lines
due to wrong RV determination by the APOGEE pipeline.
Figure A1. Continued.

MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

Outliers and similarity in APOGEE
In Table A1 we present all the objects detected as outliers, and did not fall into any of the large groups. Tables
with the objects in the rest of the groups are available online.
In Table A2 we list Be stars which are new in DR14 and
thus not included in the Chojnowski et al. (2015a) catalog.
In Table A3 we list carbon rich stars that were detected
as outliers.
In Table A4 we list the spectroscopic binaries that were
detected as outliers.
In Table A5 we list the spectroscopic binaries that were
detected as outliers.
In Table A6 we list the objects with bad DR14 reductions.
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by
the author.

MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

17

18

I. Reis et al.
APOGEE ID

RA [deg]

DEC [deg]

Classification

2M15010818+2250020
2M14323054+5049406
2M03114116-0043477
2M14304297+0905087
2M13465180+2257140
2M14120965+0508201
2M16145863+3016356
2M03242324-0042148
2M03242324-0042148
2M16241043+4555265
2M16524137+4723275
2M06415063-0130177
2M04052624+5304494
2M13145725+1713303
AP00425080+4117074
AP00442956+4121359
AP00430957+4121321
AP00424183+4051550
AP00424183+4051550
AP00431764+4127450
2M18445087-0325251
2M18452141-0330149
2M18440079-0353160
2M03411288+2453344
2M05264478+1049152
2M23375653+8534449
2M04255084+6007127
2M21021878+3641412
2M18211606-1301256
2M17534571-2949362
2M06361326+0919120
2M00220008+6915238
2M21184119+4836167
2M20564714+5013372
2M05501847-0010369
2M23001010+6055385
2M05473667+0020060

225.284
218.127
47.9215
217.679
206.716
213.04
243.744
51.0969
51.0969
246.043
253.172
100.461
61.3594
198.739
10.7117
11.1232
10.7899
10.6743
10.6743
10.8235
281.212
281.339
281.003
55.3037
81.6866
354.486
66.4619
315.578
275.317
268.44
99.0553
5.50037
319.672
314.196
87.577
345.042
86.9028

22.8339
50.828
-0.72993
9.08575
22.9539
5.13893
30.2766
-0.704119
-0.704119
45.924
47.391
-1.50494
53.0804
17.2251
41.2854
41.36
41.3589
40.8653
40.8653
41.4625
-3.42364
-3.50416
-3.88778
24.8929
10.8209
85.5792
60.1202
36.6948
-13.0238
-29.8267
9.32001
69.2566
48.6047
50.227
-0.176939
60.9274
0.33501

Brown dwarf
Contact binary
Contact binary
Contact binary
Contact binary
Contact binary
Contact binary
Contact binary
Contact binary
Contact binary
Contact binary
Double-peaked emission
Double-peaked emission
Galaxy
Globular cluster
Globular cluster
Globular cluster
Globular cluster
Globular cluster
Globular cluster
Massive star
Massive star
Massive star
Unexplained non red giant
Unexplained non red giant
Unexplained non red giant
Planetary nebula
Planetary nebula- Egg nebula
Planetary nebula- Red Square nebula
Unexplained red giant
Unexplained red giant
Unexplained red giant
Unexplained red giant
Unexplained red giant
Unexplained red giant
Wolf-Rayet star
Young stellar object

Table A1. Outliers that and did not fall into any of the large groups.

MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

Outliers and similarity in APOGEE

Table A2. Be stars.

MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

APOGEE ID

RA [deg]

DEC [deg]

2M20383016+2119439
2M22425730+4443183
2M06490825+0005220
2M04480651+3359160
2M05284845+0209529
2M21582976+5429057
2M22082542+5413262
2M19322817-0454283
2M03145531+4841448
2M21523408+4713436
2M04454937+4323302
2M18574904+1758251
2M05312677+1101226
2M05384719-0235405
2M22075623+5431064
2M21380289+5037030
2M06521036-0017440
2M04125427+6647203
2M22142219+4206020
2M04493134+3313091
2M02374876+5248458
2M05122466+4816538
2M23570808+6118272
2M05441926+5241437
2M18042714-0958113
2M06514059+0019363
2M02273460+4813548
2M23293672+4822513
2M18040936-0827329
2M21151579+3235270
2M06552851+2430188
2M19575932+2714001
2M04563331+6345566
2M19562230+2626258
2M10214707+1532036
2M05271779+1308569
2M02571539+4601118
2M21504079+5518451
2M04503901+3243187
2M22165865+6738450

309.626
340.739
102.284
72.0271
82.2019
329.624
332.106
293.117
48.7305
328.142
71.4557
284.454
82.8616
84.6967
331.984
324.512
103.043
63.2262
333.592
72.3806
39.4532
78.1028
359.284
86.0803
271.113
102.919
36.8942
352.403
271.039
318.816
103.869
299.497
74.1388
299.093
155.446
81.8241
44.3142
327.67
72.6626
334.244

21.3289
44.7218
0.089448
33.9878
2.16471
54.4849
54.2239
-4.90786
48.6958
47.2288
43.3917
17.9736
11.0229
-2.59459
54.5185
50.6175
-0.29556
66.789
42.1006
33.2192
52.8127
48.2816
61.3076
52.6955
-9.96982
0.326773
48.2319
48.3809
-8.45915
32.5909
24.5052
27.2334
63.7657
26.4405
15.5344
13.1492
46.02
55.3125
32.7219
67.6458

19

20

I. Reis et al.
APOGEE ID

RA [deg]

DEC [deg]

APOGEE ID

RA [deg]

DEC [deg]

2M21095891+1111013
2M12553245+4328014
2M08031240+5311340
2M17552511-2517291
2M18442763-0614402
2M06211564-0124429
2M12410240-0853066
2M13150364+1806426
2M07384226+2131021
2M05264861+2551545
2M16334467-1343201
2M13381781-1458456
2M13122536+1313575
2M15000319+2955500
2M21330683+1209406
2M18455347-0328585
2M18495015-0235162
2M19425134+2235573
2M19474632+2349074
2M00242588+6221034
2M04501927+3947587
2M05012902+4023388
2M21053099+2952201
2M01403590+6254392
2M04405098+4705190
2M18191371-1218145
2M18030503-2157460
2M18015024-2638220
2M17520031-2308488
2M18052874-2505351
2M18063056-2435442
2M18111704-2352577
2M18115753-1503100
2M18185547-1119080
2M18524968-2834454
2M17301939-2913292
2M19295061+0010102
2M19411240+4936344
2M19003459+4408290
2M19023427+4246148
2M19095794+4325272
2M06343313+0643006
2M01471583+5753060

317.495
193.885
120.802
268.855
281.115
95.3152
190.26
198.765
114.676
81.7026
248.436
204.574
198.106
225.013
323.278
281.473
282.459
295.714
296.943
6.10785
72.5803
75.3709
316.379
25.1496
70.2124
274.807
270.771
270.459
268.001
271.37
271.627
272.821
272.99
274.731
283.207
262.581
292.461
295.302
285.144
285.643
287.491
98.6381
26.816

11.1837
43.4671
53.1928
-25.2914
-6.24452
-1.41194
-8.88517
18.1119
21.5173
25.8652
-13.7223
-14.9793
13.2327
29.9306
12.1613
-3.48293
-2.58786
22.5993
23.8187
62.3509
39.7996
40.3941
29.8723
62.9109
47.0886
-12.304
-21.9628
-26.6395
-23.1469
-25.0931
-24.5956
-23.8827
-15.0528
-11.3189
-28.5793
-29.2248
0.16951
49.6096
44.1414
42.7708
43.4242
6.71686
57.885

2M21473632+5932259
2M21544864+5916346
2M11475977-0019182
2M18284700-1010553
2M17043371-2212322
2M19233187+4405575
2M12553245+4328014
2M14561660+1702441
2M15015733+2713595
2M15100330+3054073
2M23290070+5711558
2M02403149+5600473
2M07094794+0006382
2M07232483-0823577
2M03463234+3221127
2M19531095+4635518
2M19200927+1317078
2M21315424+5219122
2M00334926+6837330
2M04174731+4211335
2M04195310+4109094
2M06372981+0515011
2M00373109+5743345
2M03244820+6300289
2M03271166+6240211
2M03330010+6330443
2M03395727+6227241
2M06393827+2403560
2M05152962+2400147
2M03103113+4831002
2M03221451+4756591
2M05522651+4329557
2M20553607+5613011
2M21031081+5414127
2M21084459+5442122
2M21590597+4539010
2M21554492+5414593
2M21573025+5440529
2M21594113+5351121
2M22085910+5434192
2M18300408+0416050
2M04113023+2255071
2M06531594-0439506

326.901
328.703
176.999
277.196
256.14
290.883
193.885
224.069
225.489
227.514
352.253
40.1312
107.45
110.853
56.6348
298.296
290.039
322.976
8.45529
64.4472
64.9713
99.3742
9.37956
51.2009
51.7986
53.2504
54.9886
99.9095
78.8734
47.6297
50.5605
88.1105
313.9
315.795
317.186
329.775
328.937
329.376
329.921
332.246
277.517
62.876
103.316

59.5405
59.2763
-0.32173
-10.182
-22.209
44.0993
43.4671
17.0456
27.2332
30.902
57.1989
56.0132
0.11062
-8.39936
32.3536
46.5977
13.2855
52.3201
68.6258
42.1926
41.1526
5.25033
57.7263
63.008
62.6725
63.5123
62.4567
24.0656
24.0041
48.5167
47.9498
43.4988
56.217
54.2369
54.7034
45.6503
54.2498
54.6814
53.8534
54.572
4.26807
22.9187
-4.66407

Table A3. Carbon rich stars.

MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

Outliers and similarity in APOGEE
APOGEE ID

RA [deg]

DEC [deg]

APOGEE ID

RA [deg]

DEC [deg]

2M14251536+3915337
2M08115373+3212036
2M12274221+0002386
2M05284223+4359528
2M05240837+2711064
2M03563567+7857072
2M09314691+5618248
2M13413548-1723167
2M01193634+8435481
2M14542303+3122323
2M09315645+3714213
2M10280514+1735219
2M11081296-1205110
2M21302403+1132483
2M15002128+3645004
2M18460678-0337057
2M19430973+2357587
2M19225746+3824509
2M21523747+3853140
2M18054943-3059442
2M18075069-3116452
2M18081808-2553287
2M17561341-2921380
2M17360668-2710099
2M18103554-1811011
2M18192203-1411326
2M18192899-1452043
2M18280206-1217422
2M17345651-2048568
2M18001201-2631398
2M18041435-2455385
2M18165573-1852394
2M18040248-1805575
2M17464152-2713191
2M17531813-2816161
2M18042203-2917298
2M17282574-2906578
2M17285197-2815064
2M18104783-2824046
2M19383737+4957227
2M19454606+5113275
2M19301580+4932086
2M18544916+4512355
2M19123630+4603326
2M01593686+6533283
2M14370236+0928340

216.314
122.974
186.926
82.176
81.0349
59.1487
142.945
205.398
19.9014
223.596
142.985
157.021
167.054
322.6
225.089
281.528
295.791
290.739
328.156
271.456
271.961
272.075
269.056
264.028
272.648
274.842
274.871
277.009
263.735
270.05
271.06
274.232
271.01
266.673
268.326
271.092
262.107
262.217
272.699
294.656
296.442
292.566
283.705
288.151
29.9036
219.26

39.2594
32.201
0.044058
43.998
27.1851
78.952
56.3069
-17.388
84.5967
31.3756
37.2393
17.5894
-12.0864
11.5468
36.7501
-3.61827
23.9663
38.4141
38.8872
-30.9956
-31.2792
-25.8913
-29.3606
-27.1694
-18.1836
-14.1924
-14.8679
-12.2951
-20.8158
-26.5277
-24.9274
-18.8776
-18.0993
-27.222
-28.2711
-29.2916
-29.1161
-28.2518
-28.4013
49.9563
51.2243
49.5357
45.2099
46.0591
65.5579
9.47612

2M15021575+2319460
2M11254661+5217235
2M11012916+1215329
2M13405651+0031563
2M18411589-1016542
2M19564877+4458058
2M20034832+4536148
2M19190180+4153127
2M19561994+4120265
2M13483079+1750445
2M12115853+1425463
2M12462044+1251325
2M12505092+1324147
2M14123798+5426481
2M11542519+5554150
2M11044917+4840467
2M14232001+0541233
2M16582628+0939165
2M09242547-0650183
2M19400944+3832454
2M00065508+0154022
2M05502340+0420349
2M07054011+3812529
2M07250686+2435451
2M05345563-0601036
2M05350392-0529033
2M05360185-0517365
2M05350138-0615175
2M05351236-0543184
2M05351561-0524030
2M05351798-0604430
2M05371161-0723239
2M19383668+4723194
2M18534305+0026394
2M04135110+4938317
2M03361242+4651208
2M17393731-2324309
2M17340500-2808243
2M18234612-1501159
2M17190649-2745172
2M17380171-2858281
2M17535762-2841520
2M17144370-2449231
2M17364991-2728343
2M19252567+4229371

225.566
171.444
165.372
205.235
280.316
299.203
300.951
289.758
299.083
207.128
182.994
191.585
192.712
213.158
178.605
166.205
215.833
254.61
141.106
295.039
1.72953
87.5975
106.417
111.279
83.7318
83.7663
84.0077
83.7558
83.8015
83.8151
83.8249
84.2984
294.653
283.429
63.463
54.0518
264.905
263.521
275.942
259.777
264.507
268.49
258.682
264.208
291.357

23.3295
52.2899
12.2592
0.532321
-10.2817
44.9683
45.6041
41.8869
41.3407
17.8457
14.4295
12.8591
13.4041
54.4467
55.9042
48.6797
5.68982
9.65459
-6.83842
38.546
1.90061
4.34304
38.2147
24.5959
-6.01768
-5.48426
-5.29349
-6.25487
-5.7218
-5.40085
-6.07862
-7.38999
47.3887
0.444304
49.6422
46.8558
-23.4086
-28.1401
-15.0211
-27.7548
-28.9745
-28.6978
-24.8231
-27.4762
42.4936

Table A4. Spectroscopic binaries.

MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

21

22

I. Reis et al.
APOGEE ID

RA [deg]

DEC [deg]

2M21031344+0942207
2M07365631+4517467
2M07560603+2626563
2M17550303-2557141
2M18423451-0422454
2M11431652+0047511
2M04131296+5546540
2M03283689+7947391
2M16132421+5140269
2M13553588+4436441
2M18451898-0150567
2M19421896+2426209
2M21131747+4843554
2M20111813+2058271
2M03464878+2304074
2M19142629+1202560
2M20204714+3702309
2M19014937+0520105
2M03220356+5654161
2M17434496-2941008
2M18142425-1911037
2M18202527-1537239
2M18313707-1222341
2M19154842+4636261
2M19544569+4041406
2M20000263+4529265
2M18543899+0012432
2M19522028+2723553

315.806
114.235
119.025
268.763
280.644
175.819
63.304
52.1537
243.351
208.9
281.329
295.579
318.323
302.826
56.7033
288.61
305.196
285.456
50.5148
265.937
273.601
275.105
277.904
288.952
298.69
300.011
283.662
298.085

9.70577
45.2963
26.449
-25.9539
-4.3793
0.797531
55.7817
79.7942
51.6742
44.6123
-1.84909
24.4392
48.7321
20.9742
23.0687
12.0489
37.0419
5.33626
56.9045
-29.6836
-19.1844
-15.6233
-12.3761
46.6073
40.6946
45.4907
0.212021
27.3987

Table A5. Fast rotators.

MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

Outliers and similarity in APOGEE
APOGEE ID

RA [deg]

DEC [deg]

APOGEE ID

RA [deg]

DEC [deg]

2M00354276+8619045
2M19315445+4813349
2M19294950+4740246
2M00250046+5503033
2M19205656+4846274
2M19410822+4019319
2M19325505+4746578
2M19432504+2229419
2M06365780+0702069
2M19100818-0553311
2M07542422+3916064
2M19193061+4842214
2M19341894+4800216
2M18315699-0100106
2M21223490+5110033
2M14315024+5101159
2M03292627+4656162
2M05322756+2658537
2M19130107-0549328
2M19411184+4013301
2M19455347+2412201
2M14283924+4014496
2M19570041+2059538
2M19522176+1840186
2M20464928+3411241
2M14273401+4014470
2M20353553+5428403
2M19343359+4823093
2M03324489+4623388
2M19441693+4905154
2M07014143+0449051
2M21201614-0109393
2M08235914+0008354
2M23583343+5635047
2M23230618+5733020
2M06381497+0557479
2M17470159-2849173
2M04424759+3825359
2M19095216+1120219
2M17103385+3641103
2M17192832+5804145
2M07591385+4049311
2M08013264+4307298
2M09095175+4254040
2M09104765+4139238
2M10265734+4149117
2M10400281+4306255
2M16011348+4149493
2M16023049+3949503
2M16034776+4051552
2M16034893+4047314
2M16042629+4030585
2M16060267+4042385
2M16062342+4023224
2M16065762+4012407
2M16103330+4146123
2M16111200+4132006
2M14250643+3912427
2M14263122+3921276
2M14264018+4018477
2M14270892+4008013
2M14285271+4015518

8.92818
292.977
292.456
6.25194
290.236
295.284
293.229
295.854
99.2409
287.534
118.601
289.878
293.579
277.987
320.645
217.959
52.3595
83.1149
288.254
295.299
296.473
217.164
299.252
298.091
311.705
216.892
308.898
293.64
53.1871
296.071
105.423
320.067
125.996
359.639
350.776
99.5624
266.757
70.6983
287.467
257.641
259.868
119.808
120.386
137.466
137.699
156.739
160.012
240.306
240.627
240.949
240.954
241.11
241.511
241.598
241.74
242.639
242.8
216.277
216.63
216.667
216.787
217.22

86.3179
48.2264
47.6735
55.0509
48.7743
40.3255
47.7827
22.495
7.03526
-5.89197
39.2685
48.706
48.006
-1.00296
51.1676
51.0211
46.9379
26.9816
-5.82579
40.225
24.2056
40.2471
20.9983
18.6718
34.19
40.2464
54.4779
48.3859
46.3941
49.0876
4.81809
-1.16092
0.143176
56.5847
57.5506
5.96331
-28.8215
38.4267
11.3394
36.6862
58.0707
40.8253
43.125
42.9011
41.6566
41.8199
43.1071
41.8304
39.8306
40.8653
40.7921
40.5163
40.7107
40.3896
40.2113
41.7701
41.5335
39.2119
39.3577
40.3133
40.1337
40.2644

2M06285236+0007407
2M13441054+2735078
2M16280255-1306104
2M17181861+4206399
2M09082892+3618428
2M13044971+7301298
2M09294773+5544429
2M12242677+2534571
2M12283815+2613370
2M12284457+2553575
2M10265302+1713099
2M10282637+1545209
2M21310488+1250496
2M13500810+4233262
2M10521368+0101300
2M21103095+4741321
2M18312899-0138055
2M18350820+0002348
2M20510547+5125023
2M20535239+4932004
2M21302584+4452299
2M20321595+5337112
2M07115139+0539169
2M18043735+0155085
2M20412525+3317111
2M19532259+0424013
2M04291231+3515567
2M16553254-2134100
2M17564183-2803554
2M19281906+4915086
2M19331420+4841507
2M19343984+4809524
2M19094607+3747391
2M23483899+6452355
2M04060214+4655320
2M22190955-0133473
2M22472985+0553172
2M14442821+4511096
2M14493515+4634280
2M14140537+5438148
2M23240792+5732077
2M05060092+3556109
2M06202991+0723133
2M03353783+3140491
2M05350478-0443546
2M21425212+6955149
2M00474266+0351290
2M02275302-0855544
2M02310705-0758192
2M02325195-0806163
2M02332095-0903458
2M14484064-0706253
2M14362130+5733384
2M06391017+0518525
2M09235450+2753539
2M09260229+2839009
2M00525338+3832558
2M15122530+6658305
2M05495923+4136264
2M06232278-0441150
2M11540771+1810106
2M15044648+2224548

97.2182
206.044
247.011
259.578
137.121
196.207
142.449
186.112
187.159
187.186
156.721
157.11
322.77
207.534
163.057
317.629
277.871
278.784
312.773
313.468
322.608
308.066
107.964
271.156
310.355
298.344
67.3013
253.886
269.174
292.079
293.309
293.666
287.442
357.162
61.5089
334.79
341.874
221.118
222.396
213.522
351.033
76.5038
95.1246
53.9077
83.7699
325.717
11.9278
36.971
37.7794
38.2165
38.3373
222.169
219.089
99.7924
140.977
141.51
13.2224
228.105
87.4968
95.845
178.532
226.194

0.127981
27.5855
-13.1029
42.1111
36.3119
73.025
55.7453
25.5826
26.227
25.8993
17.2194
15.7558
12.8471
42.5573
1.02502
47.6923
-1.63487
0.043008
51.4173
49.5334
44.875
53.6198
5.65472
1.91904
33.2864
4.40037
35.2658
-21.5695
-28.0654
49.2524
48.6974
48.1646
37.7942
64.8765
46.9256
-1.56315
5.88812
45.186
46.5745
54.6375
57.5355
35.9364
7.38705
31.6803
-4.73184
69.9208
3.85806
-8.9318
-7.97201
-8.10455
-9.06273
-7.10704
57.5607
5.3146
27.8983
28.6503
38.5488
66.9752
41.6073
-4.68751
18.1696
22.4152

Table A6. Bad reductions.

MNRAS 000, 1–17 (2017)

23

