Astro2020 Science White Paper
Technosignatures in Transit
Primary thematic area: Planetary Systems​, especially exobiology and the search for
life beyond the Solar System
Principal Author: Jason T. Wright
astrowright@gmail.com
525 Davey Laboratory
Department of Astronomy & Astrophysics and Center for Habitable Worlds
Penn State University
University Park, PA 16802
(814) 863-8470
Co-author​: ​David Kipping​,​ ​Columbia University
Endorsers / co-signers: Daniel Angerhausen,​ Center for Space and Habitability,
Bern University, Switzerland; Blue Marble Space Institute of Sciences, Seattle, USA;
Tabetha Boyajian​ Louisiana State University; ​Douglas A. Caldwell​, SETI Institute
Abstract: ​Kepler,​ ​K2, TESS​, and similar time-domain photometric projects, while
designed with exoplanet detection in mind, are also well-suited projects for searches for
large artificial structures orbiting other stars in the Galaxy. An effort to examine these
data sets with an eye towards non-spherical or otherwise anomalous transit events, and
a robust follow-up program to understand the stars and occulters that generate them,
would enable the first robust upper limits on such megastructures in terms of their sizes,
occurrence rates, and orbital properties. Such work also has the ancillary benefit of
improving our understanding of stellar photometric variability and orbital and physical
parameter estimation of exoplanets from photometric time series, and may lead to the
identification of new, unexpected classes of stellar variables and exoplanets. Ultimately,
searching for the most unusual and anomalous signatures benefits not only the
search for technologies, but also the entire astronomical community by
uncovering new mysteries to advance our understanding of the Universe​.

The Rationale for Searching for Orbital
Technosignatures
Since “technology” might be defined as the deliberately engineered applications of
energy, some of the most general technosignatures are those related to energy use. It
is reasonable to suppose that such technology might be found in space, for instance in
the form of satellites and space probes like our own.
Since technological life elsewhere in the Galaxy is unlikely to be as young as our own
species’ technology, there has been time for its technology to have very large scope,
perhaps involving extraordinarily large numbers of small objects or even planet-sized
objects and/or collections of objects (“megastructures”). Expansion on this scale need
not have a single purpose or deliberate design behind it: humanity’s megalopolises are
in some sense large, heterogeneous structures that grew more-or-less organically over
centuries or millennia. Similarly, a driver as simple as collecting more energy for some
purpose might be sufficient, over the course of millions of years, to create a swarm of
solar-panel-bearing objects around a star.
Even if stellar energy collection is not the purpose of such structures, fundamental
principles of engineering require that they manage the thermal consequences of their
energy use, as required by the laws of thermodynamics, which in space (where only
radiative cooling is efficient) means having large radiative surfaces, proportional in area
to the power consumption of the technology.
Such a swarm (sometimes called a “Dyson sphere”, Dyson 1960) would be detectable
as a significant infrared excess, and this is the subject of some searchers for
technosignatures in the infrared (see the companion white paper by J. Wright). But a
second way to detect such structures is by the starlight they intercept, in particular as
they transit their host star.
Searching for the transit signatures of orbiting structures satisfies many of the
desiderata of a good SETI search: the signature is at least as long-lived as the
underlying technology, large collecting/radiating areas are an inevitable consequence of
all energetic technology use, and it is detectable not only with current astronomical
instrumentation, but indeed much of the data needed to perform the search has been or
will be taken in the search for exoplanets.

1

The primary drawback of the method is that unlike communicative transmissions, transit
events (and similar dimmings) of stars are common for many natural reasons. This,
however, also means that searches for anomalous dimming events has good synergies
with stellar and exoplanetary astronomy, while still providing other forms of SETI with
enriched target lists for more unambiguous technosignatures. Indeed it satisfies
Freeman Dyson’s “First Law of SETI Investigations”: “every search for alien civilizations
should be planned to give interesting results even when no aliens are discovered”.
A search for the truly weird and most anomalous stars in the cosmos would complement
other technosignature work by relaxing the need to predict extraterrestrial behavior.
Most importantly, a “search for the weird” benefits all of astronomy by uncovering
objects which defy our current understanding. Their discovery will drive theoretical
research and motivate new observational programs, expanding our understanding to
encompass the new phenomena. Establishing that the cause is truly artificial will likely
be a long and difficult road, with a rich enough reward to justify the work.

Towards Robust Upper Limits of Orbiting
Technosignatures
Interpreting transit measurements of stars serves searches for technosignatures in two
ways: 1) it identifies anomalous infrared sources for further study as both natural or
artificial objects of interest (Djorgovski 2000), and 2) it allows for upper limits to be
computed—that is, the identification of the regions of parameter space which have been
excluded in the search for alien industry (e.g. Wright, Kanodia, & Lubar 2018).
Kepler​ ushered in a new era of stellar and exoplanetary astrophysics by demonstrating
the feasibility and utility of precise photometric monitoring of large numbers of stars. The
primary purpose was of course to search for exoplanets, but the principle of searching
for transiting artificial structures is identical, and indeed ​Kepler​ inadvertently was a
nearly perfect survey instrument for such work.
Kepler, K2​, and now ​TESS​ and soon other observatories thus provided the data
necessary to compute the first rigorous upper limits on transiting structures, in a manner
similar to the exoplanet population demographics it has produced. The primary tasks of
such work are:
1. Computing the sensitivity of these surveys as a function of megastructure
properties

2

2. Identifying signals in the light curves consistent with megastructures but not with
common, natural phenomena such as intrinsic stellar variability, disks, or
exoplanets
3. Following up anomalous stars to determine their nature
The first two of these tasks were explored by Wright et al. (2016), who identified ten
classes of transit anomaly that could distinguish them from natural phenomena, as
shown in Table 1.

Briefly, unlike planets, megastructures orbiting stars might be nonspherical and
non-circular, low mass and potentially subject to radiation pressure, opaque, in orbits
uncharacteristic of planets, or much larger than planets. All of these properties can be
parameterized in terms of light curve properties, allowing us to set both single-target
and population upper limits on various classes of megastructure, such as the
exo-Clarke belt proposed by Soccas-Novarro (2018). Similar upper limits have been
calculated for, e.g., exomoons (e.g. Kipping et al. 2012).

A Case Study: Boyajian’s Star
A good illustration of step 3 at the top of this page is the case of Boyajian’s Star. Wright
et al. (2016) called out the unusual light curve of Boyajian’s Star as a particularly
strange and inexplicable example of an anomalous object whose nature need be
established as natural before upper limits could be computed. The star might have gone
unnoticed for some time without the efforts of the Planet Hunters citizen science team,

3

which flagged the light curve as strange, and the dedicated efforts of Boyajian et al.
(2016) who showed that the system was not young and exhibited none of the usual
properties of “dipper” stars being occulted by giant planetary ring systems (e.g.
Kenworthy & Mamajek 2015) or disks. The star later proved to have many other
anomalous photometric properties (e.g. Montet & Simon 2016).

Figure 1: The photometric light curve of Boyajian’s Star from K
​ epler​, showing what
appear to be a series of occulters of various sizes, shapes, and orbital speeds.
The ensuing flurry of activity produced many hypotheses (summarized in Wright &
Sigurdsson 2016). The subsequent detection of reddening during a later dip observed
from the ground confirmed that the occulting material is consistent with dust, not opaque
objects (Bodman et al. 2018), thus putting to bed the megastructure hypothesis. But the
star continues to elude a single consensus explanation. ​Boyajian’s star has thus
produced a significant amount of theory and observation in both the fields of
stellar astrophysics and technosignature search. A search for similar, less
obvious objects should prove similarly fruitful on both fronts.

4

A Weird Filter and Inverting Light Curves
Identifying weird stars through human inspection, as was done for Boyajian’s Star will
become increasingly impractical as our datasets grow in volume. Further, humans are
much harder to statistically calibrate making the interpretation of such surveys less
rigorous. Automated approaches have started to appear in the literature, such as the
use of unsupervised machine learning for identifying anomalous events (Giles &
Walkowicz 2018) and phase-dispersion minimization for identifying periodic anomalous
events (Technosignature Workshop Participants 2019, p.26). The continued
development of such resources, including workshops focussed on collaborative
development, could change the shape of technosignature research.
But merely identifying weird stars is not enough—we also need to interpret these
signatures. Follow-up observations are certainly beneficial to such efforts but are
frequently not available upon first identifying a peculiar signal. Pre-existing archival data
(such as that taken by Gaia and 2MASS) as well as the shape of the light curve itself
then become the immediate avenue for interrogating the signal in greater depth. The
typical approach for interpreting light curve shape is to posit various hypotheses (e.g.
comets, Dyson swarms, triangles) and compare their goodness-of-fit. But if none of
these hypotheses are correct, then this ranking is ultimately of little value. A more
agnostic approach is to use the shape of the light curve itself to generate a hypothesis.
This topic has received little attention in the prior literature but one recent study by
Sandford & Kipping (2019) introduces the idea of inverting the 1D light curve
morphology into a 2D reconstruction of the object’s silhouette responsible for the
transit—dubbed “shadow imaging” by the authors. This necessarily operates under the
assumption that something did indeed transit the star, rather than say anomalous stellar
activity. Further, as highlighted by the authors, the current algorithm developed is not
exhaustive (a more optimal shape could be missed) and is a ripe problem for future
software improvements.
Tabby’s Star was an obvious target for this approach and a light curve inversion
indicates the presence of semi-transparent material spanning a scale of several stellar
radii with possible ring-like structures embedded (Sandford & Kipping 2019), thus
independently confirming the previous work of Bodman et al. who came to the same
conclusion via multiband photometry. This therefore demonstrates that light curve
morphology is a ripe area for future study and could greatly aid our ability to classify
anomalous signals in the future.
5

References
Bodman, E. et al. 2018 ​arXiv:1806.08842
Boyajian, T. S. et al. 2016 ​MNRAS​ ​457​, 3988
Djorgovski, G. 2000 ​ASPC​ ​213​, 519
Dyson, F. 1960 ​Science​ ​131​, 1667
Giles, D. & Walkowicz, L. 2019 ​MNRAS​ ​484​, 834
Kenworthy, M. & Mamajek, E. 2015 ​ApJ​ ​800​, 126
Kipping et al. 2012 ​ApJ ​750,​ 115
Montet, B. & Simon, J. 2016 ​ApJ​ ​830​, 39
Sandford, E. & Kipping, D. 2019 ​AJ​ ​157​, 42
Soccas-Navarro, H. ​ApJ​ ​855​, 110
Wright, J. T., et al. 2016 ​ApJ​ ​816​, 17
Wright, J. T. & Sigurdsson, S. 2016 ​ApJ​ ​829​, 3
Wright, J. T., Kanodia, S., and Lubar, E. 2018 ​AJ​ ​156​, 240

6

