D RAFT VERSION F EBRUARY 2, 2022
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX63

How Many Elements Matter?
Yuan-Sen Ting (丁源森)1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and David H. Weinberg6, 3
1 Research School of Astronomy & Astrophysics, Australian National University, Cotter Rd., Weston, ACT 2611, Australia
2 Research School of Computer Science, Australian National University, Acton ACT 2601, Australia

arXiv:2102.04992v2 [astro-ph.GA] 1 Feb 2022

3 Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA
4 Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA
5 Observatories of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, 813 Santa Barbara Street, Pasadena, CA 91101, USA
6 Department of Physics, Department of Astronomy, and Center for Cosmology and Astro-Particle Physics,

The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Submitted to ApJ
Abstract
Some studies of stars’ multi-element abundance distributions suggest at least 5-7 significant dimensions, but
others show that many elemental abundances can be predicted to high accuracy from [Fe/H] and [Mg/Fe] (or
[Fe/H] and age) alone. We show that both propositions can be, and are, simultaneously true. We adopt a
machine learning technique known as normalizing flow to reconstruct the probability distribution of Milky Way
disk stars in the space of 15 elemental abundances measured by APOGEE. Conditioning on Teff and log g
minimizes the differential systematics. After further conditioning on [Fe/H] and [Mg/Fe], the residual scatter
for most abundances is σ[X/H] . 0.02 dex, consistent with APOGEE’s reported statistical uncertainties of
∼ 0.01−0.015 dex and intrinsic scatter of 0.01−0.02 dex. Despite the small scatter, residual abundances display
clear correlations between elements, which we show are too large to be explained by measurement uncertainties
or by the finite sampling noise. We must condition on at least seven elements to reduce correlations to a level
consistent with observational uncertainties. Our results demonstrate that cross-element correlations are a much
more sensitive probe of hidden structure than dispersion, and they can be measured precisely in a large sample
even if star-by-star measurement noise is comparable to the intrinsic scatter. We conclude that many elements
have an independent story to tell, even for the “mundane” disk stars and elements produced by core-collapse
and Type Ia supernovae. The only way to learn these lessons is to measure the abundances directly, and not
merely infer them.
1. Introduction
Ambitious Galactic spectroscopic surveys such as GaiaESO (Gilmore et al. 2012), APOGEE (Majewski et al.
2017), and GALAH (Buder et al. 2020) have obtained highresolution, high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) spectra of hundreds of thousands of stars, spanning large swaths of the
Milky Way disk, bulge, and halo and some nearby satellites
such as the Sgr dwarf and the Magellanic Clouds. Other surveys including SEGUE (Yanny et al. 2009), RAVE (Steinmetz et al. 2006), and LAMOST (Luo et al. 2015) have obtained lower resolution spectra of even larger stellar samples. The high-resolution surveys provide detailed chemical
Corresponding author: Yuan-Sen Ting
ting@ias.edu

fingerprints for each program star, typically measuring 1530 elements per star. This is further complemented by the
lower resolution surveys which measure bulk metallicity and
other abundance ratios (Ting et al. 2017b; Xiang et al. 2019;
Wheeler et al. 2020). In concert with precise distances and
proper motions from Gaia (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2018),
and with asteroseismic calibration of stellar ages (Pinsonneault et al. 2018; Miglio et al. 2020), these surveys afford an
increasingly detailed picture of the Milky Way’s stellar populations and dynamics, far beyond that available as recently
as a decade ago.
It has long been recognized that the ratio of α-elements
(produced mainly by core-collapse supernovae) to iron peak
elements (which are additionally produced by SNIa on a
longer timescale) is an important dimension of stellar abundance variation in addition to overall metallicity charac-

2

T ING & W EINBERG

terized by [Fe/H] (e.g., Wallerstein 1962; Tinsley 1979;
Fuhrmann 1998; Bensby et al. 2003; Hayden et al. 2015).
However, the evidence on variations beyond [Fe/H] and
[α/Fe] is mixed. On the one hand, Ness et al. (2019) found
that a combination of [Fe/H] and stellar age is sufficient to
predict the value of other APOGEE [X/Fe] abundance ratios
with precision comparable to the measurement uncertainties.
In a related vein, Weinberg et al. (2019) and Griffith et al.
(2020) found that an empirical “two-process” model fit to
median abundance trends can predict the APOGEE [X/Mg]
ratios for most disk and bulge stars to surprisingly high precision from [Mg/H] and [Mg/Fe] alone. On the other hand,
by applying principal component analysis (PCA) to a much
smaller, pre-APOGEE data set, Ting et al. (2012) found that
five to seven components were needed to describe the multielement abundances of solar neighborhood stars. Andrews
et al. (2017) reached compatible conclusions with a different abundance sample. Working directly with spectra, PriceJones & Bovy (2018) found that 10 components are needed
to explain the diversity of APOGEE H-band spectra.
One goal of this paper is to reconcile these seemingly disparate conclusions and demonstrate that most elements contain critical information that cannot be simply inferred from
the metallicity and α-enhancement alone. Our approach is
based on a powerful machine-learning technique called normalizing flow, which we use to create an accurate model of
the probability distribution function (PDF) of 15 abundances
measured in APOGEE disk stars, along with the stellar parameters Teff and log g. In particular, we can condition on
the values of Teff , log g, and a subset of elements, then evaluate the joint distribution of the remaining elements. The
residual abundances — star-by-star deviations from the conditional mean — display significant cross-element correlations, revealing underlying structures. Residual correlations
only approach what we would expect from the observational
uncertainties after conditioning on seven elements, signaling
that most elements carry independent information.
Drawing on these results, we address the related question:
is it still worth measuring many elemental abundances for
large samples, even if [Fe/H] and [α/Fe] can already predict
these abundances with ∼ 0.02-dex root mean square (rms)
dispersion? Our answer is an emphatic yes. Correlations can
be measured at high significance in large samples even when
the observational uncertainties are comparable to, or larger
than, the star-to-star intrinsic dispersion of individual elements. This residual correlation structure from multi-element
abundance trends may then provide critical diagnostics about
myriad astrophysical processes, including stellar yields, ISM
mixing, and merger history.
Conditioning the abundance distribution on Mg and Fe has
some similarities to fitting a two-process model like that of
Weinberg et al. (2019). Weinberg et al. (2021; completed af-

ter the original version of this paper) generalized this modelfitting approach and examine star-by-star correlated deviations from two-process predictions. While there is some
overlap between these two papers, the two approaches have
different underlying principles and complementary practical
advantages. The normalizing flow method used here opens a
novel route to minimizing observational systematics by conditioning on Teff and log g. It is conceptually and practically straightforward to condition on additional elements and
thereby assess the independent information encoded in their
abundances. Weinberg et al. (2021) aims to provide more
physical insights about the emergence of these correlated deviations and their degree of correlation with Galactic location, stellar kinematics, and stellar age.
In this paper’s next section we discuss why statistical correlations can reveal “hidden” degrees of freedom that might
be buried in the dispersion about the conditional mean predictions. Section 3 introduces the normalizing flow technique
for describing arbitrary high-dimensional distributions. In §4
we apply this technique to a sample of disk red giants from
APOGEE Data Release 16 (DR16; Ahumada et al. 2020;
Jönsson et al. 2020). In §5 we discuss the implications of our
methodology and results for the dimensionality of the stellar
abundance distribution, for methods of abundance determination, for chemical tagging of co-natal stellar populations,
and for the design of stellar spectroscopic surveys. In §6 we
summarize our findings and identify avenues for further application of these techniques.
2. Variance, correlation, and dimensionality
As noted above, previous studies have shown that by conditioning on two elements representing core-collapse supernovae and SNIa, such as Mg and Fe, one can predict other
elemental abundances to impressive accuracy. This does not
necessarily imply that other elemental abundances are redundant. For example, if there are other residual correlations
among groups of elements, it would mean that the elemental
abundance space contains information beyond the amplitude
of these two processes. These correlations, even if small,
would imply that there are other hidden degrees of freedom
(or “dimensions”) in the Milky Way’s chemical evolution. In
this section we lay out the key ideas related to the measurement of such correlations before turning to the specifics of
our method in §3 and §4.
Consider N random variables, X1 , · · · , XN , that represent
N elemental abundances, and let the correlation of any of the
two variables be ρjk . By definition, the covariances of these
N variables are
Cjk = ρjk σj σk ,
(1)
where σk is the standard deviation of the k-th variable. Suppose these N variables represent elemental abundances after
subtracting the mean abundances conditioned on Fe and Mg.

H OW M ANY E LEMENTS M ATTER ?
For simplicity, we assume that these N variables approach a
multivariate Gaussian distribution. We would like to know if
there are correlations among these residual abundances, indicating underlying physical structures in the abundance distribution.
One way to search for residual correlation is by investigating the change in variance1 , after conditioning on an additional variable. However, this method proves to be rather
insensitive in practice. To understand this, we start with
the simpler illustration shown in Fig. 1. In the middle panels, we show two bivariate Gaussians with moderate strength
correlations, ρ = 0.4 and 0.2. In the right panel we compare the variance of the second variable evaluated from the
marginal distribution with the variance after conditioning on
the first variable. Intuitively, if two variables are correlated,
one would expect conditioning on the first to reduce the variance of the second, by taking advantage of the information
provided by the first variable. However, Fig. 1 shows that a
correlation that is easily detected visually in the middle panels is barely discernible when looking at the change of the
variance as shown in the right panels.
This intuition can be formulated more rigorously. Assume
X1 to be the variable that we condition on. For a multivariate
Gaussian, the new covariance matrix after conditioning on
X1 can be analytically calculated to be
−1
0
C[2,N
],[2,N ] = C[2,N ],[2,N ] − C1,[2,N ] C11 C[2,N ],1 .

(2)

Each of these terms represents individual submatrices of the
original covariance matrix Cjk , and we use the subscript
[2, N ] to represent the (N −1)×(N −1) matrix for the second
to the N -the variable. The diagonal entries of the new matrix
0
C[2,N
],[2,N ] are the variances upon the conditioning. By evaluating Eq. 2, one can obtain an analytic expression for these
new dispersion terms. The variance of the k-th variable can
be written as
σk02 = σk2 (1 − ρ21k ).
(3)
This implies that the fractional change of the dispersion is
q
σ0
1 − k = 1 − 1 − ρ21k .
(4)
σk
For ρ21k  1, the fractional change becomes ≃ ρ21k /2.
The upper left panel of Fig. 1 illustrates this relation. For
the specific correlation values of 0.2 and 0.4, the fractional
changes of the dispersion are 2% and 8%, respectively. For
an abundance intrinsic dispersion of 0.01 dex, typical of what
we find for well measured APOGEE elements (see §4), one
would be looking for changes in the dispersion of ∼ 0.0008
dex or less.
1 In this study, we will use the word “dispersion” to refer to the standard

deviation of a variable, equal to the square-root of its variance.

3

2.1. Revealing abundance dimensionality through
dispersion is challenging
Although a reduction of 0.0008 dex might seem impossible to measure, we emphasize that, in principle, the residual
variance of elemental abundances can be measured precisely
in a large sample even if the observational uncertainties for
individual stars are comparable to the intrinsic dispersion of
the abundances. The “variance of the variance” is not the
variance itself. Mathematically, suppose that we estimate the
total variance for a given elemental abundance as

s2j =

Nsample

1

X

Nsample

Xj,i − X̄j

2

,

(5)

i=1

where X̄j is the conditional mean abundance2 . The meansquared uncertainty of this estimate — the variance of the
variance — can be calculated as follows.
2
For a Gaussian random variable, (n − 1)s2j /σj,tot
follows
a chi-squared distribution with (n − 1) degrees of freedom,
hence
(n − 1)s2j
= Var χ2n−1
2
σj,tot

(6)

(n − 1)2
Var s2j = 2(n − 1).
4
σj,tot

(7)

Var
=⇒

Here we have used the fact that the variance of χ2n−1 =
2
2(n − 1). We use the symbol σj,tot
to represent the true
total variance, and s2j to represent the estimate of the total
variance. For the n = Nsample  1, the rms fractional uncertainty in the variance is
2
(s2j − σj,tot
)2
2
σj,tot

1/2


=

2
Nsample

1/2
.

(8)

The equation shows that the variance of the variance can be
small even if the variance itself is large.
In this study, we will mostly focus on the total measured
variance without distinguishing its sources, but we note that
the total variance of an elemental abundance is the sum of the
intrinsic variance and the observational uncertainty,
2
2
2
σj,tot
= σj,int
+ σj,obs
.

(9)

Since the variance can be measured with a small fractional
uncertainty in a large sample, as a corollary, the value of the
2 We are taking N
sample large enough to ignore the slight bias caused by

using the sample mean instead of the true mean.

4

T ING & W EINBERG

Figure 1. Measuring abundance correlation structure is more powerful than measuring the dispersion about the conditonal mean. Left: Fractional reduction in the dispersion of a random variable after conditioning on the value of a correlated variable, as a function of the correlation
coefficient (Eq. 4). Middle: Density plot of random draws from a bivariate Gaussian distribution with dispersion of 0.01 dex for each variable (a
typical intrinsic dispersion for APOGEE elemental abundances) and correlation coefficients ρ = 0.2 (top) and 0.4 (bottom). Right: Distribution
of variable 2 before (blue) and after (orange) conditioning on the value of variable 1. The changes of dispersion for these two values of ρ are
2% and 8%, respectively, or less than 0.0008 dex. Correlations that are readily visible in the 2-d distributions of the middle panels are barely
discernible in the change of dispersion.

intrinsic variance can be determined even if the observational
uncertainty dominates the star-to-star dispersion.3
While we can in principle detect the reduction of variance from conditioning on a correlated variable with a large
enough sample, it remains challenging in practice. For the
examples in Fig. 1, with ρ = 0.2 and 0.4, the reductions in
variance are 4% and 16% (twice the fractional reductions in
the dispersion), and detecting them with 2σ statistical significance requires Nsample ≃ 5000 and Nsample ≃ 300, respectively. Although these numbers might appear within reach of
large surveys, one must account for the fact that the effective number of stars after conditioning at a point in elemental
abundance space is much smaller than the total size of the
sample, a point we return to in §4 below. Because of that, as
3 Deriving the intrinsic dispersion does require accurate knowledge of the

observational dispersion, and systematic uncertainties in the magnitude of
this observational dispersion may dominate over statistical uncertainties.
√
For example, if σj,int = σj,obs , then a systematic uncertainty of 2 in
the value of σj,obs would be enough to explain all of the observed variance
as a consequence of measurement dispersion.

we will see, such a signal is often not statistically significant
with the current data.
More generally, for ρ2  1 the fractional reduction of the
variance is ρ2 , and, from Eq. 8, detecting this reduction at a
significance of νσ requires
Nsample ≥

2ν 2
.
ρ4

(10)

2.2. Detecting non-zero correlations directly is easier than
detecting reductions in dispersions
While measuring the reduction of variance can be challenging, measuring non-zero correlations is much easier.
For a multivariate Gaussian distribution, the correlation estimate’s uncertainty due to finite sampling has a neat analytic
approximation, known as the Fisher transformation. In particular, let the correlation be ρ and its estimate be r, and let
zfisher = tanh−1 (r). It can be shown that (Fisher 1921),
with a sample size Nsample , the variable zfisher is normally
1
distributed with mean equal
p to 2 ln[(1 + ρ)/(1 − ρ)] and
standard deviation of 1/ Nsample − 3. In the null hypothesis with correlation ρ = 0 ≃ r, we have zfisher ≃ r, and

H OW M ANY E LEMENTS M ATTER ?
the mean of thepdistribution approaches 0 and the standard
deviation ≃ 1/ Nsample .
This result echoes
p Eq. (8), where the fractional uncertainty
of the variance is 3/Nsample . Detecting a non-zero correlation ρ at significance of νσ requires

Nsample ≥

ν2
.
ρ2

(11)

Comparing Eqs. (11) and (10), in addition to a factor of two
gain, the key difference is that the denominator is ρ2 instead
of ρ4 . Therefore, for ρ2  1, it is far easier to detect a correlation of elements directly than to detect it through reduction
of variance. For example, to detect a signal from ρ = 0.4 at
2σ significance only requires an effective sample of 25 stars,
and for ρ = 0.2, 100 stars. We will see an empirical demonstration of this point in our APOGEE analysis.
A second advantage of focusing on cross-element correlations is that observational uncertainty is unlikely to produce artificial correlations at a significant level. We discuss
this point further for the specific case of APOGEE abundance measurements in §4.4.1 below, and we add a significant caveat in §4.4.3. Nonetheless, the measurement and
interpretation of correlations is not immune to observational
uncertainty. The generalization of Eq. (9) is

Cjk,tot = Cjk,int + Cjk,obs .

(12)

If the observational covariance is diagonal – i.e., if the observational uncertainties are uncorrelated from one element to
another – then off-diagonal elements of the total covariance
are just Cjk,tot = Cjk,int = ρjk,int σj,int σk,int . For j 6= k,
therefore, the relation between total and intrinsic correlations
is
Cjk,tot
σj,tot σk,tot
σj,int σk,int
= ρjk,int
σj,tot σk,tot

ρjk,tot =

= ρjk,int

2
σj,obs
1+ 2
σj,int

(13)
(14)
!−1/2

2
σk,obs
1+ 2
σk,int

!−1/2
(15)
.

Thus, the measured correlations are always smaller in magnitude than the intrinsic correlations, by a factor that depends
on the ratio of observational variance to intrinsic variance;
for σj,obs ≃ σj,int the reduction is about a factor of two.
This reduction makes it more difficult to detect a given level
of intrinsic correlation, especially correlations involving elements with large observational dispersion. In short, the mea-

5

sured correlation is a conservative limit, and if the measured
correlation is significant then the detection is significant4 .
The third advantage of measuring cross-element correlations is that their information content is richer than that of
excess variance alone, with informative clues to the physical
origin of the residual abundance variations. Even if the magnitude of intrinsic correlation coefficients is uncertain, nonzero values of these coefficients are unambiguous evidence
of remaining structure in the element distribution. Thus, the
focus of our observational investigation will be to ask how
many conditioning elements must be considered in the PDF
before the residual correlations of the remaining elements are
consistent with the observational uncertainties. For purposes
of this paper, we take this number of conditioning elements
to be our operative definition of the “dimensionality” of the
disk stellar population in the space of APOGEE elemental
abundances.
2.3. Observational uncertainties in abundance
measurements
The abundances of elements in the atmosphere of a star
are estimated by fitting a model to the observed spectrum in
which the value of the abundance is a free parameter. The
modeling is complex, as it must include corrections for instrumental effects and telluric lines, a model of the stellar
atmosphere, and a calculation of a synthetic spectrum from
that atmosphere, which in turn depends on an adopted list
of wavelengths and oscillator strengths for lines of different
elements. Analyses of small sets of high-resolution spectra
may be done “by hand,” but large surveys typically rely on
codes that do automated spectral fitting and parameter optimization. For the giant stars in APOGEE DR16 that we will
adopt in this study (see Jönsson et al. 2020), the APOGEE
Stellar Parameters and Chemical Abundances Pipeline (AS PCAP ; Garcı́a Pérez et al. 2016; Holtzman et al. 2015) assumes MARCS model atmospheres (Gustafsson et al. 2008;
Jönsson et al. 2020) and first fits a seven-parameter model5
to the continuum-normalized H-band spectrum, then infers
the abundances of other elements by varying [M/H] and fitting the spectrum in wavelength windows in which lines of
that element dominate, with all other parameters held fixed.
There are two main sources of uncertainty in such estimates. The first is the statistical uncertainty arising from photon noise. The second is the systematic uncertainty arising
4 Similar to the variance, systematic uncertainties in the magnitude of σ
j,obs

may limit our ability to infer the true values of the intrinsic correlations.
However, these systematic uncertainties cannot make a non-zero measured
correlation consistent with a zero intrinsic correlation.
5 The parameters are T , log g, the microturbulence v
micro , and the abuneff
dance ratios [M/H], [α/M], [N/M], and [C/M], where M is an overall metallicity scaling all elements together and [α/M] scales the α-elements O, Ne,
Mg, Si, S, Ar, Ca, and Ti.

6

T ING & W EINBERG

because the models and calibrations used to infer abundances
are imperfect. These systematic effects can include departures from LTE or plane-parallel geometry, incomplete or inaccurate line lists, and data-related effects such as inaccurate
line-spread functions or incomplete removal of telluric contamination. In an absolute sense — the difference between
a star’s estimated and true abundances — the systematic uncertainties are often larger than the statistical uncertainties in
a high-SNR spectroscopic survey. For this reason, the high
statistical precision of abundance uncertainties derived from
high-SNR spectra is often dismissed as unrealistic. However,
to the extent that the systematic uncertainties are the same for
all sample stars, they do not add dispersion to the measured
abundances. Observational contributions to element dispersion arise from photon noise, and they can also arise from
differential systematic uncertainties within the sample.
The latter contribution can be minimized by examining
stars within a narrow range of parameters such as Teff , log g,
and [Fe/H], or, with the method implemented in this paper, by examining distributions conditioned on these parameters. One of our study’s innovations is the ability to minimize the systematic uncertainties through flexible modelling
of the elemental abundance space, conditioned on variables
that contribute to the systematic uncertainties. This innovation allows the observational dispersion to approach the photon noise limit, enabling a statistically significant detection
of the residual abundance correlations.
Accurate characterization of statistical abundance uncertainties due to photon noise is therefore important even if
the absolute abundance uncertainty is dominated by systematic uncertainties. The impact of photon noise on abundance measurements is primarily diagonal, i.e., adding observational uncertainties that are statistically independent for
different elements. However, photon noise uncertainties are
not entirely diagonal because uncertainties in some parameters (especially Teff , log g, and overall metallicity) affect the
models used to infer all abundances, and additionally because
some abundances may be measured from blended spectral
features or from molecular lines that involve two elements.
We estimate these off-diagonal uncertainties for APOGEE
abundances in §4.4.1 below.
APOGEE reports statistical uncertainties based on repeat
observations of a subset of stars, which are used to derive
an empirical formula relating the standard deviation of repeat observations to a star’s Teff and [M/H] and the SNR of
its spectrum (Jönsson et al. 2020). These uncertainties are
usually larger than those derived from the χ2 -fitting of the
spectrum, which implies that variations of observing conditions are contributing to the observational uncertainties in addition to Poisson fluctuations in the number of photons per
pixel. Nonetheless, we will generally refer to these statistical

measurement uncertainties with the shorthand phrase “photon noise.”
3. Describing Distributions with Normalizing Flows
Elemental abundance space correlations can reveal many
subtle properties about stellar yield processes and ISM mixing. In particular, if we can recover the multi-dimensional
distribution p([X/H]) spanned by the elemental abundances
of stars, we can then calculate moments of the distribution
and correlations between elemental abundances. In practice,
the data that we collect (e.g., from APOGEE) is only an ensemble of realizations drawn from the PDF, {[X/H]i }, where
each realization i consists of the measured abundances of an
individual star. Therefore, the first step to study the elemental
abundance space requires tools that can faithfully recover the
PDF p([X/H]) from the ensemble of realizations {[X/H]i },
which we will elaborate on in this section.
One way of recovering a distribution from an ensemble of
realizations is to conjecture a functional form for the distribution and then maximize the likelihood of the parameters.
Mathematically, let ~x be an N -dimensional random variable,
and let {~xi } be the ensemble of the realizations. If we assume
fθ (~x) to be the functional form of the normalized PDF, characterized by θ, finding that distribution that best describes
the data translates into a simple question of finding the θ∗
that optimizes the likelihood,
hX
i
θ∗ = argmaxθ
ln fθ (~xi ) .
(16)
i

However, for an arbitrary distribution, our human heuristic
on the functional form fθ can be quite limiting (see Fig. 2).
Especially for a high-dimensional and irregular distribution
like that of stars in elemental abundance space, any ad hoc
functional form might not fully capture all the distribution
details. This is where the idea of normalizing flow, a machine
learning tool that is rapidly growing in applications, can play
an important role.
The basic idea of normalizing flow is to use neural networks, characterized by the neural network coefficients ψ,
as a change of variables. More specifically, the goal is to
transform the multi-dimensional random variable ~x to a new
random variable ~z = fψ (~x) of the same dimension, such that
p(~z) is a much simpler and more recognizable distribution
than p(~x). We call the distribution p(~z) the “base distribution.” In this study, the base distribution is chosen to be a
unit-multivariate Gaussian distribution with a zero mean and
an identity covariance matrix.
For a change of random variables, one needs to take into
account the change of measure fψ0 (~x), known as the Jacobian. More precisely,
p(~z) d~z = p(fψ (~x))|fψ0 (~x)| d~x.

(17)

H OW M ANY E LEMENTS M ATTER ?

7

Figure 2. Normalizing flow can faithfully describe challenging distributions. As an illustration, we generate a 2D moon-shaped PDF and
plot its density distribution (via a sample of 106 random draws), as shown in the left panel. The two middle panels show the recovery of the
distribution assuming 4-component and 10-component Gaussian Mixture Models. These fail to describe the distribution, even in 2D. On the
right, we demonstrate a much better recovery with a normalizing flow, as illustrated further in Fig. 3.

Therefore, in order to evaluate likelihood in the ~z space, we
need to ensure that the neural networks’ Jacobian |fψ0 (~x)|
is easily and analytically calculatable. With that premise,
we can then optimize for the neural network coefficients ψ,
such that the neural network transforms the original ensemble {~xi } to {~zi } and that the ensemble of {~zi } approaches a
multivariate Gaussian distribution. Mathematically, we optimize for the neural network coefficients ψ through the standard back-propagation technique with a rectified ADAM optimizer (Liu et al. 2019), and find ψ ∗ such that
i
hX
ln P~z (fψ (~xi ))|fψ0 (~xi )|
(18)
ψ ∗ = argmaxψ
i

In other words, we maximize the likelihood such that the ensemble of ~z approaches a unit-Gaussian distribution. We emphasize that the condition that the Jacobian of the neural networks be analytically calculable is crucial, since it would be
otherwise prohibitively expensive to perform the optimization.
Besides the Jacobian criterion, another criterion is equally
important. Note that fψ transforms the random variable from
~x to ~z, with which we calculate the likelihood. Yet, the multivariate Gaussian distribution p(~z) is the one from which we
can easily sample. Therefore, if we want to sample p(~x) effectively, the neural network fψ has to be analytically invertible so that we can first sample ~z from p(~z), then evaluate
fψ−1 (~z) to attain an ensemble of ~x.
In short, to use neural networks as a flexible change of
random variables, the networks need to satisfy two criteria,
namely (a) the Jacobian of the network is analytic and (b) the
neural network is analytically invertible. The subset of neural
networks that satisfy these two criteria are known as “normalizing flows.” They can transform any random variable
from a complex distribution into a unit-Gaussian (“normal”)
distribution (see Fig. 3).
The idea of normalizing flow has inspired the machine learning community since its inception (e.g., Jimenez

Rezende & Mohamed 2015). The ability to describe highdimensional PDFs given any ensemble also makes it one of
the most flexible machine learning tools to apply to the physical sciences. However, normalizing flow has had a slow
start in astronomy, with only a handful of applications to
date. For example, Cranmer et al. (2019) applied normalizing flow to describe the color-magnitude diagram of the
Gaia data, and Reiman et al. (2020) used normalizing flow to
model quasar continua. More recently, Green & Ting (2020)
adopted normalizing flows to describe phase-space distributions and solve for Galactic dynamics.
In this study, we will adopt normalizing flows to describe
the elemental abundance distribution of stars. We assume a
similar normalizing flow to that adopted by Green & Ting
(2020). More specifically, we adopt eight units of “Neural Spline Flow” coupled with the “Conv1x1” operation (or
“GLOW” in the machine learning lingo). Each Neural Spline
Flow unit consists of three layers of densely connected networks with 16 neurons. We refer interested readers to the
original articles (Kingma & Dhariwal 2018; Durkan et al.
2019). Here we give a brief overview.
Roughly, a Neural Spline Flow performs an invertible
spline transformation whose Jacobian is analytically calculable. The Conv1x1 operation, on the other hand, performs a
linear transformation of the variables. Like most normalizing
flows, the trick to ensure an analytic Jacobian is through the
idea of “coupling”, i.e., performing a change of variable for
a subset of variables at each transformation unit. By only
changing a subset of the variables each time, we can ensure that the fψ0 matrix is triangular, which allows for a more
straightforward calculation of the Jacobian (the determinant
of fψ0 ). When many transformation units (eight in total, in our
study) are applied together, and each unit transforms a subset
of variables in a tractable way, we can change the complex
multivariate random variables gradually to become a simpler
Gaussian distribution (see Fig 3).

8

T ING & W EINBERG

Figure 3. Structure of the normalizing flow used in Fig. 2 and this study. Normalizing flows adapt neural networks as a change variable.
The goal is to transform the distribution from a complicated distribution (top left) to a simple base distribution (bottom right) through a
series of gradual transformations. Here we assume a unit-multivariate Gaussian as the base distribution. This study adopts a normalizing
flow that comprises eight units of Conv1x1 and Neural Spline Flow coupling. The Conv1x1, as illustrated in the even columns, performs
linear transformations on the variables, while Neural Spline Flow, as shown in the odd columns, transforms the variables through spline
interpolations parametrized by neural networks. The odd rows demonstrate the transformations, and the even rows show the results of these
gradual transformations (see text for details).

We chose to use eight units of normalizing flows as this
architecture is sufficient to capture the distribution of the elemental abundance space. Using more units could, in principle, describe the distribution better but with a higher computational training cost. From our bootstrapping experiments
(see Section 4.4.2), we found that any systematics incurred
by our architecture are subdominant compared to the finite
sampling noise. We will come back to this point in Section 5.5.
Since the idea of normalizing flow is rather new, welltested public codes are limited. Through our own extensive exploration, we found that most public packages do
not seem to perform as well as hand-crafted codes. We
therefore use our own codes adapted from Github repository KARPATHY / PYTORCH - NORMALIZING - FLOWS. A simi-

lar code was also used in Green & Ting (2020) and is publicly
available on Github6 .
To demonstrate the power of normalizing flow, in Fig. 2,
we present a case study with a simple double moon-shaped
distribution. We chose this toy example as it loosely resembles the elemental abundance space distribution of the
high-α population versus the low-α population. The left
panel shows the ensemble of 106 realizations drawn from the
moon-shaped distribution. The two middle panels illustrate
the cases where we attempt to describe the distribution with
Gaussian Mixture Models, with four and ten components,
respectively. Even in this simple example of 2D variables,
Gaussian Mixture Models fail to represent the actual distribution faithfully. The right panel shows the results fitted with
a normalizing flow, which clearly outperforms the Gaussian
6 https://github.com/tingyuansen/deep-potential

H OW M ANY E LEMENTS M ATTER ?
Mixture Models in depicting the double moon-shaped distribution.
We further demonstrate how normalizing flow works in
Fig. 3. From left to right, and from top to bottom, Fig. 3
shows how normalizing flow gradually transforms the complicated double moon-shaped distribution to the simple base
distribution (a 2D Gaussian) through a series of operations.
The alternate panels show the neural spline flow operation
and the Conv1x1 operation. For each step, the top panel
shows the transformation, and the bottom shows the result
of the transformation. For the Conv1x1 transformation, in
this 2D case, the operation essentially redefines the axes by
rotating the axes. On the top panels, the black points show
a regular grid in the original dimensions, and the blue points
show the transformed locations after the rotation. We connect the blue and black points to visualize the rotation. As for
the neural spline flow operation, it performs a 2D invertible
spline. To visualize this transformation, the lines in different
colors on the top panels are initiated from different original
x values (from purple to yellow, the x value ranges from -1
to 1, with a spacing of 0.5), and the panels show the transformed y values as a function of the original y values after
the spline operation.
At its core, the ability to invert a neural network stems
from that fact that we can design a network fψ (~x) =
f (s(~x)), where s is a neural network, such that the inverse
of fψ (~x)−1 = g(s(~x)) can be written as a function of s as
well. In this way, we can explicity invert the fψ (~x) without
retraining any network.7 With this in mind, depicting a conditional distribution p(~x|~y ) with normalizing flow only requires a minor modification of what we have discussed thus
far. Instead of the usual change of variable, characterized
by a neural network fψ , it suffices to ensure that the neural
network coefficients also depend (continuously) on the conditioning variable ~y . In other words, instead of fψ , we have
fψ(~y) . Operatively, for any function h(~x) in a Neural Spline
Flow, where h : Rk → Rk is a function that transforms some

9

part of the random variables with k dimension, to build in
the dependency on the m-dimensional variable ~y we consider
h(~x, ~y ) = h1 (~x)h2 (~y ), where h1 : Rk → Rk is the mapping
that does the original transformation, and h2 : Rm → Rk
is an additional function that governs how the mapping h1
should be modified with different ~y . Both h1 and h2 are each
represented by a densely connected network with three hidden layers and 16 neurons each. To put it simply, for different
conditioning variables ~y , the neural network depicts a different change of variable fψ(~y) that maps the variables ~x (with
the same ~y ) to variables ~z that form a unit-Gaussian distribution. In principle we could compute a conditional PDF by
numerically integrating the joint PDF, but training a new normalizing flow by this modified technique is a more efficient
way to attain an accurate conditional PDF and to evaluate the
conditional likelihood.
In this study, we will adopt the conditional normalizing
flow to model the distribution of the APOGEE elemental
abundances. As discussed earlier, the conditioning variables
~y include Teff , log g of the stars, as well as a subset of elemental abundances (such as Fe and Mg). The independent
variable ~x is comprised of other elemental abundances that
we do not condition on. When we condition on a new set of
variables, we retrain the normalizing flow each time8 . Recall
that normalizing flow allows us to sample p(~x|~y ) through the
inverse mapping fψ(y) : (~z, ~y ) → ~x. Therefore, for any specific reference value of the conditioning variable ~y , we can
evaluate the correlation of the independent elemental abundances ~x by drawing samples from p(~x|~y ). As we will see in
the next section, the ability to draw samples and evaluate the
correlation matrix at any values for the conditioning variables
will come in handy for several aspects of this study.
4. How many elements matter?
4.1. Data sample
We select Milky Way disk stars from APOGEE DR16 with
the following selection criteria:
• Galactocentric radius 3kpc ≤ R ≤ 13kpc,

7 To demonstrate how this can be done, we will explain with one of the sim-

plest forms of normalizing flows – RealNVP (Dinh et al. 2016). In RealNVP, the normalizing flow transformation can be written as ~
y1:d = ~
x1:d
and ~
yd+1:D = ~
xd+1:D exp(s1 (~
x1:d )) + s2 (~
x1:d ), where the subscript
denotes the subdimension, s1 and s2 are two trainable network, and is
the element-wise product. It is easy to verify that the inverse of this operation, as well as the Jacobian, can be explicitly written as a function of
s1 (~
y ) and s2 (~
y ). Therefore, once we find the best s1 and s2 through the
“forward” network, the “inverse” network is automatically defined. The
trick here depends on what is known as “coupling,” i.e., holding some of
the dimensions invariant (in the notation above, the first d dimensions).
Although for individual “units,” some dimensions are not transformed, by
having more than one unit in the normalizing flow, and holding different
dimensions invariant for the different units, one can achieve transformation
for all the dimensions while ensuring invertibility. For interested readers,
we recommend Weng (2018) for an introductory text on how to design
other multidimensional neural networks that can be explicitly inverted.

• Midplane distance |Z| ≤ 2kpc,
• 1 ≤ log g < 2.5,
• 4100 K ≤ Teff < 4600 K,
• −0.75 ≤ [Mg/H] < 0.45
• SNR > 200 for [Mg/H] ≥ −0.5; SNR > 100 for
[Mg/H] < −0.5.
8 Training a normalizing flow with ∼20,000 data entries in this study takes

about an hour on a single CPU core. In this study with 17 dimensions (15
elemental abundances, Teff , and log g), any improvement from the GPU
acceleration appears to be minimal.

10

T ING & W EINBERG

Figure 4. Abundance distribution in [X/Fe] versus [Fe/H] of the APOGEE training set. We adopt the training set to measure the conditional
PDF and pairwise correlations of the 15 elemental abundances. The training set comprises 20,111 APOGEE disk stars with stellar parameters
4100K < Teff < 4600K and 1 < log g < 2.5. We restrict the parameter range of our training set to minimize differential uncertainties in the
abundances, and we also restrict the sample to SNR > 200 for [Mg/H] ≥ −0.5; SNR > 100 for [Mg/H] < −0.5 to ensure that the abundance
measurements are robust.

We eliminate stars with STAR BAD, EXTRATARG, or
NO ASPCAP RESULT flags set, or with flagged values of
[Fe/H] or [Mg/Fe]. Our geometric cuts are based on distances from A STRO NN (Leung & Bovy 2019a,b), which
are publicly available as a value-added catalog for APOGEE
DR16.
The log g range selects luminous giants, allowing us to
sample the full range of Galactocentric radii. The lower Teff
cut eliminates cool stars for which ASPCAP abundances may
be less reliable. Further, many stars with < 4100 K in the
parent sample have flagged values of Mn and Cu. The upper
Teff cut eliminates red clump stars (see fig. 3 of Vincenzo
et al. 2021; Pinsonneault et al. 2018), which should have
reliable abundances but could be offset from giant branch
stars (see fig. 13 of Jönsson et al. 2020). More generally,
our use of restricted log g and Teff ranges is intended to reduce the impact of differential systematic uncertainties (see
§4.2); we further mitigate the differential systematics by conditioning on Teff and log g when training the normalizing
flows. Our high SNR threshold is intended to select stars

with the most reliable abundances. We relax this threshold
at low [Mg/H] to maintain an adequate sample size in this
range when studying the lower metallicity populations. If we
maintain the SNR > 200 cut for the low metallicity population, we will be left with 329 stars. Relaxing the SNR criterion to SNR > 100 increases the sample size to 536 stars.
As we will see in Section 5.5, the sampling noise can be the
limiting factor to probe correlations; this prompted us to favor a more lenient cut in SNR for the low-metallicity stars,
even with the expense of a higher photon noise. We verified that our more lenient SNR cut does not incur much additional photon noise (because the measurements are still systematic dominated, see §5.3). For the low metallicity sample,
a SNR > 200 criterion leads to a median σ[Fe/H] = 0.010
and σ[Mg/H] = 0.014, whereas a SNR > 200 criterion leads
to a median σ[Fe/H] = 0.011 and σ[Mg/H] = 0.015. However, for the more abundant Solar metallicity stars, sampling
noise is a minor problem. Therefore, we chose to refine our
correlation measurements by limiting ourselves to the high
SNR sample. Nonetheless, since our study mostly focuses

H OW M ANY E LEMENTS M ATTER ?

11

Figure 5. Distributions of [X/Fe] vs. [Fe/H] from a sample of 106 “stars” drawn from the joint PDF constructed by applying normalizing flow
to the APOGEE training set shown in Fig. 4. Comparison with Fig.4 demonstrates that the normalizing flow describes the APOGEE abundance
PDF faithfully. The distributions in this figure are smoother because of the much larger number of drawn samples.

on the Solar metallicity stellar populations, this choice is not
critical.
Our criteria are similar to those used by Weinberg et al.
(2019), but here we use DR16 instead of DR14. Also, they
used a somewhat narrower log g range (log g = 1 − 2) and
had no separate Teff cut. The number of stars passing our cuts
is 20,367. The 15 elements that we use in this study are the
α-elements Mg, O, Si, S, Ca, the light odd-Z elements Na,
Al, and K, the iron-peak elements V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and
the “iron-cliff” element Cu9 . Although APOGEE measures
C and N, we do not use them here because their atmospheric
abundances in giant branch stars are affected by internal mixing and do not reflect the stars’ birth abundances. At least for
our well-curated APOGEE sample, we checked that there is
no apparent bias in [X/Fe] for all elemental abundance ratios
adopted in this study for stars with different C and N values.
9 We adopt stellar parameters and elemental abundances from the “named

tags” attributes from the DR16 catalog (i.e., fits.TEFF, fits.LOGG,
fits.MG FE). This further leads to a more restricted and cleaner sample as
some combinations are Teff and metallicities are automatically excluded
(priv. comm. H. Jönsson).

We define [X/H] abundances from the reported APOGEE
measurements as [X/H] = [X/Fe]+[Fe/H]. Some stars that
pass our global flag cuts have flagged values of [X/Fe] for individual elements. To keep our analysis straightforward, we
further restrict the sample to stars with unflagged values for
all 15 abundances and −1.5 < [X/H] < 1.5 for all elements,
reducing it to 20,111 stars.
In Fig. 4, we illustrate the abundance distribution of our
APOGEE training set in the [X/Fe] and [Fe/H] plane. All
elemental abundances show a well-defined locus. There is
larger dispersion for Na and V, and to some extent K and
Cu, but the more considerable dispersion is not surprising
as these elements only have weak or singular features in the
APOGEE H-band spectra. The statistical uncertainties reported for these elements are also larger than for other elements.
To demonstrate the ability of the normalizing flow to emulate this distribution, we first train a normalizing flow with
this training set and fit for the joint distribution of all 15 elemental abundances, p([X/H]). We then sample from this
15D joint distribution. The density contours in Fig. 5 demonstrate the sample of 106 drawn from the fitted normalizing

12

T ING & W EINBERG

Figure 6. Dispersion of APOGEE elemental abundances about the conditional mean predicted at fixed stellar parameters, [Fe/H], and [Mg/Fe],
computed from the conditional PDF of our normalizing flow model trained on the APOGEE disk star sample. We define the dispersion σ[X/H]
to be half the difference between the 16th- and 84th-percentile abundance values in the marginal PDF for each element. In the left panel, blue,
green, and orange lines show the dispersion at three different reference points of Teff and log g as labeled, all for [Fe/H] = [Mg/Fe] = 0, and
bands indicate the finite sampling uncertainty inferred from bootstrap realizations. The dashed line shows the mean photon noise uncertainty
reported by ASPCAP for each element. In the right panel, green and orange lines show the dispersion at two other reference points of [Fe/H]
and [Mg/Fe] as labeled, all for Teff = 4500 K, log g = 2.1.

flow. Comparing Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 showcases the remarkable ability of the normalizing flow to represent the APOGEE
abundance distribution. From here onward, unless stated otherwise, we will focus on the conditional distribution, i.e., the
joint distribution of some elements conditioned on the values
of Teff , log g, and two or more elements.
4.2. The baseline: conditioning on Fe and Mg
We will first describe the abundance distribution of
13 elements, training a normalizing flow to describe
p([X/H] | [Fe/H], [Mg/Fe], Teff , log g)10 . We include Teff
and log g as conditioning variables because a star’s elemental spectral features depend on these atmospheric parameters as well as on the abundances themselves. Due to the
spectral models’imperfection, this often translates into different measurement systematics for different stars. Conditioning on them allows us to study the abundances differentially, pushing the measurement uncertainties to approach
those due only to photon noise. Our normalizing flow models also allow us to choose different reference points in Teff
10 Conditioning on [Fe/H] and [Mg/Fe] is equivalent to conditioning on

[Fe/H] and [Mg/H], since the value of [Mg/Fe] at fixed [Fe/H] and
[Mg/H] is just [Mg/Fe] = [Mg/H] − [Fe/H].

and log g to evaluate the dispersions and the correlation matrices. Comparing results at different reference points allows
us to test whether they are affected by systematic uncertainties within the range of our sample. Small differences could
arise in principle because stars of different log g and Teff have
different luminosity, can have different SNR (hence photon
noises) and sample the disk differently. However, the fact
that median abundance trends are nearly independent of location within the disk or bulge (Weinberg et al. 2019; Griffith
et al. 2020) suggests that any genuine trends with disk sampling would be small.
As a baseline model, we also condition on Fe and Mg,
which serve as representative elements for two critical enrichment processes, core-collapse supernovae and Type Ia
supernovae. These two elements provide informative diagnostics for the contribution of these two processes to a star’s
abundances because (a) they are well measured by APOGEE,
(b) Mg is expected to come almost exclusively from corecollapse supernovae, and (c) Fe has a large additional contribution from SNIa. By conditioning on these two elements we
remove two dimensions that are known to be important in the
Milky Way abundances, allowing us to study the residuals in
finer detail.
Before studying the residual correlations, we first examine the diagonal entries of the covariance matrix. Recall that

H OW M ANY E LEMENTS M ATTER ?

13

Figure 7. Dispersion of abundances about the conditional mean after conditioning on two, three, or four elements (in addition to Teff = 4500 K
and log g = 2.1). Left and right panels show two different conditional locations in metallicity and α-enhancement, as labeled. Lower panels
show the change in dispersion in units of the finite sampling uncertainty inferred from the standard deviation of bootstrap samples of the data
set. The reduction of dispersion from adding conditional elements beyond Fe and Mg is statistically insignificant in this data sample, but the
reductions in residual correlations are much more detectable as shown below in Fig. 10 (see also theoretical arguments in §2 for better intuition).

normalizing flows allow us to draw samples from the conditional distribution p([X/H]|Teff , log g, [Fe/H], [Mg/Fe]),
with which we can evaluate the dispersion by drawing samples (105 in our case) from the conditional distribution. In
Fig. 6, we show the dispersion of the conditional PDF, conditioning only on these two elements. The figure illustrates,
given a star’s [Fe/H], [Mg/Fe], Teff , and log g measurements
in APOGEE, how well the conditional mean abundance predicts the other elemental abundances. The blue, orange, and
green lines show the results for different reference values of
the conditioning variables. We estimate the finite sampling
uncertainty in the dispersion by constructing 640 bootstrap
realizations of our 20,111 APOGEE stars and repeating our
entire procedure, training the normalizing flow for the conditional PDF on each bootstrap realization of the data. Unless
stated otherwise all results in this study adopt 640 bootstrap

realizations to calculate the finite sampling uncertainty. Furthermore, since the normalizing flow training itself can be
noisy, we train 60 normalizing flows without bootstrapping
and take the median of the covariances of these realizations
as our best estimates.
On the left, we illustrate the dispersion for stars with different Teff and log g, assuming Solar metallicity (by which
we mean both [Fe/H] = 0 and [Mg/Fe] = 0). We evaluate the dispersion of a given element about the conditional
mean, denoted σ[X/H] , as half the difference between the
16th- and 84th-percentile values in the marginal PDF. Elements are listed by increasing order of this dispersion (blue
line) for the Teff = 4500 K, log g = 2.1 conditional PDF.
The dashed line shows the mean value of the reported ASP CAP [X/Fe] uncertainty for all stars in our sample. The total
dispersion is a nearly monotonic function of this estimated

14

T ING & W EINBERG

photon noise, but it is consistently higher, implying, if the
ASPCAP noise estimates are accurate, that there is residual
intrinsic dispersion in the abundances. If we estimate this
intrinsic dispersion as the quadrature difference between the
total dispersion and the photon noise, we find values of 0.010.02 dex for most elements (0.007 dex for O and Co). The
inferred intrinsic dispersion is larger (0.035-0.05 dex) for K,
V, and Na. While these elements could truly have larger intrinsic dispersion, they are also three of the elements that are
most difficult to measure with APOGEE spectra, so we suspect that this difference is a consequence of observational
dispersion in excess of the estimated noise.
If we define σ[X/H] as the rms deviation about the conditional mean instead of using the difference of percentile values, we get dispersions (not shown) that are slightly higher
(5-10%) for the best measured elements on the left side of the
plot, but 25-70% higher for the elements with the largest dispersion (Cr, Cu, K, V, Na). The larger rms values for these elements are driven by outliers on the tails of the PDF.11 These
outlier values could be real and might be astrophyically interesting, but we suspect that they are primarily non-Gaussian
observational errors because they occur for the abundances
that are most difficult to measure in the first place. If we used
the rms deviation to infer the intrinsic dispersion, we would
get larger values (0.03-0.08 dex) for these elements.
Green and orange lines show the dispersion at two other
choices of Teff and log g, corresponding to successively
cooler and more luminous stars. The residual dispersion is
similar to that found for our fiducial Teff and log g point,
demonstrating the robustness of our results, irrespect of the
chosen stellar parameters. There are minor differences, but
those could be due to different photon noise at different reference points. We find that residual dispersions at fixed Fe and
Mg are only slightly larger even if we do not condition on
Teff and log g, which indicates that our parameter range is already narrow enough to limit the contribution of differential
systematics. We nonetheless retain Teff , log g conditioning
for our default analysis, since (as argued in §2) these parameters could be correlated with abundances, which complicates
the interpretation of the correlations, even if conditioning on
them makes only a tiny difference to the residual dispersion.
The right panel shows the residual dispersion for different
metallicity and α-enhancement. We investigate three different reference points, representing the Solar metallicity population and the low-α and high-α branches at low metallicity ([Fe/H] = −0.5 with [α/Fe] = 0.05, 0.25). The
current APOGEE disk star sample has too few low metal11 Although not shown, we found that performing a 3σ clipping on the sample

drawn from the conditional normalizing flows does not qualitatively alter
the results of the correlation matrices presented in this study. Thus, our
primary results are not noticeably affected by the outliers.

licity stars to reliably investigate the abundance PDF below
[Fe/H] = −0.5. Fig. 6 demonstrates that the dispersion
about the conditional mean is qualitatively similar for these
different populations. Some elements show larger dispersion
at low metallicity, but these are mostly elements with weak
spectral features in the APOGEE H-band, so the larger dispersion could be a consequence of larger observational uncertainties at low metallicity.
Strictly speaking, our use of the percentile range rather
2
than rms deviation to define σ[X/H] means that the σ[X/H]
are technically not the diagonal elements of the abundance
covariance matrix. However, culling the outliers with the percentile range probably constitutes a better comparison with
the reported photon noise uncertainty from ASPCAP. We will
ignore this terminological distinction below and use the terms
diagonal covariance and dispersion to refer to the dispersion
estimated by this percentile method, which responds to the
core of the distribution rather than the tails.
4.3. Dispersion alone cannot (yet) detect independent
elements
Fig. 7 shows the residual dispersion of abundances after
conditioning on two elements (the baseline case discussed
previously), three elements (Fe, Mg, and O), or four elements (Fe, Mg, O, and Ni). We adopt the reference point
Teff = 4500 K and log g = 2.1 throughout. The left panel
shows Solar metallicity stars and the right panel shows lower
metallicity, α-enhanced stars. Uncertainties in the residual
dispersions are estimated from bootstrap resampling as before.
No reduction in dispersion is detectable at a statistically
significant level. This result is unsurprising in light of our
discussion in §2.1. Even if an element has correlations with
other elements as strong as ρ = 0.4, conditioning on that element only reduces the dispersion by ∼ 8% on average, which
requires an effective sample of ∼ O(100)−O(1000) for a 2σ
detection, within the finite sampling fluctuations. While the
high quality APOGEE sample adopted here has 20,000 stars,
the effective sample at a reference [Fe/H], [Mg/Fe] and stellar parameters is . 500 (see the discussion on the effective
sample size in §4.4.2). Stacking the signals at multiple reference points only moderately reduces the sampling noise, unless one takes such a large range of [Fe/H] and [Mg/Fe] that
the results become more difficult to interpret. Using a large
sample of lower SNR spectra would not improve the signal
either; in this case, the correlations become weaker due to the
larger observation dispersions (Eq. 15), which in turn would
require an even larger effective sample (Eq. 10) to measure
the reduction of dispersion at high significance. Thus, from
Fig. 7 alone, we might erroneously conclude that Fe and Mg
contain all of the information concealed in APOGEE abundances.

H OW M ANY E LEMENTS M ATTER ?
As we will show in the following section, the elemental
abundance space has many more hidden dimensions which
manifest themselves through the correlations, but these dimensions are simply not visible in dispersion with the current
limited sample size of APOGEE. With larger samples in the
near future (e.g., with SDSS-V, 4MOST, Weave), measuring
other independent dimensions through the reduction in dispersion should become possible, though it remains highly inefficient compared to measuring correlations directly. Such
results would validate the theoretical arguments as laid out
in §2. Finally, although not shown, we also tested that conditioning on any other combination of elements instead of O
and Ni does not change the results.
4.4. APOGEE data demonstrate residual correlation
structure between elemental abundances
Besides dispersion, the sample drawn from the conditional
distribution p([X/H]|Teff , log g, [Fe/H], [Mg/Fe]) also allows us to estimate the off-diagonal entries of the covariance
matrix, and hence the correlation among the elemental abundances. The correlation matrix of the APOGEE data (assuming Solar metallicity, Teff = 4500 K, and log g = 2.1) is
shown in the left panel of Fig. 8. The figure shows that even
after removing the mean abundance trends predicted by Fe
and Mg, a non-trivial correlation between elements remains,
implying higher dimensionality of the abundance distribution
that would be missed if we considered only the residual dispersion. The right panel of Fig. 8 shows the trivial correlation
matrix that we would obtain if other elemental abundances
were perfectly determined by the observed Fe and Mg, leading to an identity correlation matrix. Comparing the two panels of Fig. 8 makes the obvious point that inferring elemental
abundances from Fe and Mg (right) is not the same as measuring them (left), even if they are statistically indistinguishable in terms of their dispersions (Fig. 7). In Appendix A,
we further demonstrate that such correlation structure also
shows up across different choices of Teff and log g, and is
largely independent of the choice of stellar parameters.
However, a critical question remains: do the measured correlations reflect astrophysics, or could they be artificially induced by observational uncertainties? Three potential uncertainties could generate artificial correlations among elemental abundances; we will estimate each of these in turn and
show that they are too small to explain the APOGEE signal.
Fig. 9 summarizes this comparison.
4.4.1. Statistical covariances from the ASPCAP measurements
The first potential source of uncertainty is the correlated
measurement uncertainty from ASPCAP. For individual element abundances, ASPCAP reports statistical uncertainties
but it does not report the covariance of these uncertainties.
Therefore, in the following, we provide our own estimate of
the ASPCAP correlation.

15

If we condition on Teff , log g, [Fe/H], and [Mg/H], we expect to remove most differential systematic uncertainties as
a source of dispersion or artificial correlations, and measurement uncertainties should approach the photon noise limit,
as borne out in Fig. 6. In this case, probing the ASPCAP
measurement covariance reduces to the question of understanding the Fisher matrix. For simplicity, we make the approximation that all pixels in the APOGEE spectrum have
the same noise, and that the noise in different pixels is uncorrelated. We refer interested readers to Ting et al. (2017a)
for details behind the calculations presented here. With these
assumptions, it can be shown that the statistical covariance
due to the photon noise (or what is known as the CramerRao bound) is proportional to (G · GT )−1 , where G is an
Nlabels × Npixel matrix that collects all the gradient spectra.
Each row in G measures how an APOGEE spectrum would
vary as we vary individual stellar labels (stellar parameters
and elemental abundances).
To evaluate the gradient spectra, we adopt the Kurucz
spectral models (Kurucz 1993, 2005, 2013) through ATLAS 12/ SYNTHE synthesizer. Since ASPCAP measures abundances with spectral windows, we adopt the spectral windows from Garcı́a Pérez et al. (2016) as well as additional spectral windows in DR16 for Cr, Co, and Cu
(priv. comm. J. Holtzman) and zero-out the gradient for any
pixels that are not in the ASPCAP window for the corresponding element. When calculating the statistical covariance matrix, besides the elemental abundances in this study, we also
include gradient spectra from Teff , log g, vmicro , [C/H] and
[N/H]12 . These are stellar labels that ASPCAP also derived,
and their measurement uncertainties could indirectly create
artificial correlations among the elemental abundance uncertainties.
For ease of comparison, the top left panel of Fig. 9 repeats the measured APOGEE correlations shown previously
in Fig. 8. The top right panel shows the expected correlations from photon noise uncertainties, adopting the same
reference point of Teff = 4500 K, log g = 2.1, and Solar metallicity. The covariance of photon noise abundance
uncertainties for an individual star would be the product of
these correlations with the individual element dispersions,
and it would scale with the SNR of the spectrum. However, the correlation coefficients themselves are independent
of the SNR. The figure shows that the correlations among
elemental abundances expected from photon noise are minimal, with typical pairwise values ρ ≃ 0.01, much weaker
than the empirical signals; the APOGEE correlation signals
are of the order of ρ = 0.2 − 0.4. Our results echo those
12 If we were to include also v

macro in the fit, it would have increased the
median artificial correlation to ρ ≃ 0.03, instead of ρ ≃ 0.01, but the
effect would still be negligible for this study.

16

T ING & W EINBERG

Figure 8. (Left) Correlation matrix of 13 elemental abundances evaluated from the normalizing flow PDF conditioned on Teff = 4500 K,
log g = 2.1, and Solar [Fe/H] and [Mg/Fe]. Symbol areas are proportional to the magnitude of correlations, blue filled circles for positively
correlated element pairs and red open circles for negatively correlated pairs. Diagonal entries of the correlation matrix have a value of 1.0 by
definition. Even after removing the mean trends tracked by Fe and Mg, the APOGEE elemental abundance space has many “hidden” dimensions
that only manifest themselves through statistical correlations of abundances. (Right) The trivial correlation matrix expected if we infer the 13
elemental abundances from the observed Fe and Mg abundances. Inferring abundances is not the same as measuring the abundances; only the
latter reveals the information concealed in the subtle correlations, which we can now measure at high statistical significance from the extensive
APOGEE data.

in figure 17 of Ting et al. (2017a), who studied the correlations of abundance measurements at various resolutions and
found that for the APOGEE resolution and wavelength coverage, most abundance measurements are uncorrelated even
when blended features are included. Since ASPCAP chose
only to measure individual abundances through spectral windows without blended features, correlations between abundance measurements are even further reduced.
For completeness, we note that there are a few approximations that we have made for this calculation. For
example, we adopt the Kurucz models instead of the
MARCS / TURBOSPECTRUM models adopted in ASPCAP , as
we do not have easy access to the latter. The difference in
atomic data is likely to modify the derived element values
slightly but have minimal influence on the correlations due to
the photon noise. Similarly, we expect the assumption of uncorrelated pixels and homogeneous pixel noise might change
the absolute scale of the covariance, but not the correlation by
much. As we discuss in the following, the other two sources
of correlated uncertainties are more important, and any artificial correlations due to the ASPCAP measurements can be
neglected for our purposes.
Another caveat is that empirical uncertainties from repeat
spectra exceed those from χ2 fitting (see §2.3 and Jönsson

et al. 2020), which implies that some variation in observational conditions (e.g., small changes in the spectral line
spread function) contributes to statistical measurement uncertainties in addition to pure photon noise. Data reduction
errors such as imperfect telluric subtraction or continuum determination could also produce correlated errors in principle,
but in practice this is unlikely because abundances are determined from localized spectral features in wavelength regions
that are largely disjoint for different elements. We have done
some simple experiments with idealized examples of such
data reduction errors and find that they produce negligible
correlations. We henceforth assume any correlations arising
from these additional random errors can be neglected. This
assumption could be tested empirically in the future by computing observational error covariances (and not just rms errors) using repeat spectra as in Jönsson et al. (2020), but this
approach requires significant changes in APOGEE data analysis procedures.
4.4.2. Correlation estimation uncertainty from finite sampling
Another source of uncertainty that could generate artificial
correlations is finite sampling. In the ideal scenario where
we have infinite realizations drawn from the PDF, we should
recover the PDF exactly. However, the finite sampling im-

H OW M ANY E LEMENTS M ATTER ?

17

Figure 9. Comparison of the measured APOGEE correlations conditioned on Mg and Fe (the upper left panel), repeated from Fig. 8, to
three sources of observational uncertainty discussed in §4.4.1-4.4.3. The upper right panel shows the correlations expected from the impact
of correlations due to the ASPCAP measurements, which are not perfectly diagonal because values of some stellar parameters and blended
features affect the inference of multiple elements. Off-diagonal entries in the bottom left panel show the magnitude of random uncertainties in
correlation coefficients expected from finite sampling, estimated by bootstrap resampling of our APOGEE data set. Signs of these coefficients
have been randomly chosen to emphasize that sampling uncertainty can be positive or negative. The bottom right panel shows the correlations
expected from “measurement aberration” induced by conditioning on a star’s measured values of [Fe/H] and [Mg/H] instead of the unknown
true values. None of these sources of uncertainty is large enough to explain the correlation signals measured in APOGEE, indicating that the
detection of the residual correlation structure in the data is statistically significant and astrophysically relevant.

plies that the estimation of the conditional PDF itself, and
subsequently the correlations, must be noisy to some extent.
As derived in §2.2, the
p uncertainty of correlation due to finite sampling is ≃ 1/ Nsample . Quantitatively, we have the
standard deviation of the correlation due to sampling uncertainty to be 0.1 for a sample size of 100 and 0.01 for a sample
size of 104 .

Although we adopt a training set of 20,111 stars in this
study, not all stars contribute to any single reference point.
Since we study the smooth variation of the conditional distribution and its correlation, it can be challenging to estimate
the effective Nsample contributing to a given reference point.
To do so we repeat our entire analysis procedure for 640 bootstrap resamplings of the full 20,111 star data set and take
the standard deviation of the derived correlation coefficients.

18

T ING & W EINBERG

The bottom left panel of Fig. 9 shows these sampling uncertainties, assuming the reference point at Teff = 4500 K,
log g = 2.1, and Solar metallicity. The sign (positive or
negative) of the fluctuation is randomly assigned to highlight
that the sampling uncertainties can perturb the correlation estimates in either direction. The panel shows that the finite
sampling uncertainties are typically ρ ≃ 0.045, small compared to many of the non-zero correlations that we measure
from APOGEE. As a result, the measured APOGEE correlations cannot be entirely caused by the random fluctuations
due to the finite size of the stellar sample.
p
Recalling that the statistical uncertainty is ≃ 1/ Nsample
for large N and weak correlations, we infer that the effective sample size at our chosen fiducial reference point is
Nsample ≃ 500. In principle, we could “stack” the correlation signals at different reference points to increase the
effective sample. However, through numerical experiments
we found that stacking the signals over different Teff -log g
of our training sample (Teff = 4100 − 4600 K) only reduces the sampling uncertainty slightly (from ρ = 0.045 to
0.041). The effective sample is much smaller than the parent sample due to the conditioning on [Fe/H] and [Mg/Fe],
not Teff and log g. As we will see in §4.5, stellar populations
with different metallicities and α-enhancements exhibit subtle differences in the correlations. Therefore, although stacking the signals along [Fe/H] and [Mg/Fe] could in principle
reduce the sampling uncertainty, it will come at the cost of
interpretability. Moreover, at least for the case of conditioning on two elements, there is a larger source of uncertainty
that we will discuss below. This uncertainty cannot be reduced with the effective sample size but rather depends on
the abundances’ measurement precision. Therefore, for simplicity and for keeping any residual systematic uncertainties
under better control, we choose not to stack the results from
different reference points.
4.4.3. Abundance measurement aberration
The origin of the third source of uncertainties is more subtle, but it is the dominant source of artificial correlation for
this study. Recall that, in the baseline model, we condition
on Fe and Mg and study the residual covariances. However,
even without any astrophysical correlation, the residual covariance will only approach the ASPCAP measurement uncertainty plus sampling uncertainty if we condition on true
abundance values of Fe and Mg. When we train the conditional normalizing flow, we can only condition on the measured values from APOGEE, not the true values; this limitation itself can generate some artificial correlations. For example, if we consider a set of elements that are strongly correlated with Fe, then in a star whose measured Fe abundance
fluctuates low because of uncertainty, all of those elements
will tend to appear high, in a correlated way, relative to the

conditional mean. We refer to this effect as “measurement
aberration,” by loose analogy to the phenomenon of aberration of starlight. It is an uncertainty that arises because we
are “standing in the wrong place,” predicting a star’s conditional mean abundances based on its measured abundances
of Fe and Mg instead of their true values.13 .
We estimate this effect through numerical experiments. In
particular, we adopt the empirical conditional distribution
p([X/H] | Teff , log g, [Fe/H], [Mg/Fe]) and its corresponding covariance matrix as shown in Fig. 8. We then draw
a mock sample that has the same Teff , log g, [Fe/H], and
[Mg/Fe] values as the stars in our APOGEE training set. Instead of drawing [X/H] from the joint distribution, we draw
each element independently from its own marginal distribution, generating a test sample that follows the same empirical
dispersion as the APOGEE data but without the correlation.
The elemental abundance space spanned by the mock data is
strictly two-dimensional by construction, as Fe and Mg determine all abundances without any residual correlation. To
study the aberration effect, we then add observational uncertainty to [Fe/H] and [Mg/H], assuming the mean ASPCAP
reported uncertainties for our sample, ∆[Fe/H] = 0.008 dex
and ∆[Mg/H] = 0.011 dex. Since we draw the other 13
elemental abundances from their own marginal distributions,
their observational dispersions as shown in Fig. 6 are already
automatically included. We refit a new conditional normalizing flow and study the correlation of this mock sample. To
minimize the sampling uncertainty in this aberration estimate
(because we have to draw the conditioning variables from the
APOGEE data set, which is finite), we run the experiment 60
times, each time drawing new randomly perturbed values of
the conditioning variables from the APOGEE data. For individual correlation coefficients, we take the median of these
60 realizations as our best estimates.
The bottom right panel of Fig. 9 shows the artificial correlations due to this effect. As we will elaborate more later with
Fig. 11, this source of artificial correlations is not negligible.
Even though the artificial correlations peak at ρ = 0.05, they
have a long tail extending to ρ = 0.1 − 0.2. Nevertheless,
this effect is not sufficient to explain the strongest APOGEE
correlations (ρ = 0.2 − 0.4). Furthermore, the correlations
induced by measurement aberration can be straightforwardly
predicted by the numerical experiment conducted here under the “null hypothesis” that all abundances are determined
by Fe and Mg. Deviations from this predicted structure are
therefore evidence against the null hypothesis. As we condition on more elements (§4.5), the aberration effect changes
and diminishes because the random uncertainty in any one
13 For analytic discussion see §8.2 of Weinberg et al. (2021)

H OW M ANY E LEMENTS M ATTER ?
abundance matters less, so we redo the aberration prediction
for each new null hypothesis (see Fig. 11 below).
The main uncertainty in predicting the aberration effect is
that we rely on the ASPCAP value of the photon noise uncertainty. In Appendix B, we show that generating artificial
correlations as strong as ρ = 0.2 − 0.4, the largest values we
find for the APOGEE data, would require that ASPCAP has
underestimated the statistical uncertainties for Fe and Mg by
a factor of ∼ 2, with ∆[Fe/H] = ∆[Mg/H] = 0.02 dex.
However, in this case the structure of the correlations would
be radically different, with all elements positively correlated.
This also goes against the fact that the observed total dispersions (including intrinsic dispersions) for some elements
with even less spectral information in APOGEE, such as O
and Si, are close to 0.01 dex (Fig. 6 and Fig. 7). This contradiction is itself indirect evidence that ASPCAP is indeed
achieving differential metallicity precision at the 0.01 dex
level for Mg and Fe (as well as O and Si), consistent with the
reported photon noise uncertainties. The realization of such
exquisite precision in a large survey with mass production
“pipeline abundances” is a remarkable achievement. While
absolute or differential systematic uncertainties are a limiting
factor for some investigations, the high numerical precision
attained by APOGEE can be harnessed for many applications
with proper statistical modeling.
To sum up, through an exhaustive search for false positive signals, we conclude that the observed APOGEE correlations are real and statistically significant. They cannot be
explained away by measurement uncertainties.
4.5. Many APOGEE elemental abundances contain
independent information
After demonstrating that the APOGEE residual correlation
structure is statistically significant, we turn to the question
that we are the most interested in: How many APOGEE
elements carry independent information? In other words,
starting from the baseline model conditioned on Fe and Mg,
which other elements we should condition on to reduce residual correlations to a level consistent with observational uncertainties? Because of the measurement uncertainties and
finite sample size, our results will be a lower limit to the
number of elements with intrinsically significant information
content. Furthermore, observational uncertainty suppresses
correlations (Eq. 15), so our ability to detect correlations is
reduced for the elements with the largest uncertainties.
Fig. 10 presents an overview of our principal results, which
we will elaborate more quantitatively in Fig. 11. Successive
panels show the residual correlations after conditioning on
two, three, four, five, six, or seven elemental abundances,
always at the reference point Teff = 4500 K, log g = 2.1,
[Fe/H] = [X/Fe] = 0. The elements are sorted by their
commonly associated yield channels – α-elements (O, Si, S,

19

and Ca, in addition to Mg), light odd-Z elements (Na, Al,
K), and the iron peak elements (Cr, Ni, V, Mn, Co, and Cu,
in addition to Fe). Shaded blocks highlight groups of elements within a yield channel that show strong internal correlations, and each new conditioning element is chosen to
target one of these blocks. The strong correlations among
O, Si, and S in the top left panel are reduced by conditioning
on O. Further conditioning on Ni reduces correlations among
iron peak elements that remain after conditioning on Fe, Mg,
and O. Conditioning on Si reduces several remaining correlations among α-elements and the light odd-Z elements Na
and Al. Significant correlation remain among Ca, and Al,
which is reduced by conditioning on Ca. Finally, although it
is hard to see from Fig. 10, there is a statistically significant
(Fig. 11) anti-correlation between S and Al, which is reduced
by conditioning on Al. We note that the shaded blocks are
only meant to guide the eyes. Even if a single yield channel is responsible for producing all elements within the same
group, we might not expect to see strong internal correlations
because of two confounding factors: (a) elements with large
uncertainties (e.g., V) will show weaker observed correlation
(see Section 2.2), and (b) there are inter-group correlations
that make disentangling the correlations non-trivial. We discuss interpretation of these correlations in §5.2.
Fig. 11 shows the statistical significance of these correlations. In the top panel, the light blue histogram shows the
distribution of the magnitudes of the correlation coefficients
after conditioning on Fe and Mg, i.e., of the off-diagonal elements of the matrix in the top left of Fig. 10. The dark
blue histogram shows the correlation coefficients involving
O, which include several of the largest values in the distribution. In the inset panel, the band shows the O correlations
element by element, with finite sampling uncertainties computed from the 68, 95, and 99 percentile range of the 640
bootstrap resamplings of the data set (§4.4.2). The green dotdashed line shows our estimate of the correlations from photon noise in the ASPCAP abundance measurements (§4.4.1),
which are small enough that we can neglect them relative to
other sources of correlation. The black dashed line shows
the correlations expected from measurement aberration (bottom right panel of Fig. 9), computed as described in §4.4.3.
This line represents the prediction of the “null hypothesis”,
computed from 60 realizations in which we add random uncertainty to [Fe/H] and [Mg/H] values in a model that determines all abundances from Fe and Mg by construction
(§4.4.3). The O-Si correlation is highly inconsistent with
this null hypothesis, and the O-S, O-Ca, and O-Cr correlations are all inconsistent at well over the 99 percentile range.
Although not shown, we also tested that even if we were to
include uncertainty range from the estimate of the aberration
(from the 60 independent numerical experiments), instead of

20

T ING & W EINBERG

Figure 10. Correlation of residual abundances after conditioning on two, three, four, five, six, or seven elements as labeled. Shaded regions
show blocks of correlations to guide the eye. Correlations within these blocks are reduced after conditioning on one of their constituent
elements. All correlations are evaluated at Teff = 4500 K, log g = 2.1, and [Fe/H] = [X/Fe] = 0. The strong correlations present after
conditioning on Fe and Mg alone (top left) are reduced to a level consistent with observational uncertainties by conditioning on Fe, Mg, O, Ni,
Si, Ca, and Al (bottom center). See Fig. 11 for a more quantitative assessment.

just taking the median prediction for our null hypothesis, the
detection signals are still over the 99 percentile range.
Returning to the main panel, the green dot-dashed and
red dashed curves show the distribution of correlation coefficients from ASPCAP uncertainties (Fig. 9, top right) and finite
sampling (Fig. 9, bottom left), respectively. The black dashed
curve shows the distribution of correlations induced by measurement aberration. The solid black curve shows the combined effect of measurement aberration and sampling uncertainty, obtained by adding random draws from the sampling
uncertainty distribution for a given coefficient to the median
measurement aberration for the same coefficient. Many of
the correlations measured from the APOGEE data are well
beyond the tail of the distribution expected from measurement aberration and sampling uncertainty alone.
The second row shows the same quantities after conditioning on Fe, Mg, and O. Now the inset panel shows correlation
coefficients for Ni, which has several of the largest values.
Both Ni-Co deviate from the measurement aberration prediction over the 99 percentile range, and Ni-Mn, Ni-Ca are

at the 95-99 percentile level. We emphasize that the sampling uncertainty and measurement aberration must be recomputed each time a new conditioning element is added.
The measurement aberration effect gets gradually smaller as
more conditioning elements are included because the random uncertainty in any one abundance measurement has less
impact and is less likely to generate correlated aberration.
The sampling uncertainty distribution changes slightly because the uncertainty for individual coefficients depends on
the strength of the correlation. The ASPCAP uncertainty matrix does not need to be recomputed as more conditioning
elements are included, but rows or columns including those
elements are omitted.
After adding Ni as a conditioning element, the Si-Al, SiNa, and Si-Co correlations show the most significant deviations from the measurement aberration prediction (fourth
row). The first Si-Al correlation is over the 99 percentile
range, and Si-Na and Si-Co are at the 95-99 percentile range.
After adding Si as well, the most significant deviations are
Ca-Al and Ca-Mn (fifth row), both 99 percentile range. In

H OW M ANY E LEMENTS M ATTER ?

21

Figure 11. Statistical significance of residual correlations after conditioning on two to seven elements (top to bottom). In each panel light
blue histograms show the distribution of |ρ|, the magnitudes of off-diagonal correlations in the corresponding panel of Fig. 10. Green, red,
and dashed black curves show the distribution of correlations expected from correlated observational uncertainties, finite sampling uncertainty,
and measurement aberration, respectively. Solid black curves show the combined effect of sampling uncertainty and aberration. Inset panels
show the correlation coefficients for the indicated element, with 68, 95, 99 percentile ranges estimated from the percentiles of 640 bootstrap
resamplings of the APOGEE data set. For the first four panels, band colors are those of the corresponding element blocks in Fig. 10, and these
correlations are highlighted in the main panel histogram. Green dot-dashed and black dashed lines in the insets show the correlations predicted
from statistical uncertainties and measurement aberration, respectively. Conditioning on seven elements is required to reduce the measured
correlations to values that are all individually consistent at 95 percentile with the “null hypothesis” of no further residual correlations.

22

T ING & W EINBERG

this five-element case, the overall distribution of |ρ| is consistent with the combination of measurement aberration and
sampling uncertainty (main panel), but the specific Ca-Al and
Ca-Mn correlations are not (inset) because the measurement
aberration value for the Ca-Al coefficient is small, and the
value for Ca-Mn is opposite in sign from the observed correlation. Finally, in the six-element case, the Al-S (95-99
percentile) and Al-Co (99 percentile) correlations remain significant, which we further reduce by conditioning on Al.
We emphasize, even when only conditioning two elements,
we are left with 13 × 12/2 = 78 pairs of elemental abundances, and we typically expect 78 × 1% < 1 pair to show
correlations beyond 99 percentile. Therefore, any pair showing 99 percentile correlation is statistically significant by itself. More importantly, for most elements, we have multiple pairs that show significant correlations, which makes the
combination of all these correlations appearing by chance
highly unlikely. Nonetheless, since individual correlation
signals are still at the ∼ 2.5 − 3σ level, a larger spectroscopic
sample in the future will be critical to confirm and further
validate these results, beyond what we can achieve with the
current APOGEE sample.
After adding Al as a seventh conditioning element, the
largest residual correlations are all consistent with measurement aberration + sampling uncertainty at the 95 percentile
level (seventh row). We therefore do not claim convincing
evidence of residual correlations beyond seven elements.
There is some judgment involved in deciding the order in
which to add conditioning elements. Here we have made
these choices based on both the magnitude of the residual
correlations and the statistical and systematic uncertainties in
the abundance measurements, skipping over some elements
for which APOGEE measurements are less robust (e.g., Na).
We have checked that alternative orderings lead to the same
conclusion about the number of elements required to reduce
residual correlations to a level consistent with observational
uncertainty, though the choice and order of which seven elements to condition on is not unique. The elements that most
clearly demonstrate residual correlations are also the seven
with among the smallest ASPCAP measurement uncertainties
and the smallest total dispersion (see Fig. 6). We suspect
that improving the photon noise uncertainty of the abundance
measurements would show that even more elements contain
significant independent information.
Finally, stars with different [Fe/H] and [Mg/Fe] sample
stellar populations that have experienced different enrichment histories and potentially different degrees of stochasticity in their chemical evolution. Fig. 12 compares the residual correlations for Solar metallicity stars (left) to those for
[Fe/H] = −0.5 and [Mg/Fe] = 0.05 (middle) or 0.25
(right), always with Teff = 4500 K and log g = 2.1. The
residual correlations for metal-poor stars are comparable in

magnitude and similar in pattern to those for Solar metallicity stars, but with some differences. Most noticeably, correlations involving Ca are stronger and consistently positive
for the metal-poor stars. For the α-enhanced stars the correlations among the α-elements are somewhat stronger and those
among the iron peak elements somewhat weaker. These differences are not surprising given the greater relative contribution of core-collapse supernova enrichment to the high-α
population, though we caution that the residual correlations
after conditioning on Fe and Mg need not follow the average
contribution of individual enrichment processes in a simple
way (see §5.1). Importantly, as for Solar metallicity stars, the
residual correlations reveal structure in the abundance distributions that would be buried if we were to study only the
dispersion (Fig. 7). The bottom panels show that conditioning on seven elements again removes most of the large correlations, though we have not investigated the significance of
correlations as exhaustively for these low metallicity populations.
5. Discussion
The analysis in §4.5 shows that one must consider at least
seven elements (Fe, Mg, O, Si, Ca, Ni, and Al) to remove
residual correlations in the conditional PDF of APOGEE
abundances. These elements are also among the most precisely measured in APOGEE data, and they display the
smallest total dispersion after conditioning on Fe and Mg (all
but Al have dispersions < 0.02 dex, and Al has a dispersion
of 0.027 dex, see Fig. 6). With numerical experiments, we
found that if we were to add 0.03 dex of noise, most measured correlations as shown in Fig. 11 would be consistent
with just the photon noise and the measurement aberration
prediction. When adding 0.04 dex of noise, most correlations
are dominated by aberration. Therefore, the dimensionality
is most likely limited by how many elemental abundances
we can measure at the level of 0.02-0.03 dex, and we suspect
that most or all elemental abundances would show significant
residual correlation structures in data with still higher measurement precision. Crucially, these correlations can only be
discovered if abundances are measured individually, not inferred based on the abundance of other elements.
Our correlation measurements are made possible by a new
statistical technique, powered by the latest technology in machine learning, to model the high-dimensional and irregular
distribution of stars in elemental abundance space. The technique allows us to mitigate systematic uncertainties by conditioning on stellar parameters (Teff , log g) that affect abundance measurements. Further conditioning on Fe and Mg
reduces residual dispersion about the conditional mean to
0.01-0.04 dex for most elements, and it reveals the sub-0.02dex intrinsic dispersion after subtracting the reported ASP CAP statistical uncertainties in quadrature. Our discussion

H OW M ANY E LEMENTS M ATTER ?

23

Figure 12. Correlation matrices for Solar metallicity stars (left) compared to those of [Fe/H] = −0.5 stars with [Mg/Fe] = 0.05 (middle) or
[Mg/Fe] = 0.25 (right). Top and bottom rows show conditioning on two and seven elements, respectively. Residual correlation patterns in the
top row are similar but not identical for different populations, and they are reduced to a similar level by seven-element conditioning as shown
in the bottom panels.

in §2 explains why detecting hidden dimensions through reduction of residual dispersion is statistically difficult, and our
analysis in §4 bears out this expectation in practice.
Instead, these complex but critical signatures of chemical
enrichment processes can be revealed by directly measuring cross-element correlations in conditional PDFs. Conditioning on Fe and Mg alone leaves residual correlations that
clearly exceed the levels expected from correlated measurement uncertainties, from statistical fluctuations due to finite
sample size, or from the measurement aberration caused by
random uncertainties in the conditioning abundances. We
need to condition on Fe, Mg, O, Ni, Si, Ca, and Al to reduce the residual correlations for Solar metallicity stars to a
level that is arguably consistent with the observational uncertainties.
In this section we discuss the implications of our results
for the dimensionality of the stellar distribution in elemental
abundance space, for characterization of observational uncertainties in abundance measurements, for chemical tagging,
and for design of Galactic spectroscopic surveys.

5.1. Characterizing dimensionality and the stochastic
chemical evolution of the Milky Way
Our findings help to resolve the tension identified in §1 between studies showing that disk star abundances can be accurately predicted from [Fe/H] and age (Ness et al. 2019)
or from [Mg/H] and [Mg/Fe] (Weinberg et al. 2019) and
PCA analyses showing that 5-10 principal components are
required to explain the diversity of stellar abundance patterns
(Ting et al. 2012; Andrews et al. 2012) or APOGEE spectra
(Price-Jones & Bovy 2018). Conditioning on Fe and Mg does
indeed reduce residual dispersion to a level that only moderately exceeds that expected from photon noise. However,
cross-element correlations clearly demonstrate the presence
of underlying residual structure in the abundance patterns beyond the star-by-star dispersion.
The question of how many elements are needed to remove
residual correlations is closely connected to the more general question of the dimensionality of the stellar distribution
in elemental abundance space. If we have measurements of
M abundances for every star, then these measurements de-

24

T ING & W EINBERG

fine an M -dimensional space, but the stars may lie along a
one-dimensional curve, a two-dimensional surface, a threedimensional hypersurface, etc. We expect the number of
dimensions to be connected to the number of distinct astrophysical processes that contribute to the elements being
considered. However, the connection is indirect. For example, in a one-zone model with a fully mixed interstellar
medium (ISM), stellar abundances depend on a single parameter (time), even if the star formation history is complex
and there are many processes contributing to the elements
(core-collapse supernovae, Type Ia supernovae, AGB stars,
neutron star mergers, etc.). While the relative contribution of
these processes changes with time, all stars of the same age
have the same integrated contributions.
Adding dimensionality to the abundance distribution thus
requires mixing stellar populations that have experienced different enrichment histories. Radial migration of stars is one
such mixing mechanism: star formation, accretion, and outflow histories within the Galactic disk change systematically
with radius, and the stars present at a given radius today were
born in a range of annuli with a variety of chemical evolution
tracks (e.g., Schönrich & Binney 2009; Minchev et al. 2013;
Frankel et al. 2020). Incomplete mixing of the ISM, in azimuth at a given radius or even within a single star-forming
complex, allows stars to be born with a variety of abundance
patterns at nearly the same location and time (Krumholz &
Ting 2018). Bursts of star formation produce sharp excursions of [α/Fe] ratios and complex evolutionary tracks for elements produced by AGB stars on a timescale separate from
that of core-collapse supernovae or Type Ia supernovae (e.g.,
Johnson & Weinberg 2020). Mergers are another mechanism
for mixing stellar populations with different histories, though
the thinness of the Galactic disk implies that the fraction of
disk stars that originated in a distinct satellite should be small
(e.g., Toth & Ostriker 1992; Ting & Rix 2019).
Our analysis here implies a lower limit of seven for the effective dimensionality of the APOGEE disk abundance distribution. We note that this number is clearly a conservative limit. The elements studied in this paper are expected to
come predominantly from core-collapse and Type Ia supernovae (see Andrews et al. 2017; Rybizki et al. 2017; Weinberg et al. 2019). But even within the most “boring” elements
of disk stars at Solar metallicity, our study reveals a plethora
of abundance structures. An analysis including elements produced by other processes (e.g., optical surveys like GALAH
or Gaia-ESO) will undoubtedly exhibit an even richer structure.
5.2. Nucleosynthesis Implications
Unfortunately, interpreting the residual correlations of
Figs. 10 and 11 in terms of stellar enrichment sources remains challenging for several reasons. First, while many of

the correlation coefficients are convincingly larger than expected from measurement aberration and statistical uncertainties, they are not so much larger as to provide precise
measurements of their values. Second, the most obvious statistical tool to apply to multi-element abundance correlations,
Principal Component Analysis (Ting et al. 2012; Andrews
et al. 2012, 2017), implicitly assumes that the latent factors
governing these correlations are orthogonal. There is no reason for the physical variations in stellar yield contributions
to be statistically orthogonal, so the components recovered
from PCA are often combinations of different stellar yields
(as demonstrated by Ting et al. 2012). Third, as already discussed in §5.1, the residuals and their correlations depend on
both the variations in stellar yield inputs and the processes
that mix these variable yields in the ISM and that mix stellar
populations within the disk. Reliable interpretation of these
correlation measurements will therefore require an ambitious
forward modeling program that incorporates these physical
processes and accounts for the impact of measurement uncertainties, perhaps using improved measurements from larger
future data samples.
Here we offer some general interpretive comments, and we
refer the reader to Weinberg et al. (2021; especially their §8)
for more extensive discussion. Instead of conditioning on Mg
and Fe, Weinberg et al. (2021) fit each star’s abundances with
an empirical two-process model intended to capture core collapse and Type Ia supernova contributions, but because Mg
and Fe provide precisely measured abundances that can distinguish these contributions the approaches are fairly similar
in practice. Despite the many differences of detail, including
the use of APOGEE DR17 abundances rather than DR16,
the correlations of abundance residuals found by Weinberg
et al. (2021; see their Fig. 16) are qualitatively similar to
those shown here in Fig. 10. In particular, both analyses find
strong residual correlations among the α-elements O, Si, and
S, among the iron-peak elements Ni, V, Mn, and Co, and
among the intermediate mass elements Ca, Na, and Al.14
It is natural to associate the first of these correlated residual groups with variations in the core collapse supernova enrichment. Stochastic sampling of the progenitor mass distribution might be sufficient to produce such variations depending on how efficiently ejecta are mixed within the ISM;
this is a quantitative question that merits theoretical investigation. Core collapse supernovae and Type Ia supernovae
both contribute to the iron-peak elements, so variable enrichment from either population could drive correlated deviations in the second element group. Type Ia supernovae
14 Weinberg et al. (2021) do not include Cu, which is not provided in the

DR17 ASPCAP abundances, though they do include Ce (not available in
DR16) and the element combination C+N. They find that the correlations
of Ca, Na, and Al extend to K and Cr, which is less obvious in our analysis.

H OW M ANY E LEMENTS M ATTER ?
may represent a heterogeneous population, e.g., with subChandrasekhar and Chandrasekhar-mass progenitors, with
single-degenerate and double-degenerate progenitors, with
progenitors of different chemical composition, or with different explosion physics. Variations in the relative contributions of populations with distinctive yields could produce
variations among the iron-peak abundance ratios like those
found here.
There is no obvious link among the elements in the intermediate group. Theoretical models predict that core collapse supernovae dominate the production of Na (Andrews
et al. 2017; Rybizki et al. 2017), but GALAH and APOGEE
data show a substantial offset of [Na/Mg] between low-α
and high-α stars implying a large contribution from a timedelayed enrichment mechanism (Griffith et al. 2019; Weinberg et al. 2019, 2021). Possibly this source also contributes
to Ca and Al, and variations in its amplitude lead to correlated
deviations in these abundances at fixed Mg and Fe. Weinberg et al. (2021) find a strong correlation between residual
abundances of Na and of Ce, which is an s-process element
expected to have a large contribution from AGB stars. However, Al is expected to arise predominantly from core collapse supernovae (Andrews et al. 2017; Rybizki et al. 2017),
and in contrast to Na it does not show distinct [X/Mg] ratios between low-α and high-α stars, which implies that its
production mechanism is prompt like that of Mg.
These examples, especially the third, highlight the need for
chemical evolution models that can make meaningful quantitative predictions for correlated abundance residuals at fixed
Mg and Fe, and for the desirability of improved survey and
analysis strategies (see §5.5) that can measure these correlations unambiguously and precisely. It is only the size, homogeneity, and abundance precision of APOGEE that enables
an empirical analysis like the one developed here, and the
theoretical methods for exploiting such an analysis have yet
to catch up.
5.3. Characterizing observational uncertainties
In §2.3 we emphasized the distinction between “absolute”
abundance uncertainties that are the same for all stars in a
sample, differential systematic uncertainties that depend on
stellar parameters such as Teff and log g that vary across the
sample, and statistical abundance uncertainties from photon
noise. The first may dominate the difference between stars’
measured and true abundances, but it does not contribute
dispersion to abundances. Differential systematics can contribute dispersion, but they can be mitigated by conditioning
on stellar parameters, a powerful feature of the normalizing
flow method.
By mitigating any differential systematics, we demonstrated that (Fig. 6) the small statistical uncertainties reported
by the ASPCAP pipeline are an accurate representation of

25

photon noise, with total dispersion including an intrinsic contribution of 0.01 − 0.02 dex for well measured elements. We
have also seen that even photon noise that is uncorrelated
from pixel to pixel can cause correlated abundance errors because the abundances of multiple elements may be affected
by the same uncertain stellar parameter, and because some
abundances are estimated from blended features or molecular lines15 . We have estimated these correlated measurement uncertainties for ASPCAP in §4.4.1 and find that they
are small compared to statistical uncertainties in correlation
coefficients from finite sampling (§4.4.2). The largest source
of artificial correlations is the “measurement aberration” arising because we can only condition on measured values of
abundances rather than true values (§4.4.3).
Although the photon noise alone might have limited impact on our ability to detect correlations at high significance,
characterizing it is still enormously important. Fundamentally, we do not have direct access to the intrinsic variance
and correlations, only to measured values that include observational contributions. Interpreting these measurements
and tracing them back to astrophysical phenomena (§5.1) requires a robust characterization of the intrinsic correlations,
and hence an accurate determination of the observational uncertainties. While smaller statistical uncertainties are preferable, the most important thing is to understand them well
enough so that their effects (including that of measurement
aberration) can be removed.
This challenging goal is within reach as we approach a
more ab initio way to perform full-spectral modelling. Fullspectral fitting is sometimes presented as a way to extract
more information from blended features. Such an argument
can be misleading because for high-resolution spectra this
gain is minimal, as the information per spectral feature only
adds in quadrature (Ting et al. 2017a; Sandford et al. 2020).
However, in terms of extracting intrinsic covariance, performing full spectral fitting with all stellar labels simultaneously (e.g., with THE PAYNE, Ting et al. 2019, or CYCLE STARNET , O’Briain et al. 2020) may be advantageous compared to a multi-step approach like ASPCAP’s; the statistical
covariance matrix from χ2 -minimization from full-spectral
fitting represents the full correlated uncertainties from photon noise. In the same vein, classical fitting techniques have
advantages compared to deep learning inferences like A S TRO NN (Leung & Bovy 2019a) or STARNET (Fabbro et al.
2018), as the latter does not have easy access to evaluate the
observational covariance from first principles.
15 Another source of correlation comes from the fact that some elements (e.g.,

essential electron donors) can substantially alter the stellar atmosphere. As
a result, it would modify other elements’ spectral features even those spectral features are not associated with the elements in question (see the appendix in Ting et al. 2016a)

26

T ING & W EINBERG

Figure 13. Residual correlation structures derived with different spectral analysis pipelines, all evaluated at our standard reference point
Teff = 4500 K, log g = 2.1, [Fe/H] = [Mg/Fe] = 0. The left panel uses the ASPCAP abundances (this study). The middle panel uses
abundances for the same data set derived by THE PAYNE with atmospheric models improved through CYCLE - STARNET. The right panel
uses a DR14 sample with abundances from THE CANNON. In all three cases, we adopt the common subset of 13,207 stars that have THE
CANNON DR14 abundances as the training set for a more robust comparison. The two ab initio modeling pipelines yield similar though not
identical correlation patterns, while correlations from THE CANNON are weaker on average and different in structure for some elements. Weaker
correlations could arise if THE CANNON’s abundances are partly affected by the fact that data-driven models partially infer abundances through
astrophysical correlations instead of measuring them (see Fig. 8).

Alternatively, the repeated spectrum technique already
used to infer ASPCAP’s statistical uncertainties (§5.4 of
Jönsson et al. 2020) could be extended with larger repeat
samples to estimate abundance uncertainty correlations and
to better capture effects that lead to non-Gaussian deviations.
Our study highlights the importance of collecting repeated
spectra to characterize the photon noise uncertainty. We caution that while the dispersion of abundances in star clusters
is sometimes used as an empirical estimate of observational
uncertainties, such an estimate is inadequate for modeling
the photon noise uncertainty. The dispersion from open clusters includes both photon noise uncertainties and differential systematics, and for some elements the photon noise uncertainty could be further inflated by dispersion of intrinsic
abundances within the cluster.
One of the important outcomes of large multi-element
data sets has been the emergence of data-driven abundance
pipelines such as THE CANNON (Ness et al. 2015), A S TRO NN (Leung & Bovy 2019a), STARNET (Fabbro et al.
2018) which use labels determined from a subset of spectra to
train a model that infers these labels from other spectra. This
approach is especially powerful for cross-calibrating surveys
with different wavelength ranges or spectral resolution (Ness
et al. 2015; Nandakumar et al. 2020), and it may achieve
smaller statistical uncertainties than a strictly forward modeling approach. However, a data-driven method carries the risk
of “learning” the astrophysical correlations of abundances in
stars, so that the abundance of an element is to some degree
inferred from the abundances of other elements rather than
from true spectral features of that element (see, e.g., fig. 19

in Wheeler et al. 2020, and fig. 3 in Ting et al. 2017b). Under
ideal conditions (e.g., noiseless labels), a generative machine
learning model with the correct capacity will not be biased by
correlations in the data, in contrast to a discriminative machine learning model (like A STRO NN). However, practical
data samples do not fully satisfy these ideal conditions. Various approaches have been attempted to mitigate the effect
of “learned correlations” with L1 regularization (Casey et al.
2016), censoring pixels, or imposing theoretical priors (Ting
et al. 2017b; Xiang et al. 2019), but these mitigations are not
perfect.
For the problem of measuring residual abundance correlations, the focus of this paper, a data-driven pipeline may be
less well suited than a traditional forward modeling pipeline.
If abundance values are partly inferred through astrophysical correlations with conditioning elements, residual correlations with these elements will be suppressed (see Fig. 8),
and correlations among non-conditioning elements could be
artificially enhanced. We investigate this issue in Fig. 13. We
crossmatch our training set with the APOGEE DR14 CAN NON catalog (APOGEE does not have an official DR16 CAN NON catalog). This cross-matching leaves us with 13,207
stars as the training set. As a comparison, we also run the
same analysis using THE PAYNE. Since the DR14 PAYNE
catalog (Ting et al. 2019) did not measure a few elements
compared to ASPCAP, we re-run THE PAYNE on DR16 using an improved set of Kurucz models (Kurucz 1993, 2005,
2013), which are auto-calibrated with a machine learning
technique known as domain adaptation in CYCLE - STARNET
(O’Briain et al. 2020). In order to have a more robust com-

H OW M ANY E LEMENTS M ATTER ?
parison, we train conditional normalizing flows for the AS PCAP , CANNON , and PAYNE / CYCLE - STARNET abundances
with this common subset of 13,207 stars.
Fig. 13 compares the results. Since THE CANNON did
not measure Cu, and THE PAYNE/CYCLE - STARNET cannot
provide robust measurement for K, we omit these two elements in this comparison. The figure shows that ab initio
fitting techniques (ASPCAP and THE PAYNE) give qualitatively similar correlation structures and strong correlations
(ρ = 0.4 − 0.5), though there are a few notable differences.
For example, THE PAYNE abundances seem to show smaller
residual correlations associated with O and stronger correlations associated with V. Some differences are not unexpected
due to the different spectral models adopted16 .
THE CANNON abundances, by contrast, show visibly
weaker residual correlations, with some qualitatively different correlation structures, despite that fact that THE CANNON
was trained on a higher quality subset of ASPCAP abundances
and therefore should have inherited the same model systematics. The differences are particularly prominent for entries
that are far from the diagonal. These differences tentatively
suggest that THE CANNON is artificially damping some residual correlations because its abundance values are affected by
“learned” correlations with the conditioning elements Fe and
Mg. More generally, the impact of correlated measurement
uncertainties on observed correlation patterns may be more
difficult to evaluate for a data-driven pipeline than for an ab
initio forward modeling pipeline. We plan to investigate this
issue more fully in a forthcoming paper.

5.4. Chemical outliers, chemical siblings, and chemical
doppelgangers
Describing the elemental abundances of stars with the
conditional normalizing flow and minimizing systematics through parameter conditioning offers exciting new
prospects in stellar population and Galactic evolution studies.
One such opportunity is a more sensitive and robust approach
to finding chemical outliers, stars whose unusual abundances
may reveal rare astrophysical processes or Galactic events.
Very metal-poor or metal-rich stars are already rare in the local disk, but this in itself does not imply that their abundance
patterns are unusual. The conditional PDF allows us to ask
whether a star’s abundances are unusual relative to stars of
the same overall metallicity and α-enhancement, and conditioning on Teff and log g means that these unusual abun16 As already seen in Ting et al. (2019), oxygen abundances from THE PAYNE

appear to follow an [O/Fe] − [Fe/H] trend closer to the one from the optical surveys (see their fig 12), in which [O/Fe] continues to increase for
lower [Fe/H], whereas the [O/Fe] from ASPCAP plateaus at low metallicity (Fig. 4).

27

dances are unlikely to be caused by differential systematic
uncertainties.
Several recent studies have searched for groups of chemical outliers with similar, distinctive abundance patterns. For
example, Price-Jones et al. (2020) applied DBSCAN to the
8D elemental abundance space in APOGEE and found 21
candidate (disrupted) clusters that have more than 15 members with the same ages. Ting et al. (2016b) constrained
the maximum mass of Milky Way star clusters through the
non-detection of large, chemically homogeneous groups in
APOGEE DR12. Hogg et al. (2016) applied a k-means partitioning of 15-element abundance space to APOGEE abundances derived by THE CANNON, recovering multiple known
star clusters through a blind search of abundance space. Ratcliffe et al. (2020) applied a hierarchical clustering algorithm
to a set of 19 abundances for red clump stars in APOGEE
DR14, finding that groups defined by abundances are spatially separated as a function of age. However, to date most
searches have mostly found rather obvious structures, such as
globular clusters and the metal-poor high-α population (but
see Price-Jones et al. 2020), or reconstructing tidal streams
of known star clusters (e.g. Kos et al. 2018; Simpson et al.
2020). A critical obstacle is that the sampling density of
stars changes drastically with [Fe/H] and [α/Fe], and these
changes can overwhelm more subtle signals in a clustering
algorithm. Searches in the residual abundances after conditioning on Fe and Mg will be a more sensitive probe of
disrupted structures with distinctive abundance patterns.
The most ambitious extension of this approach to Galactic
Archaeology is the idea of “chemical tagging,” that we can
identify pairs or groups of stars that were born in the same
cluster because they have nearly identical abundances, even
if they are now widely separated in phase space (Freeman
& Bland-Hawthorn 2002). Since a star’s atmospheric abundances do not change much in its lifetime, they can serve as
the “DNA fingerprints” of the star’s origins. Critical to the
viability of this program is the ability to identify “chemical
siblings” that have the same intrinsic abundances in the presence of “chemical doppelgangers” that are unrelated but have
abundances that are consistent within observational uncertainties. Some recent analyses of this challenge have painted
a rather bleak outlook for the “strong chemical tagging17 ”
(Ting et al. 2015; Ness et al. 2018). Our methods and findings have numerous implications for the prospects of chemical tagging. We briefly address several of them here, reserving a detailed discussion for future work.
17 Unfortunately, the word “chemical tagging” has been used in other contexts

nowadays and therefore can be confusing at times. For example, “weak”
chemical tagging often refers to inferring the stars’ birth Galactocentric
radii from their elemental abundances (and ages). Here we are referring
to chemical tagging in its original form – i.e., reconstructing disrupted star
clusters.

28

T ING & W EINBERG

Figure 14. Reassessing chemical tagging and the chemical doppelganger rate. (Left) The blue histogram shows the probability that a pair of
co-natal stars with identical intrinsic abundance has log-likelihood ln Lsame (Eq. 19), assuming observational uncertainty equal to the reported
ASPCAP values. The orange histogram shows the log-likelihood distribution for pairs of stars drawn randomly from N (0, 2Cjk,tot ), i.e., from
a Gaussian approximation to the residual abundance PDF conditioned on [Fe/H] = [Mg/Fe] = 0. (Right) The solid black curve shows the
completeness of selecting co-natal pairs as a function of the adopted threshold in ln Lsame . The dashed blue curve shows the corresponding
contamination by unrelated random pairs, assuming a field-to-co-natal ratio f = 1000. Orange and green dashed curves show the contamination
if the observational dispersion is reduced by a factor of two or three, respectively; in each case we have added a constant to ln Lsame so that
the completeness (black curve) stays the same. Chemical tagging with APOGEE abundances is difficult given current abundance precision and
f ≃ 1000, but factors of 2-3 improvement in precision would make it possible to recover co-natal pairs with high fidelity.

First, we note the obvious point that if all abundances
were in fact predictable from [Fe/H] and [Mg/Fe] then the
task of chemical tagging would be hopeless, as the information encoded by elemental fingerprints would be too limited. Our detection of numerous significant correlations at
the measurement precision already achieved by APOGEE is
an encouraging demonstration that the information content
of multi-element abundances is rich. Second, our analysis
shows that APOGEE really is achieving the high precision
implied by repeat stellar observations, with uncertainty of
0.01-0.02 dex for eight or more elements (Fig. 6). Larger
observational dispersion suggested by some previous studies
may be caused by differential systematic uncertainties across
the sample. Third, the normalizing flow technique may be
a powerful tool for chemical tagging because it can mitigate differential systematics through conditioning and because it offers a well defined way of assessing the probability
of observing a given set of abundances for a star or pair of
stars, including non-Gaussian features of the PDF. Finally,
the correlations revealed by our APOGEE analysis alter the
efficiency of distinguishing siblings from doppelgangers, an

effect not previously accounted for in these estimates (Ness
et al. 2018).
To calculate this last effect, we start with the two-element
conditional PDF p([X/H]|Teff , log g, [Fe/H], [Mg/Fe]),
evaluated at our usual reference point of Solar metallicity, Teff = 4500 K, log g = 2.1. Recall that the residual
variances and correlations are largely independent of this
choice. As discussed in §2.2, the total covariance matrix
Cjk,tot , which we can evaluate from the conditional normalizing flow, is the sum of the observational dispersion Cjk,obs
and the intrinsic covariance Cjk,int . For this calculation we
approximate Cjk,obs as a diagonal matrix with entries given
by the reported ASPCAP photon noise (dashed line in Fig 6).
The difference of Cjk,tot and Cjk,obs gives us the intrinsic
covariance Cjk,int .
Suppose that we observe a pair of stars whose intrinsic
abundances are identical. If the observed abundance vectors
~x1 and ~x2 have Gaussian observational uncertainties, then the
PDF of the abundance differences ~x1 − ~x2 follows a normal
distribution N (0, 2Cjk,obs ), with a log-likelihood
ln Lsame = ln N (0, 2Cjk,obs ) .

(19)

H OW M ANY E LEMENTS M ATTER ?
For a pair of unrelated stars, the PDF of ~x1 − ~x2 instead
follows N (0, 2Cjk,tot ). Recall that we have already conditioned on Fe and Mg, so we are considering pairs of stars for
which these two abundances are indistinguishable. The normalizing flow gives us the full and potentially non-Gaussian
p(~x1 − ~x2 ), but here we approximate the residual abundance
distribution as Gaussian to facilitate our comparisons of alternative cases below.
The left panel of Fig. 14 plots the distribution of ln Lsame
(Eq. 19) for pairs of stars that are co-natal and thus have identical abundances, and for pairs of stars drawn randomly from
the conditional PDF. As expected, co-natal stars are much
more likely to have small ~x1 −~x2 and thus high ln Lsame . For
chemical tagging one wants to find a threshold in ln Lsame
that selects most co-natal pairs while rejecting most random
“doppelganger” pairs.
Whether or not the chemical doppelgangers will overwhelm the chemical siblings depends critically on the fieldto-co-natal ratio f , i.e., the prior knowledge of whether a
pair of stars is random as opposed to being co-natal. As discussed at length by Ting et al. (2015), for a given star-forming
event with cluster mass Mc , this ratio can be approximated
to be ≃ M∗ /Mc , where M∗ is the integrated star formation
rate (SFR) of a certain Galactocentric annulus that produces
stars with similar Fe and Mg to the cluster. If we further
assume that the total integrated SFR at a given Galactic annulus is about 5 × 1010 M (e.g., Ting et al. 2015; Bovy &
Rix 2013; Bland-Hawthorn & Gerhard 2016)18 , and approximate that we can grid the Fe and Mg abundance space to
1000 bins (assuming Fe and Mg photon noise precision of
0.01 dex with 0.5 dex span in [Fe/H], and 0.2 dex span in
[Mg/Fe]), then f = Mc /(5 × 107 M ). For a large cluster with Mc = 5 × 104 M , like Westerlund 1, we will have
f ≃ 1000, the value adopted below.
The solid black line in the right panel of Fig. 14 shows the
completeness of selecting co-natal pairs as a function of the
log-likelihood threshold, i.e., if we only consider pairs with
ln Lsame larger than the value on the x-axis. The blue dashed
line shows the contamination rate, defined as the ratio of random field pairs above the threshold to the total number of
pairs above the threshold, assuming a field-to-co-natal ratio
of f = 1000. With the current ASPCAP photon noise illustrated in Fig. 6, which corresponds to ∆[Fe/H] ≃ 0.01 dex
and similar or larger values for other elements, it remains
challenging to identify co-natal stars. For any threshold that
has reasonable completeness, the contamination rate is nearly
100%, i.e., doppelgangers far outnumber siblings.
18 Note that, the integrated SFR is not exactly the current stellar mass, but

this ratio is roughly compensated if we only count stars within a certain
Galacto-centric annulus like the Solar neighbourhood (for details, see Ting
et al. 2015).

29

However, moderate improvements in measurement precision can dramatically change this picture. Orange and
green dashed curves show forecasts in which we reduce
the observational dispersion by a factor of two or a factor
of three (equivalently, reduce the variance by a factor of
four and nine), setting Cjk,tot = Cjk,int + Cjk,obs /4 and
Cjk,int + Cjk,obs /9. We add a constant to the log-likelihood
such that, in all three cases, the completeness results (solid
black line) coincide with each other. With a factor two reduction of dispersion, one can choose a threshold that yields
80% completeness with ∼ 50% contamination, enough to
yield strong statistical conclusions even if any given pair
has a significant chance of being random. For a factor of
three reduction of dispersion, one can choose a threshold
that yields high completeness and minimal contamination.
In the SNR-limited regime, these reductions would require
factors of four or nine increase of observing time per star.
More importantly, the ASPCAP photon noise estimates, based
on repeat spectra of stars, are usually larger than those estimated from χ2 -fitting (Jönsson et al. 2020) by a factor of a
few, which implies that an abundance extraction pipeline that
corrected for additional observational effects might achieve
significantly higher abundance precision even with the existing APOGEE spectra. Conversely, without such corrections,
simply increasing exposure times may not improve precision
as rapidly as σ 2 ∼ 1/SNR ∼ 1/t. Achieving sub-0.01 dex
precision, even differentially, requires an even better understanding of the abundance extraction pipeline, which is no
doubt challenging.
We also caution that our forecast has uncertainties because
our decomposition of the observed Cjk,tot into Cjk,obs and
Cjk,int can be affected by systematic uncertainties in the
characterization of Cjk,obs . A more careful investigation of
the photon noise characterization is critical (§5.3). Regardless, the forecast in this study is undoubtedly a conservative estimate – supplementing our current set of APOGEE
elements with elements expected to have a larger contribution from AGB stars or other neutron-capture processes
could substantially improve chemical tagging by adding
more chemical variations. Chemical tagging may also be
feasible in lower density regions of the residual abundance
space, even if doppelgangers overwhelm siblings in the core
of the distribution. Finally, besides characterizing Cjk,obs ,
measuring a robust Cjk,tot as we have done in this study is
also important. These correlations change the chemical tagging effectiveness because they “tilt” Cjk,int
p relative to the
nearly diagonal Cjk,obs . We repeated our Cjk,obs /3 forecast after setting the off-diagonal elements of Cjk,int to zero,
and we found that ignoring the correlations can artificially
alter the expected contamination rate (by 10-20%).

30

T ING & W EINBERG

Figure 15. Influence of measurement precision and sample size on ability to detect low-amplitude correlations of residual abundance variations.
(Top) Distribution of correlation coefficients produced by measurement aberration in our data set (black curve), with abundance uncertainty
of ∆[Fe/H] = 0.008 dex and ∆[Mg/H] = 0.011 dex, and in data sets with abundance uncertainties lower (red) or higher (blue) by a factor
of two. (Bottom) Distribution of the finite sampling uncertainties in correlation coefficients, as estimated from bootstrap resamplings of our
APOGEE data set (black curve) and numerical experiment with samples of 700, 3000, or 100,000 stars (blue, orange, green) from the same
distribution. Although our APOGEE sample has ≃ 20,000 stars, the sampling uncertainty after conditioning on Teff , log g, [Fe/H], and
[Mg/H] corresponds to an effective sample size Neff = 1/ρ2 ≃ 500. Detecting correlations at the level of ρ ≃ 0.05 − 0.1 requires high
abundance precision and samples that are either large or targeted in stellar parameters so that Neff approaches Nsample .

5.5. Implications for Survey Design
The design of a Galactic spectroscopic survey involves
trade-offs among numerous competing considerations, including number of targets, types of targets, spatial coverage,
wavelength range, spectral resolution, and SNR. Design decisions depend partly on the instrumentation, telescope facilities, and observing time available, on synergy with other data
sets, and on the prioritization of the survey’s science goals.
Here we discuss implications of our results for a survey that
places high priority on mapping the correlations among elemental abundances, to understand nucleosynthesis and the
astrophysical origin of the elements, to trace distinct stellar
populations through space and time, and to probe complexities of Galactic chemical evolution. The key design considerations are to minimize systematic uncertainties in artificial

correlations and to maximize the signal-to-noise ratio for detecting intrinsic correlations.
We first note that our analysis in §4.3 suggests an intrinsic dispersion of 0.01-0.02 dex for the residual abundances
of many APOGEE elements after conditioning on Fe and
Mg. This is a useful reference value when thinking about the
statistical precision of abundance measurements. Recall that
from Eq. 15, observed correlations are suppressed relative to
intrinsic correlations by a factor that depends on the ratio of
observational variance to intrinsic variance. Consequently, it
will generally be difficult to measure low-amplitude intrinsic correlations for elements whose photon noise uncertainties are much larger than the intrinsic dispersion, or 0.02 dex.
The fact that six out of the seven conditioning elements in this
study have dispersions of < 0.02 dex vividly illustrates this
constraint. Nonetheless, we emphasize that measuring these

H OW M ANY E LEMENTS M ATTER ?
correlations is still possible in a large sample if all sources of
spurious correlations are sufficiently well characterized.
We have already discussed the issue of correlated statistical uncertainties in abundance measurements (§5.3). This
consideration favors higher spectral resolution to reduce the
impact of blended features that drive stronger correlations.
In principle, the correlations from statistical uncertainty can
be predicted and subtracted, but this requires accurate knowledge of their magnitude. The larger they are, the more likely
it is that systematic uncertainty in their level will be a limiting
factor. Ideally one would like to derive the observational covariance “theoretically” from χ2 fitting and empirically from
repeat spectra of stars, and demonstrate consistency between
them. If these estimates are inconsistent, as they currently
are for APOGEE (Jönsson et al. 2020), it means that the statistical uncertainties are not fully understood, and it indicates
that improved data reduction and modeling might be able to
extract higher precision abundances from the existing spectra. We emphasize yet again that it is valuable to minimize
and fully characterize the photon noise in abundance measurements even if the absolute uncertainty is dominated by
imperfections in the atmospheric and spectral synthesis models. These modeling systematics generally do not add dispersion or artificial correlations to the abundances derived for
stars with similar properties. The latter can be attained by
modeling the data with normalizing flows.
Higher measurement precision is desirable both to boost
the expected correlation signal (assuming that the intrinsic
correlation ρjk,int is fixed by the underlying astrophysics)
and to reduce the artificial correlations caused by measurement aberrations. In the top panel of Fig. 15, the black solid
curve shows the distribution of correlation coefficients produced by measurement aberration in our analysis, computed
as described in §4.4.3. This calculation assumes random uncertainty in [Fe/H] and [Mg/H] at the level of the mean AS PCAP uncertainties for our sample, 0.008 dex and 0.011 dex,
respectively. The red curve shows the predicted distribution
if the random uncertainties for both elements are reduced
by a factor of two, which drastically reduces the number
of aberration-induced correlations above |ρ| ≃ 0.06. Conversely, doubling the [Fe/H] and [Mg/H] uncertainties (blue
curve) leads to a much broader distribution of aberration correlations. In principle, the aberration correlations are a predictable mean signal, not an uncertainty, so one should be
able to detect true correlations even at levels within this distribution. However, systematic uncertainty in the exact level
of the photon noise uncertainty makes the predicted aberration signal uncertain. This systematic uncertainty in the aberration correlations is a major reason that we do not push beyond seven conditioning elements in our current analysis.
The other limiting factor in detecting weak correlations is
−1/2
sampling uncertainty, which scales as Nsample . Although

31

not shown, we tested this theoretical scaling extensively with
numerical experiments. For Nsample smaller than the current sample size, we subsampled the APOGEE sample. As
for Nsample larger than the current sample size, we draw
mock samples from the emulated APOGEE joint distribution (Fig. 5). We found that the scaling is robust for 300 <
Nsample < 100,000. We did not test beyond Nsample =
100,000. The exact scaling also indirectly demonstrates that
our normalizing flow parameterization adequately describes
the distribution and only incurs negligible uncertainty. The
results from some of these numerical experiments are shown
in the bottom panel of Fig. 15. The black curve shows
the distribution of sampling uncertainty amplitudes estimated
from bootstrap resamplings of our APOGEE training sample (§4.4.2). The uncertainties are typically ρ ≃ 0.045,
with some variation depending on the element correlation
in question. Sampling uncertainty sets a statistical limit on
the detectability of low-amplitude correlations for a given
sample size. Green, orange, and blue curves show the distribution from our numerical experiments with Nsample =
100,000, 3000, or 700, respectively.
As previously discussed, the sampling uncertainty we find
in our bootstrap analysis implies that the effective size of our
sample after conditioning on Teff , log g, [Fe/H], and [Mg/H]
is only Neff = 1/ρ2 ≃ 500, even though our full sample is
Nsample ≃ 20,000. Because our measured correlation signal is fairly consistent from one reference point to another
(Appendix A), we could average results from multiple reference points to reduce sampling uncertainty. We have experimented with this approach and obtained some reduction of
sampling uncertainty when integrating over Teff and log g.
However, since the training sample already spans a small
range of Teff − log g, we found that the reduction is minimal (from ρ = 0.045 to 0.041). Expanding the sample beyond this Teff − log g range will risk distorting or diluting
correlations due to the differential systematics of the abundances, though this effect could be mitigated by using median or mean trends to calibrate empirical corrections as a
function of Teff or log g (e.g., Eilers et al. 2021; Ness et al.
2021; Weinberg et al. 2021).
We found that we can approach the theoretical ρ ≃ 0.01
corresponding to Neff ≃ 104 if we further integrate over
[Fe/H] and [Mg/H], but as demonstrated in Fig. 12, different
populations have subtle differences in the residual correlation
structures, and hence we chose not to integrate the signals.
The bottom line is that the same survey strategy as APOGEE
as assumed in the bottom panel of Fig. 15 is not the most effective approach for this particular study. With a more careful
selection (e.g., through Gaia’s color-magnitude diagram) of
“stellar twins,” with similar Teff , log g, [Fe/H], and [Mg/Fe],
at any given reference point in this 4D-distribution, we could

32

T ING & W EINBERG

achieve what APOGEE enabled in this study with a sample
of only O(1000) stars.
While normalizing flows could mitigate some of these limitations, nonetheless, collectively these considerations suggest that an effective strategy for mapping out multi-element
abundance correlations might be to target moderate-sized
samples (Nsample ≃ O(104 )) of stars pre-selected in narrow
ranges of Teff , log g at multiple reference points in [Fe/H],
and [Mg/Fe], obtaining high SNR at high spectral resolution, analogous to solar twin studies (Ramı́rez et al. 2009;
Nissen 2015; Bedell et al. 2018). Choosing narrow ranges of
stellar parameters at each reference point mitigates differential systematics as a source of observational dispersion, and it
minimizes the difference between Nsample and Neff for setting sampling uncertainty. High SNR mitigates the dilution
of intrinsic correlations by observational dispersion, reduces
measurement aberration, and reduces any systematic uncertainty from correlated statistical uncertainties.
Within a program such as GALAH or the SDSS-V Milky
Way Mapper (Kollmeier et al. 2017), this goal could be
achieved by targeting small subsets (e.g., O(1)%) of the
full (& 106 star) samples for repeated observations to build
high SNR. Coverage of a wide range of elements could be
achieved by observing these stars in common in both optical
and infrared surveys. With well-characterized correlations at
various locations in [Fe/H], and [Mg/Fe], the much larger
full samples could be used to search for outlier stars and
chemically distinct groups and to apply these correlations to
chemical tagging.
6. Conclusions
High-resolution, highly multiplexed spectroscopic surveys
are currently measuring 10-30 elemental abundances in samples of more than 105 stars. Embedded in this multidimensional elemental abundance space are clues to the astrophysical sources of the elements and archaeological information about the Milky Way’s history. However, the tools
that we currently have to decipher the irregular distribution of
stars in this high-dimensional space remain rather rudimentary. In this study, we have proposed a new method based on
a machine learning technique known as normalizing flow to
depict the distribution of Milky Way disk stars in the abundance space spanned by 15 elements measured by the SDSS
APOGEE survey. Our key findings are summarized as follows.
• Conditional normalizing flow allows us to minimize
the impact of differential systematic uncertainties
on observational dispersion in abundance measurements. After conditioning on Teff , log g, [Fe/H], and
[Mg/Fe], the residual APOGEE abundances have a total dispersion of 0.01-0.02 dex for O, Si, Ca, Ni, 0.02−
0.04 dex for Mn, Al, Co, S, Cr, Cu, and 0.04−0.06 dex

for K, V, and Na. These dispersions are typically 1.52 times higher than the photon noise uncertainties reported by ASPCAP for our SNR > 200 sample, and the
difference is plausibly explained by intrinsic dispersion with a typical amplitude of 0.01 − 0.02 dex. Differentially, the observational dispersion of APOGEE’s
[Fe/H] and [Mg/Fe] measurements is ≃ 0.01 dex or
better.
• We have argued theoretically and demonstrated empirically that abundance correlations can be measured robustly in a large data set even when the statistical uncertainties of individual abundance measurements are
comparable to the intrinsic dispersion. Studying only
the dispersions about the conditional means could miss
many hidden dimensions in the elemental abundance
space. Abundance correlations are much more effective for measuring this subtle information.
• Although knowledge of a star’s [Fe/H] and [Mg/Fe] is
sufficient to predict most of its APOGEE abundances
at the ∼ 0.02 dex level, the residual abundances show
cross-element correlations at high significance. These
correlations cannot be discovered if the abundances are
inferred from Fe and Mg, only if they are measured
independently.
• Even for Solar metallicity disk stars and a set of elements expected to come mainly from core-collapse
and Type Ia supernovae, we must condition on at least
seven elements (e.g., Fe, Mg, O, Ni, Si, Ca, and Al)
to reduce residual correlations to a level consistent
with observational uncertainties. Correlation patterns
for [Fe/H] = −0.5 stars, with [Mg/Fe] = 0.05 or
[Mg/Fe] = 0.25, are similar to those found at Solar metallicity. Our results reconcile previous findings that [Fe/H] and [Mg/Fe] accurately predict many
other abundances with other studies finding 5-10 significant dimensions to the stellar distribution in abundance space: both conclusions are true. However,
since the dispersion is much less sensitive than crosscorrelations of elemental abundances, the lack of reduction in dispersion does not imply that elemental
abundances are redundant.
We have discussed implications of our results for survey
design and analysis in §5. The robust statistical modeling
of the elemental space mitigates differential systematics, improves the prospects for chemical tagging of co-natal stars,
and puts the concept of chemical tagging onto a firmer statistical footing. However, chemical tagging remains challenging with current abundance precision. For detecting
and characterizing the full network of correlations, we advocate high-SNR observations of intermediate-sized samples

H OW M ANY E LEMENTS M ATTER ?
(∼ 104 stars), concentrated in stellar parameters and at specific locations in [Fe/H] and [Mg/Fe], measuring elements
that probe a range of astrophysical processes. These correlations encode critical insights about nucleosynthetic sources
and subtleties of chemical evolution, and advances in theoretical modeling are needed to exploit the novel information
they can provide. Once accurately measured, these correlations can be applied to larger, lower SNR samples to map
temporal and spatial variations and select stars with common
histories.
Normalizing flows are a powerful new technique for describing complex, high-dimensional distributions. This technique has many potential applications in Galactic Archaeology, including identification of outlier stars and distinctive
clusters in abundance space. In cosmology, the advent of
enormous data sets drove the development of sophisticated
statistical techniques to interpret them. As Galactic Archaeology surveys grow to many elements for vast numbers of
stars, a similar revolution in analysis techniques is needed
to exploit the rich, multi-faceted constraints they provide on
stellar astrophysics, nucleosynthesis, and the history of the
Milky Way.

Acknowledgments
We thank Gregory Green for sharing his codes to visualize
normalizing flows (Fig. 3). We thank Jon Holtzman, Charlie Conroy and Henrik Jönsson for illuminating discussions.
YST acknowledges financial support from the Australian Research Council through DECRA Fellowship DE220101520.
YST is grateful to be supported by the NASA Hubble Fellowship grant HST-HF2-51425.001 awarded by the Space Telescope Science Institute. DHW acknowledges support from
NSF grant AST-1909841 and from the W.M. Keck Foundation and the Hendricks Foundation at the Institute for Advanced Study. The APOGEE/Sloan Digital Sky Survey IV is
funded by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science, and the Participating Institutions and acknowledges support and resources from the
Center for High- Performance Computing at the University
of Utah. We thank Robert Kurucz for developing and maintaining the spectral synthesis programs and databases and
Fiorella Castelli for allowing us to use her Linux versions
of the programs.

Appendix A Conditioning on different Teff and log g
In this study, we focus on the reference point Teff =
4500 K and log g = 2.1, but our results are not sensitive to

33

this choice. Fig. A1 demonstrates that the residual correlation structures are almost identical across different reference
Teff and log g within the stellar parameters spanned by the
training set.
Besides mitigating any Teff −abundance correlations, we
found that conditioning on Teff and log g is also crucial for
studying the dispersions in this study. Conditioning on Teff
and log g reduced the measured dispersions (Fig. 6). Without conditioning on Teff = 4500 K and log g = 2.1, the Mn
abundances demonstrate a 70% larger dispersion (0.037 dex
instead of 0.022 dex). The dispersions for Ca, Ni, Cr, Cu,
and K also increase by 10-17%, indicating that for some elements, abundance measurements from ASPCAP have residual
differential systematics even over the restricted range of Teff
in this study.
Appendix B Can mischaracterization of the ASPCAP
photon noise explain the correlation
signals?
In §4.4, we have demonstrated that the ASPCAP measurement correlations and finite sampling uncertainty cannot explain the APOGEE residual correlation structures. However,
the measurement aberration effect, on the other hand, is sensitive to the assumption on the ASPCAP photon noise. In
this study, we adopt ∆[Fe/H] = 0.008 dex and ∆[Mg/H] =
0.011 dex as reported in ASPCAP. This is likely a robust assumption because we have seen that even for elements with
generally less spectral information than Fe and Mg such as O
and Si, the total dispersion (the quadrature sum of the photon
noise and intrinsic dispersion) is only ∼ 0.01 dex (Fig. 6).
Here we further verify this assumption by estimating the
measurement aberration if ASPCAP had mischaracterized the
photon noise. We follow the same procedure as was done in
Fig. 9. The top right panel of Fig. A2 demonstrates the measurement aberration effect if the photon noise is two times
smaller than what was reported, and the bottom right panel
two times larger. The top left panel illustrates the APOGEE
residual correlations as a reference, and the bottom right
panel the measurement aberration in this study. Note that,
unlike the bottom right panel of Fig. 9, here we plot the aberration effect perturbed by the finite sampling uncertainty to
visualize the combined effect of the two. Recall that the
ASPCAP correlation uncertainty is minimal. Therefore, the
combined effect here serves as a conservative limit. Without the sampling noise, the difference between the measurement aberrations and the APOGEE correlations would be
even more apparent.
The figure demonstrates that, in order to generate the
strong correlations (ρ = 0.4 − 0.5) as we measured from
the APOGEE data, the photon noise of ASPCAP needs to be
two times larger than what was reported, which is at odds
with the total dispersions for the other elements. But more

34

T ING & W EINBERG

Figure A1. The abundance correlation structures at different reference Teff , log g when conditioning on two elements (Fe and Mg). The
correlation structures, as shown in the left panel of Fig. 8, are largely invariant within the stellar parameter range spanned by the APOGEE
training data in this study.

importantly, even in this case, as shown in the bottom right
panel, the aberration effect will become so strong that all elemental abundances will be highly and positively correlated.
As shown in the top left panel, the APOGEE residual correlations exhibit more structures and do not simply exhibit strong
correlations among all elemental abundances. Our numerical

experiment suggests that the correlations that we measured in
APOGEE cannot be explained simply by the mischaracterization of the ASPCAP photon noise. This experiment also indirectly demonstrates that photon noise uncertainty reported
by ASPCAP is robust. Differentially, APOGEE has indeed
measured [Fe/H] to a precision of 0.01 dex or better.

References
Ahumada, R., Prieto, C. A., Almeida, A., et al. 2020, ApJS, 249, 3
Andrews, B. H., Weinberg, D. H., Johnson, J. A., Bensby, T., &
Feltzing, S. 2012, AcA, 62, 269. https://arxiv.org/abs/1205.4715
Andrews, B. H., Weinberg, D. H., Schönrich, R., & Johnson, J. A.
2017, ApJ, 835, 224
Bedell, M., Bean, J. L., Meléndez, J., et al. 2018, ApJ, 865, 68
Bensby, T., Feltzing, S., & Lundström, I. 2003, A&A, 410, 527
Bland-Hawthorn, J., & Gerhard, O. 2016, ARA&A, 54, 529
Bovy, J., & Rix, H.-W. 2013, ApJ, 779, 115
Buder, S., Sharma, S., Kos, J., et al. 2020, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2011.02505. https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.02505
Casey, A. R., Hogg, D. W., Ness, M., et al. 2016, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1603.03040. https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.03040
Cranmer, M. D., Galvez, R., Anderson, L., Spergel, D. N., & Ho,
S. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1908.08045.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.08045
Dinh, L., Sohl-Dickstein, J., & Bengio, S. 2016, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1605.08803. https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.08803
Durkan, C., Bekasov, A., Murray, I., & Papamakarios, G. 2019,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1906.04032.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.04032
Eilers, A.-C., Hogg, D. W., Rix, H.-W., et al. 2021, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2112.03295. https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.03295
Fabbro, S., Venn, K. A., O’Briain, T., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 475,
2978
Fisher, R. A. 1921, Metron, 1, 1
Frankel, N., Sanders, J., Ting, Y.-S., & Rix, H.-W. 2020, ApJ, 896,
15

Freeman, K., & Bland-Hawthorn, J. 2002, ARA&A, 40, 487
Fuhrmann, K. 1998, A&A, 338, 161
Gaia Collaboration, Brown, A. G. A., Vallenari, A., et al. 2018,
A&A, 616, A1
Garcı́a Pérez, A. E., Allende Prieto, C., Holtzman, J. A., et al.
2016, AJ, 151, 144
Gilmore, G., Randich, S., Asplund, M., et al. 2012, The Messenger,
147, 25
Green, G. M., & Ting, Y.-S. 2020, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2011.04673. https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.04673
Griffith, E., Johnson, J. A., & Weinberg, D. H. 2019, ApJ, 886, 84
Griffith, E., Weinberg, D. H., Johnson, J. A., et al. 2020, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2009.05063. https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.05063
Gustafsson, B., Edvardsson, B., Eriksson, K., et al. 2008, A&A,
486, 951
Hayden, M. R., Bovy, J., Holtzman, J. A., et al. 2015, ApJ, 808,
132
Hogg, D. W., Casey, A. R., Ness, M., et al. 2016, ApJ, 833, 262
Holtzman, J. A., Shetrone, M., Johnson, J. A., et al. 2015, AJ, 150,
148
Jimenez Rezende, D., & Mohamed, S. 2015, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1505.05770. https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.05770
Johnson, J. W., & Weinberg, D. H. 2020, MNRAS, 498, 1364
Jönsson, H., Holtzman, J. A., Allende Prieto, C., et al. 2020, AJ,
160, 120
Kingma, D. P., & Dhariwal, P. 2018, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1807.03039. https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.03039

H OW M ANY E LEMENTS M ATTER ?

35

Figure A2. The measurement aberration effect, assuming different photon noise levels for ASPCAP. The top left panel shows the measured
APOGEE correlations (when conditioning with two elements - Fe and Mg) as a reference. The other panels demonstrate different degrees of
spurious correlations due to measurement aberration adopting different photon noise uncertainties for [Fe/H] and [Mg/H]. We perturb the
aberration effect with the finite sampling uncertainty in the APOGEE data to better visualize the combined effect. In this study (Fig. 9), we
assume the ASPCAP reported values – ∆[Fe/H] = 0.008 and ∆[Mg/H] = 0.011, and the aberration effect is shown in the bottom left panel.
The top right panel shows the aberration effect if the ASPCAP photon noise uncertainties were two times smaller than what had been reported
in DR16, and the bottom right panel two times larger. A two times larger photon noise could mimic the amplitudes of the measured signals in
terms of the residual abundance correlations. However, in this case, almost all elemental abundances will be highly and positively correlated,
which is at odds with the measured APOGEE abundance correlations.

36

T ING & W EINBERG

Kollmeier, J. A., Zasowski, G., Rix, H.-W., et al. 2017, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1711.03234. https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.03234
Kos, J., Bland-Hawthorn, J., Freeman, K., et al. 2018, MNRAS,
473, 4612
Krumholz, M. R., & Ting, Y.-S. 2018, MNRAS, 475, 2236
Kurucz, R. L. 1993, SYNTHE spectrum synthesis programs and
line data, ed. Kurucz, R. L.
—. 2005, Memorie della Societa Astronomica Italiana
Supplementi, 8, 14
—. 2013, ATLAS12: Opacity sampling model atmosphere
program, Astrophysics Source Code Library.
http://ascl.net/1303.024
Leung, H. W., & Bovy, J. 2019a, MNRAS, 483, 3255
—. 2019b, MNRAS, 489, 2079
Liu, L., Jiang, H., He, P., et al. 2019, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1908.03265. https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.03265
Luo, A. L., Zhao, Y.-H., Zhao, G., et al. 2015, Research in
Astronomy and Astrophysics, 15, 1095
Majewski, S. R., Schiavon, R. P., Frinchaboy, P. M., et al. 2017,
AJ, 154, 94
Miglio, A., Chiappini, C., Mackereth, T., et al. 2020, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2004.14806. https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.14806
Minchev, I., Chiappini, C., & Martig, M. 2013, A&A, 558, A9
Nandakumar, G., Hayden, M. R., Sharma, S., et al. 2020, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2011.02783. https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.02783
Ness, M., Hogg, D. W., Rix, H. W., Ho, A. Y. Q., & Zasowski, G.
2015, ApJ, 808, 16
Ness, M., Rix, H. W., Hogg, D. W., et al. 2018, ApJ, 853, 198
Ness, M. K., Johnston, K. V., Blancato, K., et al. 2019, ApJ, 883,
177
Ness, M. K., Wheeler, A. J., McKinnon, K., et al. 2021, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2109.05722. https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.05722
Nissen, P. E. 2015, A&A, 579, A52
O’Briain, T., Ting, Y.-S., Fabbro, S., et al. 2020, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2007.03109. https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.03109
Pinsonneault, M. H., Elsworth, Y. P., Tayar, J., et al. 2018, ApJS,
239, 32
Price-Jones, N., & Bovy, J. 2018, MNRAS, 475, 1410

Price-Jones, N., Bovy, J., Webb, J. J., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 496,
5101
Ramı́rez, I., Meléndez, J., & Asplund, M. 2009, A&A, 508, L17
Ratcliffe, B. L., Ness, M. K., Johnston, K. V., & Sen, B. 2020, ApJ,
900, 165
Reiman, D. M., Tamanas, J., Prochaska, J. X., & Ďurovčı́ková, D.
2020, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2006.00615.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.00615
Rybizki, J., Just, A., & Rix, H.-W. 2017, A&A, 605, A59
Sandford, N. R., Weisz, D. R., & Ting, Y.-S. 2020, ApJS, 249, 24
Schönrich, R., & Binney, J. 2009, MNRAS, 396, 203
Simpson, J. D., Martell, S. L., Da Costa, G., et al. 2020, MNRAS,
491, 3374
Steinmetz, M., Zwitter, T., Siebert, A., et al. 2006, AJ, 132, 1645
Ting, Y.-S., Conroy, C., & Goodman, A. 2015, ApJ, 807, 104
Ting, Y.-S., Conroy, C., & Rix, H.-W. 2016a, ApJ, 826, 83
—. 2016b, ApJ, 816, 10
Ting, Y.-S., Conroy, C., Rix, H.-W., & Cargile, P. 2017a, ApJ, 843,
32
—. 2019, ApJ, 879, 69
Ting, Y.-S., Freeman, K. C., Kobayashi, C., De Silva, G. M., &
Bland-Hawthorn, J. 2012, MNRAS, 421, 1231
Ting, Y.-S., & Rix, H.-W. 2019, ApJ, 878, 21
Ting, Y.-S., Rix, H.-W., Conroy, C., Ho, A. Y. Q., & Lin, J. 2017b,
ApJL, 849, L9
Tinsley, B. M. 1979, ApJ, 229, 1046
Toth, G., & Ostriker, J. P. 1992, ApJ, 389, 5
Vincenzo, F., Weinberg, D. H., Miglio, A., Lane, R. R., &
Roman-Lopes, A. 2021, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2101.04488.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.04488
Wallerstein, G. 1962, ApJS, 6, 407
Weinberg, D. H., Holtzman, J. A., Hasselquist, S., et al. 2019, ApJ,
874, 102
Weinberg, D. H., Holtzman, J. A., Johnson, J. A., et al. 2021, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2108.08860. https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.08860
Weng, L. 2018, lilianweng.github.io/lil-log
Wheeler, A., Ness, M., Buder, S., et al. 2020, ApJ, 898, 58
Xiang, M., Ting, Y.-S., Rix, H.-W., et al. 2019, ApJS, 245, 34
Yanny, B., Rockosi, C., Newberg, H. J., et al. 2009, AJ, 137, 4377

