arXiv:1002.1922v1 [hep-ph] 9 Feb 2010

Preprint typeset in JHEP style - HYPER VERSION

Cavendish-HEP-2010-02

MSSM dark matter measurements at the
LHC without squarks and sleptons

M. J. White and F. Feroz
Cavendish Laboratory. Madingley Road. Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK

Abstract: We examine the case of neutralino dark matter in the focus point region of the MSSM, in which the scalar sparticles are too heavy to be produced at
the LHC. Whilst it has been previously asserted that the LHC alone would fail to
constrain the properties of the lightest neutralino for such a scenario, we find that
one can obtain good predictions of astrophysical quantities such as the relic density,
annihilation cross-section and direct search cross-sections by using the shape of the
dilepton invariant mass spectrum to constrain neutralino mixing. We demonstrate
our technique using a Bayesian analysis of the 24 parameter MSSM model space,
and in the process introduce a novel way of improving the LHC results even without
assumptions on which new sparticles are responsible for the kinematic features in
the dilepton invariant mass distribution.
Keywords: Beyond the Standard Model, MSSM, Dark Matter.

Contents
1. Introduction

1

2. Background
2.1 Neutralino dark matter in the focus point region
2.2 Benchmark point
2.3 Constraining the MSSM parameter space

3
3
5
6

3. Focus point SUSY at the LHC
3.1 Conventional input measurements
3.2 New input measurements
3.3 Discussion

9
9
12
17

4. Conclusions

19

5. Acknowledgements

20

1. Introduction
The existence of a large amount of non-baryonic ‘dark’ matter (DM) in the universe
is now relatively uncontroversial, and the precise nature of the matter is currently
the source of much speculation. The WMAP observations of the cosmic microwave
background have provided a precise measurement of the dark matter relic density [1],
and also strongly support cold dark matter in the form of weakly interacting massive
particles (WIMPs). Since the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics does not
contain any particles that fit this description, searches for dark matter are intimately
connected with searches for new physics.
The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, Geneva, is designed to probe the
TeV scale for evidence of new fundamental theories, and can be expected to produce
dark matter particles if a WIMP exists with an accessible mass. At the same time,
direct search experiments continue to look for interactions between Earth-based targets and passing WIMPs, indirect search experiments look for evidence of WIMP
annihilation in space, and the cosmic microwave background is being mapped with
ever greater precision. If it is genuinely true that a single WIMP candidate explains dark matter, one should obtain a consistent set of observations from these
experiments, but checking this consistency is hampered by large uncertainties in the

–1–

relevant astrophysics. For example, if no annihilation signal is observed, how do
we know if this is because the annihilation cross-section lies below the reach of our
current apparatus or whether we simply looked in a region where there was too little
dark matter to give a strong flux? If a direct search experiment fails to see a signal,
how do we untangle the interaction cross-section from the uncertainties in the local
density and velocity of the dark matter that affect the number of observed events?
From a particle physics perspective, the only answer is to try and measure the microscopic properties of the WIMP as precisely as possible in accelerator experiments
in order to make accurate predictions of the astrophysical data. These measurements can then either be used with halo models to predict annihilation fluxes and
direct search cross-sections, or, in the exciting case of a positive result in one or more
astrophysical experiments, to directly constrain the halo distributions themselves.
Comparisons with the relic density could give important clues on the proportion of
dark matter composed of the WIMP observed at the LHC or could help validate the
standard picture of Big Bang cosmology.
This paper examines dark matter arising from the Minimal Supersymmetric
Standard Model (MSSM) in the popular case that the WIMP is the lightest neutralino
of the model. Previous studies [2,3] have indicated that, under favourable conditions,
one can measure the WIMP mass and couplings rather well at the LHC but, in the
case that the scalars are too heavy to be produced, one might get the mass but
certainly not the couplings. A classic example is the ‘focus point’ region of the
mSUGRA parameter space [4], in which the scalar masses may be high while the
model still obeys all experimental constraints, including the WMAP constraint on
the relic density. A linear collider could resolve these issues but is still many years
away and, while it would be possible to use astrophysical data in combination with
the LHC data, this relies on assuming the model which we are trying to test. Hence
there is a clear need to improve DM predictions at the LHC if we are to make proper
use of the rich astrophysical data sets expected over the next ten years.
We revisit the focus point SUSY case and demonstrate that the LHC can do
significantly better than previously advertised, by using the shape of the dilepton
invariant mass spectrum to constrain neutralino mixing. We also find that the improvements are still obtained even if one assumes that the sparticles producing kinematic endpoints at the LHC have not been correctly identified. In analysing our
benchmark point we quote a study from members of the ATLAS collaboration [5],
though our results would apply equally well to CMS [6]. We then use the anticipated
ATLAS data in a Bayesian analysis of the 24 parameter MSSM space, and hence
although we use an mSUGRA benchmark point, our analysis is not restricted to the
mSUGRA parameter set. Moreover, it should be possible to apply our approach to
other SUSY models with heavy scalars.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the relevant background, defines the benchmark point used in this study and introduces the Multi-

–2–

Nest sampling algorithm [7] used to obtain our results. In Section 3 we describe
how to use the shape information to improve the results, and present the posteriors
obtained using the ‘conventional’ and ‘new’ approaches. We also discuss potential
pitfalls. We present conclusions in section 4.

2. Background
2.1 Neutralino dark matter in the focus point region
The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model (MSSM) describing broken SUSY
permits 108 parameters and, although a large number of these must be small to
suppress flavour changing processes, at least 24 parameters are normally considered necessary to investigate LHC phenomenology. Although SUSY provides several
WIMP candidates (including the sneutrino and gravitino), the most popular is the
lightest neutralino, which is an admixture of the superpartners of the standard model
gauge bosons, with components set by the following mixing matrix:


M1
0
−mZ cos βsW mZ sin βsW




0
M
m
cos
βc
−m
sin
βc
2
Z
W
Z
W


M=
(2.1)

 −mZ cos βsW mZ cos βcW

0
−µ


mZ sin βsW −mZ sin βcW
−µ
0

where M1 and M2 are the U(1) and SU(2) gaugino masses, µ is the Higgsino mass
parameter, tanβ is the ratio of the vacuum expectation values of the two Higgs
doublets and the other parameters are all from the standard model. Measuring the
couplings of a neutralino WIMP essentially comes down to trying to constrain the
components of this matrix which is not generically possible at the LHC.
Many phenomenological studies have been performed using simpler frameworks
such as the minimal supergravity model (mSUGRA) [8] where SUSY breaking, which
is assumed to occur in a hidden sector, is communicated to the observable sector via
gravitational interactions. The mSUGRA model unifies various GUT scale parameters, obtaining the following parameter set: the scalar mass m0 , the gaugino mass
m1/2 , the trilinear coupling A0 , the ratio of Higgs expectation values tanβ, and the
sign of the SUSY Higgs mass parameter µ. Assuming the lightest neutralino is the
correct WIMP candidate, one finds that, in most of the mSUGRA parameter space,
too many neutralinos would survive after the Big Bang, and hence the only allowed
regions must have some kind of annihilation mechanism to bring the density down to
within the limits set by astrophysical observation. There are four main mechanisms,
each of which dominates in a particular region of the parameter space [2]:
1. Slepton exchange. This is suppressed unless the slepton masses are lighter than
approximately 200 GeV and gives rise to the ‘bulk’ region at low values of the
mass parameters.

–3–



lnear

q

q~


lfar

~l

~02

R

~01

Figure 1: A popular cascade decay chain used to measure sparticle masses at the LHC.
The invariant mass distributions of the decay products will exhibit kinematic endpoints
whose position is a function of the four sparticle masses involved in the cascade.

2. Co-annihilation with light sleptons. This occurs when there are suitable mass
degeneracies in the sparticle spectrum, giving rise to a suitably named ‘coannihilation region’.
3. Annihilation to third-generation fermions. This is enhanced when the heavy
Higgs boson A is almost twice as massive as the LSP, giving rise to a ‘funnel
region’ for models with reasonably large tanβ.
4. Annihilation to vector bosons. This can occur if the neutralino LSP acquires a
significant wino or higgsino component, which happens in the so-called ‘focus
point’ region at high m0 .
One must remember that the tight level of constraint provided by the WMAP data
is only a feature of models with a small number of parameters. A recent review of
mSUGRA results that investigates the effect of adding new parameters can be found
in reference [9], while the results of a 24 parameter Bayesian analysis incorporating
all current data can be found in [10].
The high value of m0 in the focus point region puts the squark and slepton masses
in the multi-TeV range and thus out of direct reach of the LHC, and this forms the
basis of why the LHC is expected to struggle to measure the WIMP couplings in this
region. The main method of constraining the parameters of the mixing matrix is to
look for cascade decay processes featuring squarks and sleptons (see figure 1) and use
kinematic endpoints in the invariant mass distributions of the SM decay products to
measure mass differences between the sparticles. If a large amount of the sparticle
mass spectrum can be measured (for example in the bulk or coannihilation regions),
one can tell that the LSP is almost purely bino and reconstruct the relic density to a
precision of around 10% [3], dependant on assumptions about the LHC reach in the
Higgs sector. This remains true in a 24 parameter MSSM analysis, and thus is not
limited to an unreasonably restrictive mSUGRA analysis. Mass differences can still
be measured in the focus point region using cascade decays headed by gluinos, but

–4–

the lack of squarks and sleptons will clearly reduce the number of decays that we can
observe, and it was previously argued that this leaves the dominant component of
the neutralino ambiguous when one attempts to fit the SUSY parameters [2], leading
to substantial (i.e. orders of magnitude) uncertainties in the gamma ray flux, direct
detection cross-section and relic density results from the LHC.
Nevertheless, the focus point is attractive for a number of reasons. From a DM
perspective, it is interesting to note that the higgsino component of the neutralino
WIMP implies large annihilation via W + W − and ZZ bosons, and a large number of
gamma rays in the final state, thus improving the prospects for finding dark matter
using the forthcoming generation of gamma ray telescopes. Indeed, a previous study
comparing the search reach of the LHC and H.E.S.S. II revealed a region of overlap
in the focus point region that would give clear signals in both experiments [11]. If
a focus point type scenario were chosen by Nature, we therefore have the potential
to learn much about dark matter. Furthermore, the focus point region is actually
favoured by constrained MSSM fits to particle physics and cosmological data if one
assumes ‘natural priors’ [12].
2.2 Benchmark point
Our study uses a particular benchmark point that
gives a typical focus point phenomenology, and a discussion of the generality of our results is deferred to section 3.3. One of the problems of performing studies of
the focus point region is that the results of spectrum calculations are highly sensitive to the top Yukawa coupling,
and therefore to the physical top mass. Given that one
of the leading aims of this paper is to show improvement
over previously published results, we have chosen to use
the same spectrum generator as that used in [2] (ISAJET
7.69 [13]), with the same focus point region benchmark
point (their ‘LCC2’) and the same value of the top mass.
While it is true that a more recent and improved version
Table 1: Particle masses of ISAJET is available, along with a revised measurement
for the benchmark point de- of the top mass, the results of this paper should be viewed
scribed in the text. The as comparitive rather than definitive. We thus use the
squarks and sleptons of the
following values of the mSUGRA parameters:
Particle
χ̃01
χ̃02
χ̃03
g̃
b̃1
b̃2
t̃1
t̃2
τ̃1
τ̃2
h

Mass/GeV
106
165
191
850
2710
3241
1977
2720
3252
3268
118.7

first two generations all
have a mass greater than 3
TeV.

m0 = 3280GeV, m1/2 = 300GeV, tanβ = 10, A0 = 0, µ > 0
(2.2)
with a top mass of 175 GeV. We ran ISASUGRA with these parameters, generating
the equivalent 24 parameter MSSM input for ISASUSY. We then used this input

–5–

to generate the expected values for the observables used in our analysis 1 . The
ISASUSY parameter set gives a slightly different mass spectrum and a relic density
Ωχ h2 = 0.089 which is a little lower than the WMAP limit but this does not affect
the validity of our conclusions. Important masses are given in Table 1, as generated
from ISASUSY.
2.3 Constraining the MSSM parameter space
Given a set of LHC observables O and our set of hypothesised MSSM parameters
PMSSM , we will shortly wish to evaluate p(PMSSM |O) and thus to find the region
of parameter space consistent with the data. This posterior probability is related to
the likelihood L(PMSSM ) = p(O|PMSSM ) by Bayes theorem:
p(O|PMSSM )p(PMSSM )
(2.3)
p(PMSSM |O) =
Z
where p(PMSSM ) represents our prior knowledge on the distribution of parameters,
and the normalization constant Z is the ‘Bayesian evidence’, given by the average of
the likelihood over the prior:
Z
Z = L(PMSSM )p(PMSSM )dNpar PMSSM
(2.4)
In our study, we assign points the following likelihood:


Y
(Oi (PMSSM ) − oi )2
p(O|PMSSM ) =
exp −
2σi2
i

(2.5)

where Oi (PMSSM ) is the predicted value of the ith observable oi , σi is the error in
Oi and the product runs over all observables.
In typical SUSY phenomenology problems such as that presented here, the posterior cannot be evaluated analytically and one can instead use a sampling approach.
Most popular are Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithms that draw samples in such a
way that the distribution of samples tends towards the unnormalised posterior distribution. This allows one to make inferences on parameter constraints while bypassing
the evaluation of the Bayesian evidence. Although this has proven successful in the
past in MSSM case studies, the methods (such as the Metropolis algorithm) become
far less efficient as the dimension of the parameter space increases, and additionally
they struggle in cases with a multimodal posterior where the most likely islands of
interest occupy a vanishingly small volume of the parameter space. Sadly, this is the
quintessential MSSM posterior, and previous examples have either used many CPU
years or have varied the step size as the sampling progresses from a large initial value
tuned to find disparate islands to a small value designed to explore the region around
each mode. One still has to choose sensible initial conditions for these algorithms, as
well as finding sensible step sizes in each parameter if one chooses not to vary them.
1

Note that we do not set the top, bottom and tau masses, Higgs vacuum expectation value and
strong coupling constant to the benchmark value as in [2], nor do we scale the Yukawa couplings to
more closely match mSUGRA.

–6–

A more recent approach is that of ‘nested sampling’ which targets the Bayesian
evidence first, subsequently obtaining samples from the posterior as a by product.
We here give a brief description and refer the reader to [7, 14] for more details.

Figure 2: Cartoon illustrating (a) the posterior of a two dimensional problem; and (b) the
transformed L(X) function where the prior volumes Xi are associated with each likelihood
Li .

Nested sampling [15] is a Monte Carlo method that calculates the evidence by
transforming the multi–dimensional evidence integral into a one–dimensional integral
that is easy to evaluate numerically. This is accomplished by defining the prior
volume X as dX = p(PMSSM )dNpar PMSSM , so that
Z
X(λ) =
p(PMSSM )dNpar PMSSM ,
(2.6)
L(PMSSM )>λ

where the integral extends over the region(s) of parameter space contained within
the iso-likelihood contour L(PMSSM ) = λ. The evidence integral, Eq. (2.4), can then
be written as
Z
1

Z=

0

L(X)dX,

(2.7)

where L(X), the inverse of Eq. (2.6), is a monotonically decreasing function of X.
Thus, if one can evaluate the likelihoods Li = L(Xi ), where Xi is a sequence of
decreasing values,
0 < XM < · · · < X2 < X1 < X0 = 1,
(2.8)
as shown schematically in Fig. 2, the evidence can be approximated numerically
using standard quadrature methods as a weighted sum
Z=

M
X
i=1

Li wi ,

(2.9)

where the weights wi for the simple trapezium rule are given by wi = 21 (Xi−1 −Xi+1 ).
An example of a posterior in two dimensions and its associated function L(X) is
shown in Fig. 2.

–7–

The summation in Eq. (2.9) is performed as follows. The iteration counter is
first set to i = 0 and N ‘active’ (or ‘live’) samples are drawn from the full prior
p(PMSSM ), so the initial prior volume is X0 = 1. The samples are then sorted in
order of their likelihood and the smallest (with likelihood L0 ) is removed from the
active set (hence becoming ‘inactive’) and replaced by a point drawn from the prior
subject to the constraint that the point has a likelihood L > L0 . The corresponding
prior volume contained within the iso-likelihood contour associated with the new live
point will be a random variable given by X1 = t1 X0 , where t1 follows the distribution
Pr(t) = NtN −1 (i.e., the probability distribution for the largest of N samples drawn
uniformly from the interval [0, 1]). At each subsequent iteration i, the removal of the
lowest likelihood point Li in the active set, the drawing of a replacement with L > Li
and the reduction of the corresponding prior volume Xi = ti Xi−1 are repeated, until
the entire prior volume has been traversed. The algorithm thus travels through
nested shells of likelihood as the prior volume is reduced. The mean and standard
deviation of log t, which dominates the geometrical exploration, are:
E[log t] = −1/N,

σ[log t] = 1/N.

(2.10)

Since each value of log t is independent,
after i iterations the prior volume will shrink
√
down such that log Xi ≈ −(i ± i)/N. Thus, one takes Xi = exp(−i/N).
Once the evidence Z is found, posterior inferences can be easily generated using
the final live points and the full sequence of discarded points from the nested sampling
process, i.e., the points with the lowest likelihood value at each iteration i of the
algorithm. Each such point is simply assigned the probability weight
pi =

Li wi
.
Z

(2.11)

These samples can then be used to calculate inferences of posterior parameters such
as means, standard deviations, covariances and so on, or to construct marginalised
posterior distributions.
The most challenging task in implementing nested sampling is to draw samples
from the prior within the hard constraint L > Li at each iteration i. The MultiNest algorithm [7,14] tackles this problem through an ellipsoidal rejection sampling
scheme. The live point set is enclosed within a set of (possibly overlapping) ellipsoids and a new point is then drawn uniformly from the region enclosed by these
ellipsoids. The ellipsoidal decomposition of the live point set is chosen to minimize
the sum of volumes of the ellipsoids. The ellipsoidal decomposition is well suited to
dealing with posteriors that have curving degeneracies, and allows mode identification in multi-modal posteriors. If there are subsets of the ellipsoid set that do not
overlap with the remaining ellipsoids, these are identified as a distinct mode and subsequently evolved independently. The MultiNest algorithm has proven very useful
for tackling inference problems in cosmology and particle physics(see e.g. [10,16–21])

–8–

typically showing two orders of magnitude improvement in efficiency over conventional techniques. We use this algorithm for exploring the posterior distributions in
this paper.

3. Focus point SUSY at the LHC
3.1 Conventional input measurements
Before explaining how to improve the LHC measurements in the focus point region,
we will reproduce the existing approach to provide a comparison for our later results.
Assuming that the LHC will not produce squarks or sleptons, mass measurements
are restricted to cascade decays of the form:
g̃ → χ̃0j q q̄ → χ̃0i q q̄l+ l−

(3.1)

where j > i. The neutralino decays give rise to kinematic endpoints in the dilepton
invariant mass distribution that will be recognisable as arising from three body decays
(by virtue of shape or possibly by using a wedgebox technique as in [22]). In fact, two
endpoints are visible for the focus point model considered here, arising from decays of
the χ̃02 and χ̃03 , and their positions are simply given by the difference mχ̃0i − mχ̃01 . The
most recent relevant study performed by members of the ATLAS collaboration [23]
gives an error of 0.5 GeV on mχ̃02 − mχ̃01 , and 1.5 GeV on mχ̃03 − mχ̃01 if we assume,
as these studies have, that we have correctly identified the neutralinos producing the
bumps. The resulting distribution is shown in figure 3 and would be very similar for
the benchmark point used in this study. We therefore assume for our study that the
neutralino mass differences have been determined to be the nominal values obtained
from the ISASUSY mass spectrum for our MSSM benchmark point, with the same
errors as those quoted in the ATLAS study.
Reference [2] further assumes that the χ̃01 and g̃ masses can be fixed to within
10% by kinematic fits, and the lightest Higgs mass could be obtained with an accuracy
of 0.25 GeV. Again, we assume these same errors, and use the nominal mass values
from our benchmark point spectrum for the reconstructed masses. Finally, one can
set limits on the squark and slepton masses based on their non-observation, which we
impose approximately by restricting the prior range for the squark and slepton mass
parameters. A summary of the observables used in our analysis is given in Table 2,
while the prior range used in our exploration of the MSSM parameter space is given
in Table 3.

–9–

Events/2 GeV/30 fb-1

200

150

100

50

0
0

20

40

60

80

100
120
Minv (GeV)

Figure 3: The dilepton invariant mass reconstructed by the ATLAS detector for a benchmark point in the focus point region (taken from reference [23]). Two kinematic endpoints
are clearly visible and can be measured precisely by fitting with the analytic form of the
three body endpoint shape.

– 10 –

We have performed a nested sampling of
the MSSM parameter space, using a log prior
on all parameters except the A parameters
for which we follow [2] in using the formula
A = Msinh(x), with M = 50 GeV. A log
prior is generally useful for parameters with
1
a scale uncertainty, while A = Msinh(x) is
Table 2: Set of observables used for the chosen since the A parameters can take ei‘conventional’ analysis of our focus point ther sign. For simplicity, we have further
benchmark point. All masses were calcu- restricted M1 and µ to be positive as this
ated using ISASUSY, while the errors are will not affect the validity of our conclusions.
quoted from the studies in [23] and [2]. For each point selected by MultiNest we
See text for further explanation.
run ISASUSY on the 24 MSSM parameters to
generate the mass and decay spectrum. We
then use the masses and neutralino mass differences to calculate the predicted values
of the observables given in Table 2 and evaluate the likelihood using equation 2.5.
Observable
mχ̃02 − mχ̃01
mχ̃03 − mχ̃01
mg̃
mh
mχ˜0

Value
59.5 ± 0.5 GeV
85.3 ± 1.5 GeV
850 ± 85 GeV
118.72 ± 0.25 GeV
106 ± 11 GeV

Parameters
M1 , M2 , µ, mA
tanβ
mg̃
1st and 2nd generation squark masses
3rd generation squark masses
slepton masses
At , Ab , Ac

Prior range
0.1 GeV – 4000 GeV
2 – 60
700 GeV – 4000 GeV
2000 GeV – 4000 GeV
1500 GeV – 4000 GeV
350 GeV – 4000 GeV
-4000 – 4000

Table 3: Prior ranges used in all fits for the 24 MSSM parameters.

Figure 4 shows the marginalised posterior in the (M1 ,µ) plane as evaluated by
MultiNest for this set of input measurements, and one can clearly see three solutions. Each of these has a lightest neutralino of different dominant character,
with the left-most island corresponding to the benchmark model2 . One can use the
points in this posterior to calculate astrophysical observables, and we used DarkSUSY
5.05 [24–27] with a custom interface to ISASUSY based on the Les Houches format [28]. The WIMP relic density and neutralino pair annihilation cross-section
at threshold (used to calculate the flux expected in indirect search experiments)
are shown in Figures 5 and 6, and we see that the effect of the extra islands is to
2

The results agree closely but not exactly with those shown in [2], but the differences can be
explained either by our slightly different procedure of handling the MSSM weak scale spectrum or
by the fact that we do not impose a Tevatron-inspired limit on the lightest chargino mass. This
latter cut restricted the phase space for the false solutions in [2] and, without it, we essentially get
extra points in the ‘wrong’ islands which contribute to raising the ‘wrong peaks’ in figures 5 and 6.

– 11 –

Figure 4: Marginalised posterior in the (M1 ,µ) plane, resulting from a 24D MultiNest
sampling of the weak scale MSSM parameters with the ‘conventional’ set of input measurements.

give us false regions of high likelihood orders of magnitude away from the correct
value. These would clearly destroy any reasonable prospect of accurately predicting
the relic density or gamma ray flux based on LHC measurements. Direct search
cross-sections divide into spin-dependent and spin-independent contributions, with
the spin-independent term enhanced by a factor of the square of the target nucleus
mass. The effect of false posterior regions at the LHC is to contribute an extra peak to
each of these terms, as shown in Figure 7 for the spin-independent neutralino-proton
direct detection cross-section and in Figure 8 for the spin-dependent neutralinoneutron direct detection cross-section (the spin-dependent proton-neutralino and
spin-independent neutralino-neutron cross-sections are very similar). We see a longer
tail on the spin dependent distribution than in [2], but this is almost certainly due
to MultiNest having explored the bino mode more thoroughly than their sampling
method.
3.2 New input measurements
To remove the false regions of the posterior in Figure 4, we need to find observables
at the LHC that are sensitive to neutralino mixing. Here we suggest one example in
the form of the shape of the dilepton invariant mass distribution, since the number
of events contributing to each bump in the distribution is sensitive to the couplings

– 12 –

0.1
0.06
0.08

0.05
0.04

0.06

0.03
0.04
0.02
0.02

0
0

0.01
0
10-1

0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18
Ωχh2

Figure 5: The relic density as predicted
from the ‘conventional’ set of LHC measurements.

102
10
<σ v> (10-26 cm3 s-1)

1

Figure 6: The neutralino pair annihilation cross-section at threshold as predicted from the ‘conventional’ set of LHC
measurements.

0.035
0.03

0.06

0.025

0.05

0.02

0.04

0.015

0.03

0.01

0.02

0.005

0.01

0

-8

10

10-7

0
10-4

-6

10
σSI(χ + p) (pb)

Figure 7:
The spin-independent
neutralino-proton
direct
detection
cross-section as predicted from the
‘conventional’ set of LHC measurements.

-3

10

σSD(χ + n) (pb)

Figure 8:
The spin-dependent
neutralino-neutron
direct
detection
cross-section as predicted from the
‘conventional’ set of LHC measurements.

of the relevant neutralinos producing the bumps. Tuning the WIMP components
has the effect of raising and lowering the two bumps, and thus changing the shape.
In general, tuning the neutralino couplings could also add or remove endpoints, or
change their interpretation (i.e. making an endpoint appear from a χ̃04 → χ̃01 l+ l−
decay rather than from a χ̃03 → χ̃01 l+ l− , etc). Although the dependence of the shape
on the neutralino components is non-trivial, we are helped in the case of heavy
scalars by the fact that we know from the LHC data that there are no on shell
sleptons contributing to the endpoints, and thus the shape is even more sensitive to

– 13 –

the neutralino couplings than in the generic case where one would complicate matters
by introducing greater dependence on the slepton masses.
In principle, one could model the shape of the dilepton invariant mass precisely at
a given point in parameter space by generating a large sample of Monte Carlo events
at that point, and passing them through a detector simulation. For a thorough
sampling of the 24 parameter MSSM involving millions of explored points, this is
clearly unfeasible, however, and we must use some shortcuts to encode the shape
information in a manner that is easy to calculate. Under the assumption that the
three body neutralino decays proceed dominantly through an off-shell Z boson 3 ,
the shape of the dilepton invariant mass distribution is a known function of the
neutralino masses, whose fit to the measured distribution is shown in Figure 3. The
integral can be used to calculate the ratio of the number of events arising from each
neutralino decay contributing to the dilepton invariant mass, which is related to the
branching ratios of the sparticles by:
BR(g̃ → ... → χ̃02 + X) × BR(χ̃02 → χ̃01 l+ l− )
BR(g̃ → ... → χ̃03 + X) × BR(χ̃03 → χ̃01 l+ l− )

(3.2)

where the first decay in the numerator and denominator can proceed through multiples steps provided they do not produce leptons. The ATLAS study in reference [23]
quotes a measured value of 1.4 ± 0.3 for this ratio, comparing favourably to their
theoretical value of 1.19, even in the presence of background and a detailed simulation of the ATLAS detector resolution. Our benchmark point has a slightly different
theoretical value of 1.46. The study in [23] further assumed that the χ̃03 and χ̃02 had
been correctly identified as the cause of the endpoints in the dilepton invariant mass
spectrum, an assumption that we do not wish to work with here since it presupposes knowledge of neutralino mixing which we are trying to determine in a general
manner.
There are other more trivial details of the shape of the dilepton invariant mass
distribution. It is clear that any parameter point capable of explaining the distribution in figure 3 must have a taller endpoint on the left, and a shorter endpoint on the
right (this is of course the same as using ratio information). It is also clear that only
two endpoints were observed, and hence any model that would have given more or
less than two endpoints is also not capable of explaining the observed distribution.
If we now assume we have not identified the neutralinos producing the endpoints, we must examine the general case where the number of χ̃0j → χ̃0i l+ l− decays
3

Our decay through Z boson assumption is in fact true in the focus point region since the sleptons
are very heavy, though a priori one can only set lower bounds on the slepton masses and hence
might encounter a systematic uncertainty due to this asssumption. In practise, however, we shall
find the ratio of the number of events contributing to each bump in the invariant mass distribution
is ≈50 times higher in one of the false solutions, and ≈5 times higher in the other which probably
exceeds any systematic correction to the ratio measurement.

– 14 –

contributing to the dilepton invariant mass distribution is given by:
N ∝ BR(g̃ → ... → χ̃0j + X) × BR(χ̃0j → χ̃0i l+ l− )

(3.3)

where the exact number of events depends on the cross-section for gluino production
and the efficiency of the kinematic cuts. Again, the first branching ratio shown could
in fact be the product of various decay processes that end with a χ̃0j and anything
else (excluding leptons), and could consist of multiple steps. Since we know (from
measurement) that all decay chains contributing to our dilepton plot started with
gluinos, however, we can confidently state that we would have seen two endpoints
if the two largest combined branching ratios of the form of equation 3.3 are close
in value while the third highest branching ratio is much lower. This encodes the
shape of the distribution in a way which is easy to evaluate quickly at many points
in parameter space, making it possible to scan or sample the parameter space to
reject points on the basis of shape.
We therefore reran the MultiNest sampling with the following additions. At
each point in the parameter space, we used the ISASUSY decay spectrum to work
out the combined branching ratios for all processes of the form given in equation 3.3.
The two highest of these branching ratios are assumed to have caused the observed
bumps in the dilepton invariant mass distribution, and the ratio of the number of
events contributing to each endpoint is obtained using the following generalisation
of equation 3.2:
BR(g̃ → ... → χ̃0p + X) × BR(χ̃0p → χ̃0q l+ l− )
(3.4)
BR(g̃ → ... → χ̃0r + X) × BR(χ̃0r → χ̃0s l+ l− )
The gluino cross-section and reconstruction efficiency cancel in this division and
thus do not need to be explicitly evaluated- we are indeed fortunate that squarks are
not contributing otherwise this procedure would not have worked. Note that our two
highest branching ratios can in principle come from any neutralino decay process, so
in principle we have endpoints arising from the decays χ̃0p → χ̃0q l+ l− and χ̃0r → χ̃0s l+ l− ,
where p,q,r and s can take any value as long as p > q and r > s (in the previous
section, we had p = 2, r = 3 and q = s = 1). We now assign a likelihood based on
the observables listed in Table 4, which simply comprise of generalisations of those
in the previous section plus the addition of the ratio measurement. Furthermore, we
assign zero likelihood to points that could not have produced the observed dilepton
distribution because they fell into the following categories:
1. Points in which the ‘wrong’ endpoint is highest, i.e. the kinematic endpoint
with the largest mll value is taller than the endpoint with the lowest mll value
2. Points in which the third highest combined branching ratio of the form of
equation 3.3 is more than 10% of the second highest branching ratio (this is

– 15 –

considered a sensible boundary of visibility).

Results of a MultiNest sampling in the
same parameter space as the previous subsection are shown in the (M1 ,µ) plane in figure 9, and the extra regions have been completely removed. Further investigation reveals that the vetos listed above are not the
1
dominant contribution to this improvement,
Np /Nr
1.5 ± 0.3
since both leave many points in both of the
Table 4: Set of observables used for incorrect regions. Rather, it is the ratio meathe ‘new’ analysis of our focus point surement that provides enough discriminabenchmark point. All masses were calcu- tion between them to improve the results,
ated using ISASUSY, while the errors are leading to a substantial decrease in likelihood
quoted from the studies in [23] and [2]. in the false regions. Since this is the ratio
Np /Nr is the ratio of the number of
between the two highest endpoints produced
events arising from the decays χ̃0p →
by the gluino cascade processes, this is really
χ̃0r l+ l− and χ̃0r → χ̃0s l+ l− , measured by
telling us that the “two bump” feature of the
fitting a functional form to the dilepton
dilepton invariant mass plot is a feature of
invariant mass distribution. See text for
the focus point model. The large spread in
further explanation.
this ratio between the different regions also
indicates that even a reasonably imprecise measurement of this quantity would be
enough to favour the correct region. We also note that the selected region has endpoints arising from χ̃02 → χ̃01 l+ l− and χ̃03 → χ̃01 l+ l− decays and hence, although we
had not assumed this advance, we have successfully inferred it from the data.
Observable
mχ̃0p − mχ̃0q
mχ̃0r − mχ̃0s
mg̃
mh
mχ˜0

Value
59.5 ± 0.5 GeV
85.3 ± 1.5 GeV
850 ± 85 GeV
118.72 ± 0.25 GeV
106 ± 11 GeV

The relic density and annihilation cross-section are shown in figures 10 and 11,
where it can immediately be seen that the ‘fake’ solution peaks are removed from the
annihilation cross-section prediction, thus allowing an accurate comparison of LHC
data with the forthcoming round of gamma ray results. The relic density prediction
is improved but still suffers from a lack of constraint at low values which is caused by
the effect of the A pole; resonant annihilation through the A boson leads to a large
reduction of the relic density for any model in which mA ≈ 2mχ̃01 . The direct search
cross-sections, meanwhile, enjoy a similar improvement to the annihilation crosssection, as seen in Figures 12 and 13, though the spin-dependent cross-section has a
tail to large values in which it is possible to get a larger cross-section by increasing
the amount of bino-Higgsino mixing or by increasing tanβ 4 . This would seem to be
irreducible at the LHC.
4

We thank Michael Peskin for this suggestion.

– 16 –

Figure 9: Marginalised posterior in the (M1 ,µ) plane, resulting from a 24D MultiNest
sampling of the weak scale MSSM parameters with the ‘new’ set of input measurements.
0.08

0.007

0.07

0.006

0.06
0.005
0.05
0.004
0.04
0.003
0.03
0.002

0.02

0.001
0
0

0.01
0
10-1

0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18
Ωχh2

Figure 10: The relic density as predicted from the ‘new’ set of LHC measurements.

1

102
10
<σ v> (10-26 cm3 s-1)

Figure 11: The neutralino pair annihilation cross-section at threshold (right)
as predicted from the ‘new’ set of LHC
measurements.

3.3 Discussion
Having demonstrated an improvement in the LHC capability at one benchmark point,
we now consider the generality of our result, along with any potential pitfalls. Firstly,

– 17 –

0.14
0.035
0.12
0.03
0.1
0.025
0.08

0.02

0.06

0.015
0.01

0.04

0.005

0.02

0

-8

10

10-7

0
10-4

-6

10
σSI(χ + p) (pb)

Figure 12: The neutralino-proton direct detection cross-section as predicted
from the ‘conventional’ set of LHC measurements.

-3

10

σSD(χ + n) (pb)

Figure 13: The neutralino-neutron direct detection cross-section as predicted
from the ‘conventional’ set of LHC measurements.

it is clear that the improvement in our results comes from using shape information,
and one must therefore carefully consider whether there are issues that might distort this shape. The dilepton invariant mass is a particularly clean signature, since
practically all SUSY backgrounds can be removed via ‘flavour-subtraction’ (i.e. one
plots the combination e+ e− + µ+ µ− − e+ µ− + µ+ e− ). This explains the precision of
the quoted ATLAS result which survived a rigorous detector simulation.
It is more likely that the method described here will fail if Nature presents a
focus point scenario with larger mass differences between the neutralinos such that
the endpoints are either obscured by the Z peak or, in the case where the mass
difference exceeds the Z mass, are not produced at all since the decay χ̃0j → Z χ̃01 is
open. One could also push the gluino mass to large values and reduce the overall
production cross-section at the LHC without violating any current constraints. In
such a case, the LHC is trivially bound to fail.
On the plus side, it is possible that the precision of the measurement could be
improved further by using inclusive signatures in addition to the endpoint information, using a method similar to that in reference [29]. The focus point is conceptually
simpler than most other regions of the parameter space, as the fact that the LHC
would only be producing gauginos means that any inclusive signature must be telling
us something about the gaugino sector. Thus, if dark matter is a gaugino, the focus
point could be one of the more promising cases to handle at the LHC rather than
one of the hardest, and this is a promising avenue for future work.
Finally, we consider the relic density prediction, and speculate as to whether
the low values arising from the A pole can be removed by any further LHC data.
Although mA is well in excess of 2mχ˜0 in the focus point region, there is no way a
1

– 18 –

priori to rule out low heavy Higgs masses. If one could measure a lower bound on mA ,
it is worth noting that the low values are substantially reduced for mA > 300 GeV
(Figure 14).
Previous studies have placed bounds on
the Higgs mass by either examining the Higgs
0.005
search reach for the LHC in the mA −tanβ
plane and determining which region is com0.004
patible with non-observation or by using the
0.003
measured mass difference between sparticles
to place bounds on the Higgs mass based
0.002
on its non-appearance in cascade decays [3].
0.001
Neither method is particularly useful here
since a rather large region of the mA −tanβ
0
0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18
search plane is compatible with the observaΩh
tion of only mh , while (mχ˜0 − mχ˜0 ) < 2mχ˜0
1
1
4
for
our
benchmark
point,
meaning
that
even
Figure 14: The relic density as predicted from the ‘new’ set of LHC mea- if the branching ratios were favourable enough
to produce heavy Higgs bosons in cascade
surements with a cut mA > 300 GeV.
decays, the only lower limit we could place
on the A mass would still be insufficient to rule out the low values. We therefore
consider it unlikely that the LHC could set a lower limit sufficient to reduce this
uncertainty on the relic density calculation, though it is not inconceivable that new
work on Higgs decays to SUSY particles might extend the search reach for the A
boson sufficiently to improve general limits. If evidence suggests that a focus point
scenario is realised in Nature, there is a clear incentive to pursue this line of enquiry.
χ

2

4. Conclusions
We have revisited the case of focus point neutralino dark matter at the LHC, for
which it was previously assumed that it was not possible to make accurate predictions of astrophysical observables due to poorly constrained neutralino mixing parameters. Using similar Bayesian sampling techniques as the previous literature, we
have demonstrated a method by which the shape of the dilepton invariant mass distribution can be used to remove false solutions and substantially improve predictions
of the annihilation cross-section at threshold and the direct search cross-sections.
The relic density prediction is also improved and could be significantly enhanced if
one could set a lower bound on the A mass. If Nature has chosen a focus point
scenario, we will thus be able to test the compatibility of LHC WIMP measurements
with astrophysical data without having to wait for a linear collider. This is particularly important given the rich astrophysical data sets expected over the next few

– 19 –

years, and given the high likelihood of obtaining a strong indirect detection signal in
focus point models.
Although there are still specific reasons why we might be unlucky at the LHC (we
are still dependent on favourable details of the mass spectrum), we remain optimistic
that the LHC will be able to make stronger statements on neutralino mixing than has
previously been assumed if Nature has chosen a model with heavy scalars. Applying
our technique to other such scenarios would be an interesting line of future work.

5. Acknowledgements
MJW gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the Science and Technology
Facilities Council, and wishes to thank Howie Baer, Michael Peskin, Edward Baltz,
Are Raklev, Giacomo Polesello, Csaba Balazs and the members of the Cambridge
Supersymmetry Working group for helpful discussions. FF is supported by a
research fellowship from Trinity Hall, Cambridge.

References
[1] WMAP Collaboration, E. Komatsu et. al., Five-Year Wilkinson Microwave
Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) Observations:Cosmological Interpretation, Astrophys. J.
Suppl. 180 (2009) 330–376, [arXiv:0803.0547].
[2] E. A. Baltz, M. Battaglia, M. E. Peskin, and T. Wizansky, Determination of dark
matter properties at high-energy colliders, Physical Review D 74 (2006) 103521.
[3] M. M. Nojiri, G. Polesello, and D. R. Tovey, Constraining dark matter in the MSSM
at the LHC, JHEP 0603 (2006) 063.
[4] J. L. Feng, K. T. Matchev, and F. Wilczek, Neutralino Dark Matter in Focus Point
Supersymmetry, Phys. Lett. B482 (2000) 388–399, [hep-ph/0004043].
[5] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., The ATLAS Experiment at the CERN Large
Hadron Collider, JINST 3 (2008) S08003.
[6] CMS Collaboration, R. Adolphi et. al., The CMS experiment at the CERN LHC,
JINST 3 (2008) S08004.
[7] F. Feroz, M. P. Hobson, and M. Bridges, MULTINEST: an efficient and robust
Bayesian inference tool for cosmology and particle physics, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron.
Soc. 398 (Oct., 2009) 1601–1614, [arXiv:0809.3437].
[8] H. P. Nilles Phys. Lett. B 115 (1982) 193.
[9] H. Baer, A. Mustafayev, E.-K. Park, and X. Tata, Collider signals and neutralino
dark matter detection in relic-density-consistent models without universality, JHEP
05 (2008) 058, [arXiv:0802.3384].

– 20 –

[10] S. S. AbdusSalam, B. C. Allanach, F. Quevedo, F. Feroz, and M. Hobson, Fitting the
Phenomenological MSSM, arXiv:0904.2548.
[11] E. Moulin, A. Jacholkowska, G. Moultaka, J. L. Kneur, E. Nuss, T. Lari,
G. Polesello, D. Tovey, M. White, and Z. Yang, Complementarity of gamma-ray and
LHC searches for neutralino dark matter in the focus point region, Physical Review
D 77 (2008) 055014.
[12] B. C. Allanach and D. Hooper, Panglossian Prospects for Detecting Neutralino Dark
Matter in Light of Natural Priors, JHEP 10 (2008) 071, [arXiv:0806.1923].
[13] H. Baer, F. E. Paige, S. D. Protopescu, and X. Tata, ISAJET 7.69: A Monte Carlo
event generator for pp, p̄p, and e+ e− reactions, 2003.
[14] F. Feroz and M. P. Hobson, Multimodal nested sampling: an efficient and robust
alternative to Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods for astronomical data analyses,
Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 384 (Feb., 2008) 449–463, [arXiv:0704.3704].
[15] J. Skilling, Nested Sampling, in American Institute of Physics Conference Series
(R. Fischer, R. Preuss, & U. V. Toussaint, ed.), vol. 735 of American Institute of
Physics Conference Series, pp. 395–405, Nov., 2004.
[16] M. Bridges, F. Feroz, M. P. Hobson, and A. N. Lasenby, Bayesian optimal
reconstruction of the primordial power spectrum, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 400
(Dec., 2009) 1075–1084, [arXiv:0812.3541].
[17] S. S. AbdusSalam, B. C. Allanach, M. J. Dolan, F. Feroz, and M. P. Hobson,
Selecting a model of supersymmetry breaking mediation, Physical Review D 80 (Aug.,
2009) 035017, [arXiv:0906.0957].
[18] F. Feroz, B. C. Allanach, M. Hobson, S. S. Abdus Salam, R. Trotta, and A. M.
Weber, Bayesian selection of sign µ within mSUGRA in global fits including WMAP5
results, Journal of High Energy Physics 10 (Oct., 2008) 64, [arXiv:0807.4512].
[19] R. Trotta, F. Feroz, M. Hobson, L. Roszkowski, and R. Ruiz de Austri, The impact
of priors and observables on parameter inferences in the constrained MSSM, Journal
of High Energy Physics 12 (Dec., 2008) 24, [arXiv:0809.3792].
[20] A. R. Raklev and M. J. White, Constraining the MSSM with Dark Matter indirect
detection data, arXiv:0911.1986.
[21] F. Feroz, J. R. Gair, M. P. Hobson, and E. K. Porter, Use of the MULTINEST
algorithm for gravitational wave data analysis, Classical and Quantum Gravity 26
(2009), no. 21 215003.
[22] Z. Kang, N. Kersting, S. Kraml, A. R. Raklev, and M. J. White, Neutralino
Reconstruction at the LHC from Decay-frame Kinematics, arXiv:0908.1550.

– 21 –

[23] U. De Sanctis, T. Lari, S. Montesano, and C. Troncon, Perspectives for the detection
and measurement of supersymmetry in the focus point region of mSUGRA models
with the ATLAS detector at LHC, 2007.
[24] P. Gondolo, J. Edsjo, P. Ullio, L. Bergstrom, M. Schelke, and E. A. Baltz,
DarkSUSY: Computing supersymmetric dark matter properties numerically, JCAP
0407 (2004) 008.
[25] M. Frank, T. Hahn, S. Heinemeyer, W. Hollik, H. Rzehak, and G. Weiglein, The
Higgs boson masses and mixings of the complex MSSM in the
Feynman-diagrammatic approach, JHEP0702 047 (2007).
[26] G. Degrassi, S. Heinemeyer, W. Hollik, P. Slavich, and G. Weiglein, Towards
high-precision predictions for the MSSM Higgs sector, European Physical Journal C
28 (2003) 133.
[27] S. Heinemeyer, W. Hollik, and G. Weiglein, Feynhiggs: a program for the calculation
of the masses of the neutral CP-even higgs bosons in the MSSM, 1998.
[28] P. Skands, B. C. Allanach, H. Baer, C. Balazs, G. Belanger, F. Boudjema,
A. Djouadi, R. Godbole, J. Guasch, S. Heinemeyer, W. Kilian, J.-L. Kneur,
S. Kraml, F. Moortgat, S. Moretti, M. Muhlleitner, W. Porod, A. Pukhov,
P. Richardson, S. Schumann, P. Slavich, M. Spira, and G. Weiglein, SUSY les
houches accord: Interfacing SUSY spectrum calculators, decay packages, and event
generators, JHEP 0407 (2004) 036.
[29] C. G. Lester, M. A. Parker, and M. J. White, Determining SUSY model parameters
and masses at the LHC using cross-sections, kinematic edges and other observables,
JHEP 0601 (2006) 080.

– 22 –

