A SELF-CONSISTENT MODEL OF THE CIRCUMSTELLAR DEBRIS CREATED BY
A GIANT HYPERVELOCITY IMPACT IN THE HD172555 SYSTEM

B.C. Johnson1, C.M. Lisse2, C.H. Chen3, H. J. Melosh4,1, M.C. Wyatt5, P. Thebault6, W.G.
Henning7, E. Gaidos8, L.T. Elkins-Tanton9, J.C. Bridges10, A. Morlok11

Accepted by the Astrophysical Journal October 22nd 2012

1

Department of Physics, Purdue University, 525 Northwestern Avenue, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA

johns477@purdue.edu
2

JHU-APL, 11100 Johns Hopkins Road, Laurel, MD 20723, USA

3

STScI 3700 San Martin Dr. Baltimore, MD 21218, USA

4

Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA

5

Institute of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge, CB3 0HA, UK

6
7

LESIA, Observatoire de Paris, F-92195 Meudon Principal Cedex, France
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, 8800 Greenbelt Rd., Greenbelt, MD 20771

8

Department of Geology and Geophysics, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, Hawaii 96822, USA

9

Department of Terrestrial Magnetism, Carnegie Institution for Science, Washington DC 20015, USA

10

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Leicester, LE1 7RH, UK

11

Department of Physical Sciences, The Open University, Walton Hall, MK7 6AA Milton Keynes, UK

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

1

Keywords: astrochemistry; infrared: stars; radiation mechanisms: thermal; techniques: spectroscopic;
stars: planetary systems: formation; protoplanetary disks

53 Pages, 7 Figures, 0 Table

Please address all future correspondence, reviews, proofs, etc. to:
Brandon C. Johnson
Department of Physics
Purdue University
525 Northwestern Avenue
West Lafayette, IN 47907
Johns477@purdue.edu

2

Abstract:
Spectral modeling of the large infrared excess in the Spitzer IRS spectra of HD 172555 suggests
that there is more than 1019 kg of sub-micron dust in the system. Using physical arguments and
constraints from observations, we rule out the possibility of the infrared excess being created by
a magma ocean planet or a circumplanetary disk or torus. We show that the infrared excess is
consistent with a circumstellar debris disk or torus, located at ~ 6 AU, that was created by a
planetary scale hypervelocity impact. We find that radiation pressure should remove submicron
dust from the debris disk in less than one year. However, the system’s mid-infrared photometric
flux, dominated by submicron grains, has been stable within 4% over the last 27 years, from
IRAS (1983) to WISE (2010). Our new spectral modeling work and calculations of the radiation
pressure on fine dust in HD 172555 provide a self-consistent explanation for this apparent
contradiction. We also explore the unconfirmed claim that ~1047 molecules of SiO vapor are
needed to explain an emission feature at ~8 m in the Spitzer IRS spectrum of HD 172555. We
find that unless there are ~1048 atoms or 0.05

of atomic Si and O vapor in the system, SiO

vapor should be destroyed by photo-dissociation in less than 0.2 years. We argue that a second
plausible explanation for the ~8 m feature can be emission from solid SiO, which naturally
occurs in submicron silicate “smokes” created by quickly condensing vaporized silicate.

1 – Introduction
According to the most widely accepted theories of planet formation (Ida & Lin 2004; Chambers
2004; Kenyon & Bromley 2004), the planets we see today in the solar system are the final
winners of a long series of violent impacts, mergers, and accretion events. In the very beginning
of a system, grains of heavy elements condense out of gaseous circumstellar disks and into dust

3

grains. Collisions and aggregational clumping result in the accretion of these grains into solid
bodies a few centimeters in diameter. Collective effects such as gravitational instabilities then
lead to the production of planetesimals a kilometer or more in diameter (Blum 2010). Once kmsized planetesimals are common, continued accretion yields protoplanets (often called embryos
or planetary cores) on timescales of 105 to 106 years, which continue to collide and merge into
full-sized planets. One or more planets in a system may grow to about 10 times the mass of
Earth, enough to capture large amounts of gas as they sweep through the nebula, creating deep
atmospheres like those of Jupiter and Saturn. The primordial phase of disk evolution, when giant
planets form, ends with the dissipation of all disk gas content. For most stars this process seems
to require 1 to 6 Myr, with 3 Myr often cited as a typical lifetime for gaseous disks (Pascucci et
al. 2006, Hernandez et al. 2007, Currie et al. 2009). Over the next few Myr, the remnant
primordial circumstellar dust is either blown out by the flux of stellar radiation, decelerated by
Poynting Robertson drag and accreted onto the primary, destroyed in collisions, or accreted onto
growing rocky planetesimals. Throughout the next ~30 Myr, rocky terrestrial protoplanets
continue to accumulate planetesimals near the primary and icy planets accrete icy planetesimals
outside the system’s ice line. By 100 Myr, current models have solar systems at a relatively
mature stage, with little accretional growth occurring (although significant surface evolution and
alteration can occur via impacts and deposition of a late veneer). Over the next Gyrs of the
primary star’s main sequence life, observable amounts of dust in a debris disk may be created by
the steady state grinding of planetesimals or the occasional large impact.

Thus, large bodies in solar systems grow and evolve via collisional accretion and fragmentation.
However, as much as we may want to understand the processes that created present day solar

4

system structures, evolutionary processing over the last 4.5 Gyr has erased much of the evidence.
Fortunately, we can learn about these processes by observing nearby young stars forming their
own planetary systems, because the same physical processes that formed the bodies & debris
clouds in the solar system are operating in these systems. By finding exo-analogs for solar
system structures such as the collisionally active Kuiper Belts in resolved circumstellar disks (e.g.,
Corvi, Wyatt et al. 2005, Lisse et al. 2012); the dense warm zodiacal clouds around stars such

as HD 69830, created by asteroid belt collisions (Beichman et al. 2005, Lisse et al. 2007); or the
massive collisional aggregation occurring in the HD 113766 system (Lisse et al. 2008), these
systems can help us learn more about the physics causing these processes to occur, what they
create, and how they evolve (Wyatt et al. 2007, Kriviov 2010).

Of particular interest for this work, we note that in the lunar formation event, the incoming Mars
sized planetesimal Theia must have impacted at a relative speed about equal to the escape
velocity for the Earth-Moon system (vescape = 12 km sec-1) (Canup 2004, 2008). Jackson and
Wyatt (2012) estimate that in addition to creating a substantial circumplanetary disk that
subsequently forms the Moon, this impact would create an ~1023 kg circumstellar debris disk,
which could be readily detectable around other stars by Spitzer 24 μm surveys for ~25 Myr after
the initial impact. As we show in Section 2, the Spitzer IRS spectra, imaging observations, and
the interferometric visibility of HD 172555 are consistent with emission from a circumstellar
debris disk or torus located at ~6 AU from the primary created by a planetary scale hypervelocity
impact. In Section 2 we also introduce several standing questions about the HD 172555 debris
disk.

Although submicron dust should be quickly removed from the system by radiation

pressure blowout, observations show that the system’s mid-infrared photometric flux, which is

5

dominated by emission from submicron dust, has remained constant within 4% over the last 27
years (Figure 1). We also examine the problems associated with the as yet unconfirmed
suggestion, made by Lisse et al. 2009, that there are 1047 molecules of SiO vapor in HD 172555.
These problems include a poorly constrained condensation lifetime of SiO as well as an
unknown photo-dissociation lifetime of SiO.

In Section 3 we consider the stability of fine dust in HD 172555. First we calculate the lifetime
of grains in HD 172555 due to radiation pressure blowout and Poynting Robertson drag (Section
3.1). Then we show that it is possible to construct a particle size distribution that is consistent
with our radiation pressure blowout calculations and the Spitzer IRS spectra of HD 172555
(Section 3.2). In Section 4 we provide constraints on the possible presence of SiO vapor in HD
172555. We show that it could take 103-104 yr for SiO vapor to condense onto existing grains
(Section 4.2). We then argue that, unless there are ~1048 atoms or 0.05

of Si and O vapor in

the system, SiO should be destroyed by photo-dissociation in less than 0.2 yr (Section 4.3 and
Section 4.4). Finally, in Section 5 we introduce the alternative possibility that the ~8 m feature
observed by Spitzer is emission from solid SiO rather than SiO in the gas phase.

2 – HD 172555: Discovery of a Silica-Rich Debris Disk
Dust grains orbiting a star absorb visible light from the primary and re-emit mainly in the
infrared, causing systems with abundant dust to have excess emission in the infrared (Backman
1993). In 2006, Chen et al. (hereafter Ch2006) published a Spitzer IRS 5-35 μm survey of 59 of
the brightest IRAS sources with large infrared excesses attributed to circumstellar dust. Of their
59 systems, 5 showed unusually strong, high contrast warm dust features: HD 113766A,  Corvi,

6

 Tel, HD 172555, and HR 3927. Ch2006 showed that they were able to explain the observed
excess emission spectra using a mix of crystalline and amorphous silicates and silica, and larger
“rubble” emitting as blackbodies. In 2009, as part of a detailed follow-up study of the most
interesting Ch2006 sources, Lisse et al. (2009) (hereafter Li2009) utilized absorption and
emission spectra of laboratory dust analogues coupled with lessons learned from modeling Deep
Impact and STARDUST cometary dust to identify HD 172555 as exhibiting a highly unusual
composition compared to the other IRAS-bright systems. The infrared excess of HD 172555, a
12 Myr old A5V star in the  Pictoris moving group, is dominated by emission from dust with
temperature ~340 K and a strong emission peak at ~9 μm (Figure 1, Figure 2), This peak at 9
μm is attributed to the Si-O bond vibration of amorphous silica and, along with a secondary 20
µm feature, is quite distinctive and unlike any known olivine or pyroxene emission spectra
(Figure 2, Li2009).

Modeling the Spitzer IRS spectrum of HD 172555 using a mix of submicron amorphous silica,
silicate, and metal sulfide dust particles, SiO gas, and large optically thick dust particles, Li2009
produced a greater than 95% confidence level match to the spectrum. They found some
kg of “fine” 0.1-1000 m dust, and at least

kg of large,

optically thick “rubble” emitting as blackbodies. Using both the maximum temperature of the
fine dust (as calibrated versus the Deep Impact experiment, Lisse et al. 2006) and the effective
temperature of the large rubble, ~200 K, they placed the dust populations at 5.8 ± 0.6 (1) AU
from the system’s A5V primary star. Ruling out other possible formation mechanisms, such as
shocks, stellar flares, or  Meteoroids, Li2009 concluded that the glassy silica must have been

7

formed in a giant hypervelocity impact, with an impact velocity greater than 10 km s-1, between
2 large (greater than MMercury) rocky, silicate-rich bodies at roughly 6 AU from the central star. In
addition to an abundance of glassy silica, the Spitzer spectrum also has a strong residual feature
centered at ~8 µm. Li2009 found the fundamental rotational-vibrational linear stretch complex of
the SiO vapor molecule was a good match to the residuals. (This feature cannot be seen in
Figure 1, because photospheric emission from HD 172555 has not been removed, but as shown
in Li2009, when the photospheric emission is removed, an 0.07 Jy excess is observed at 8 µm.)
Without the inclusion of SiO vapor, the Spectral model only corresponds to 0.03 Jy at 8 µm, an
error of ~70% (Li2009). Li2009 found that if the excess emission at 8 µm is due to SiO vapor
fluorescing at ~6 AU from the primary, the emission is produced by ~1022 kg or 1047 molecules
of optically thin SiO vapor. This finding further supported the conclusion that the HD 172555
debris disk was created by a massive hypervelocity impact, as SiO vapor is expected to be
produced via the dissociation of silicates (e.g., olivines and pyroxenes) following vaporization.

The Spitzer observations of HD 172555 are spatially unresolved, and analysis to date has relied
only on spectral decomposition. Since 2009, however, there have been several attempts to image
the HD 172555 debris disk that have given us spatial constraints on the location of the dust. An
observation, recently reported by Pantin & Di Folco (2011), using a so-called “lucky imaging”
VLT/VISIR 8-13 μm photometric imaging technique, is consistent with an axisymmetric
circumstellar torus located at ~6 AU. The 18 μm emission was also resolved using TReCS in
Smith et al. (2012) suggesting emission located at ~8 AU, consistent with the ~6 AU results of
Pantin & Di Folco (2011) and Li2009. Conversely, the 12 μm emission was not resolved by
TReCS. Inability to resolve the 12 μm emission, combined with N-band interferometric

8

visibilities from MIDI on VLTI, led Smith et al. (2012) to conclude that warm dust emitting at
10-12 μm is an axisymmetric circumstellar disk located somewhere within the 1-8 AU region.
All three observations argue against the possibility of an asymmetric or point source structure
for the observed excess infrared emission.

From the presence of meta-stable amorphous silica and SiO gas, Li2009 argued that the HD
172555 circumstellar debris cannot be in thermodynamic equilibrium. Further work focusing on
the dynamics of the HD 172555 debris disk has raised questions regarding the temporal stability
of the system (Lisse et al. 2010). E.g., it is not clear that fine dust on the order of ~1 µm can be
dynamically stable, against radiative blowout, in the radiation field of the HD 172555. Yet there
must be copious fine dust to produce the strong emission features seen in the mid-infrared. If
submicron dust is not dynamically stable something must be replacing it in a roughly constant
fashion. Additionally, the radiation field of this A5V star should produce copious amounts of UV
photons, shortward of 1500 Å, capable of photolytically destroying the SiO molecule, which has
a molecular binding energy of 8.26 eV (Tarafdar and Dalgarno 1990). Either SiO vapor is being
actively created or some other species is creating the observed 8 µm feature. Determining the
SiO lifetime against photo-dissociation or re-condensation into the solid state is thus of great
importance. Finally, the best fit particle size distribution (PSD) found by Li2009 using their
spectral decomposition technique has a very steep number density per unit grain size,
, where

is the particle radius. This slope is much steeper than canonical steady state

collisional distributions, which is given approximately by

for particles with

dispersal thresholds that are independent of particles size (Backman and Paresce 1993).
Although the system’s PSD implies that there is abundant submicron dust in the system, which

9

should be removed from the system by radiation pressure, the system’s mid-infrared photometric
flux has stayed fairly stable, within 4%, over 27 years, from IRAS (1983) to WISE (2010)
(Figure 1).

Given our current understanding of solar system formation and evolution, we investigate a
number of possible physical scenarios, including circumplanetary disks and magma-ocean
covered planets, to answer these stability concerns by creating dynamically and photolytically
stable collections of silica and SiO gas in HD 172555. We only consider major impact driven
events or high temperature outflows, as the amount of dust mass involved to emit the Jy-level
infrared emission detected by Spitzer at a distance of 29 pc is at least 1021 kg, a mass consistent
with a Ceres sized body (Li2009). However, on physical and observational grounds, we have
ruled out physical scenarios involving circumplanetary disks and magma-ocean covered planets.
Thus, we conclude the infrared excess of HD 172555 is produced by a circumstellar disk or torus
created by an initial giant impact between two planet-sized bodies. In the following sections we
explain the stability of submicron dust in HD 172555 and determine the conditions necessary to
keep SiO vapor present in the system. For the sake of completeness, the models which could
have plausibly produced large amounts of stable silica and SiO gas, but that we have ruled out
given the current set of observational data for HD 172555, are described in Appendix A.

3 – Stability of Fine Dust
In Section 2 we introduced several questions about the Li2009 study. Li2009 found that a steeper
than collisional PSD with a

is required to fit the Spitzer IRS spectrum of

HD 172555. This PSD corresponds to a system with mid-infrared emission dominated by

10

submicron grains, which should be quickly removed from the system by radiation pressure. This
quick removal of submicron grains seems to be at odds with the apparent stability of the system’s
observed mid-infrared photometric flux over 27 years (Figure 1). However, as we show in the
following sections, it is possible to construct a PSD that is both long-lived and consistent with
the Spitzer IRS spectrum. In Section 3.1 we calculate the lifetime of grains in HD 172555 due to
radiation pressure and Poynting Robertson drag. Our calculations show that glassy silica grains
between 0.02 µm and 1.5 µm in radius should be removed from the debris torus in less than one
year. In Section 3.2, based on the laboratory work of Takasawa et al. (2011), we argue that a
steeper than collisional PSD is consistent with dust being sourced by recent hypervelocity
grinding. We also show that it is possible to construct a PSD that is consistent with the
calculation of dust that will be blown out by radiation pressure and the Spitzer IRS spectra of HD
172555 (Figure 6 bottom).

3.1 – Radiation Pressure Blowout
To estimate the stability of fine dust we calculate the ratio of the radiation pressure force to
gravitational force as a function of particle size

( )

where

〈

and

( )〉

( )

are the luminosity and mass of HD 172555, is the velocity of light,

density of the grains,

is the radius of the grains, and 〈

coefficient for particles of radius

is the

( )〉 is the radiation pressure

averaged over the stellar spectrum (Artymowicz 1988).

11

Pictoris, a fellow 12 Myr old A5V member of the  Pictoris moving group (BPMG), has the
same effective temperature Teff = 8000 K as HD 172555. Thus, for particles of the same
composition and density, the
(

)(

values for HD 172555 are given by the following scaling

( )

( )

( )

are the luminosity, mass, and  values for 
and

) ,

where

,

,

and

(Artymowicz 1988), and

are the luminosity and mass of HD 172555 (Li2009). The calculated



values for ( )in HD 172555 are shown in Figure 3.

We can use the value of Beta for a dust particle to determine its long-term dynamical stability
versus the forces of stellar radiation pressure and gravity. For example, dust with
produced from parent bodies on circular orbits having
other hand, when

,

, will have stable orbits. On the

, the dust, produced from parent bodies on circular orbits having

, will move outward with a terminal radial velocity

[(

)(

)]

( )

(Su et al. 2005). For HD 172555, R ~ 6 AU is the radius at which the dust is created, G is the
gravitational constant, and

(Li2009).

Using the optical properties of obsidian, a majority amorphous silica species with ~75% SiO2
and ~14% Al2O3 by mole (Artymowicz 1988 and references therein), a composition that is
comparable to the ~69% SiO2, 10% MgO, and 9% Al2O3 mixture of Bediasite and obsidian

12

found for the “fine dust” in HD172555 (Li2009), Figure 3 shows that dust between 0.02 μm and
1.5 μm in radius will be removed from HD 172555 by radiation pressure. To estimate the rate at
which dust is removed from the torus we consider the crossing time,

( )

where is the minor radius of the torus. A best-fit model of the 18 μm resolved emission gives a
disk with a width d

AU (For detailed description the debris geometry see Figure 4).

Assuming that the disk can be approximated by a torus, the minor radius of the torus is about
half of the disk’s width or

AU (Smith et al. 2012). Smith et al. (2012) estimate that the

lower limit for disk width is

AU or

AU. Additionally, the surface area of the dust

( ) AU, where i is the inclination of the disk or torus (Li2009). If

requires

( ) AU, the torus would be optically thick and emit as a blackbody. The Spitzer IRS
spectrum is not consistent with blackbody emission, therefore, the torus must be optically thin
with

significantly greater than

( ) AU. Thus, we assume that

is on the order of

1 AU and leave it as a variable in all of our calculations. The imaging observations also show
that mid-infrared emission comes dominantly from a limited spatial region described by a disk or
torus and emission from dust outside of this torus or disk produces a negligible portion of the
observed infrared excess (Pantin & Di Folco 2011, Smith et al. 2012). Thus, when assessing the
photometric stability of the system we can safely neglect any emission from dust that is blown
out of the torus.

We find that dust between 0.02 μm – 1.5 μm in radius will be removed from the torus in

13

(

) yr (Figure 5). The lifetime of submicron dust,

(

) yr seems

inconsistent with observational evidence that the infrared excess of HD 172555, which is
dominated by emission from submicron dust, has appeared photometrically stable over the ~27
years from its IRAS discovery in 1983 to its re-observation by WISE in 2010 (Figure 1), let
alone its stability on the Myr timescales of the system’s age and the estimated circumstellar disk
lifetime calculated by Jackson & Wyatt (2012). However, we show next that it is possible to
construct a PSD that is consistent with the calculation of dust that will be blown out by radiation
pressure and the Spitzer IRS spectra of HD 172555 (Figure 6 bottom).

3.2 – Particle Size Distributions
New spectral modeling work, using the same dust composition found in Li2009 and the same
methods of Li2009, shows that additional PSDs are capable of giving a better than 95%
confidence level fit to the Spitzer IRS spectrum of HD 172555 (Figure 6 top). The mid-infrared
spectral modeling is degenerate in that any collection of dust particles that satisfies the following
integral equation will produce emission that is essentially identical to the observed Spitzer
spectrum. We have

∑∫

( (

))

(

)

( )

( )

where the subscript denotes each individual dust component of the ith composition (e.g. olivine,
silica,etc.),

(

) is the particle temperature for a particle of radius

distance R from the primary,
radiance at wavelength ,

and composition at a

is the distance from Spitzer to the dust,
(

is the blackbody

) is the emission efficiency of the particle of composition

14

at wavelength

and particle size ,

is the differential PSD, the integral is over all sizes,

and the sum is over all compositions. In practice, for a spectrum with strong infrared emission
features, the compositional mix of materials is relatively uniquely defined. The overall run of
temperature with particle size is as well, which helps specify the location of the dust with respect
to the central star. The size distribution of the dust can have some play or flexibility in it; a
population of 1-10 um silicaceous dust, for example, will produce both strong features and some
mid-infrared continuum; a population of extremely small (< 1 μm) particles, which produces
only strong emission features plus a population of extremely large (>100 μm) particles, which
produces only continuum, may produce similar model infrared spectra, and depending on the
quality of the observed spectrum, it may be difficult to distinguish between the two.

The non-unique nature of the spectral modeling allows us to test additional PSDs that can
potentially yield a better than 95% confidence level fit to the Spitzer IRS spectrum (as did
original PSD published by Li2009; Figure 6). For a single power law PSD, the best-fit PSD
is

(this is the same PSD published by Li2009; Figure 6 top). Figure 6

middle shows a broken power law, with

below 1 μm and

above 1 μm. Motivated by calculation of

for obsidian grains, we show that a PSD with

with a reduction in the number of grains between 0.1 μm and 1 μm is also
viable (Figure 6 bottom).

Although the three PSD’s in Figure 6 look very different, they have many similarities. All of
the PSDs are very steep with approximately

compared to the canonical

steady state distribution given approximately by

for particles with dispersal

15

thresholds that are independent of particles size (Backman and Paresce 1993). Although the
PSD’s have particles up to 100 μm in them, these steep PSDs have most of their mass contained
in the small particles and all of these PSDs correspond to 1019-1020 kg of submicron dust. After
removal of the emission created by the PSDs there is still a large 200 K blackbody signature as
described in Li2009 (Figure 2). Following Li2009 and assuming that this emission is created by
the smallest particles capable of emitting as blackbodies ~100 μm, all three PSDs require the
addition of

kg of large “rubble”. Following Li2009 we call the warm 340 K dust

described by the PSDs “fine dust” and the larger particles emitting as 200K blackbodies, which
are not included in the PSDs, “rubble”. The temperature difference between the “rubble” and
“fine dust” is expected, because the large optically thick “rubble” particles co-located with the
“fine dust” are much better at radiating heat and needs only to reach a color temperature of ~ 200
K to establish energy balance with the incident starlight.

Lab work by Takasawa et al. (2011) shows that a much steeper-than-collisional size distribution
is consistent with PSDs created by hypervelocity impacts. Takasawa et al. (2011) measured the
size distribution for seven hypervelocity shots with impact velocities ranging from 9-61 km/s.
The average slope of the PSDs for the seven shots gives

(Takasawa et al.

2011). Although they use a range of impact velocities, there is no obvious correlation between
the slope of the PSD and the impact velocity.

We believe the steeper than collisional PSDs found for hypervelocity impacts in the laboratory
indicates that the steeper than collisional PSDs derived for the “fine dust” in HD 172555 by
Li2009 implies that most of the “fine dust” around HD 172555 is sourced by hypervelocity

16

impacts. However, we do not believe this “fine dust” was created by the initial planetary scale
hypervelocity impact, but by subsequent hypervelocity impacts between sub-millimeter-sized
particles similar to those used by Takasawa et al. (2011). Other support for a constant
hypervelocity grinding scenario is produced by dynamical modeling of the circumstellar debris
disk created by the Moon forming impact, which shows that typical collision velocities in the
circumstellar disk are

km s-1 (Jackson and Wyatt 2012). Although this velocity depends on

the details of the orbital elements of the debris, the study of Jackson and Wyatt (2012) shows that
hypervelocity grinding is not unprecedented.

In addition to being sourced by hypervelocity impacts, these steep PSDs also require that the
particles have not had time to become a steady state collisional distribution. The time it takes for
particles to relax to the steady state collisional distribution is their collisional lifetime. Following
Wyatt et al. (1999) we find the collisional lifetime of the smallest particles that dominate the
surface area of the torus is given by

( )

where

yr is the orbital timescale at 6 AU, and

is the fractional cross

sectional area of the torus that the particles occupy. The cross sectional area of the dust is
(

(

)

m2 (Li2009). Combining this we find

)(

)

( )

17

To observe a steep PSD with

the fine dust must have only been created

within a collisional timescale. As previously stated, the canonical steady state distribution with
is for particles with dispersal thresholds that are independent of particle size
(Backman and Paresce 1993). The dispersal threshold,

, is the specific incident energy

required to cause a catastrophic collision, where a catastrophic collision is one where the mass of
the largest object remaining after a collision is half the mass of the largest object before the
impact. It is possible that we are observing a steady state PSD if the dispersal threshold
(Wyatt et al. 2011). This dependence is significantly steeper than typical dispersal
threshold size dependences with approximately

(Benz and Asphaug 1999).

Based on the values from Figure 3, we expect that the PSD agreement with laboratory studies
should only apply to dust larger than ~1 μm, as the submicron dust is still removed on a time
scale of

(

) yr by radiation pressure. Thus the

PSD (Figure 6 top)

corresponds to a system in which the submicron dust is somehow bound to the system and long
lived. If the debris torus is optically thick enough to reduce the effective luminosity of HD
172555 from

to

within the torus, then values for obsidian (Figure 3)

would be ~10 times smaller. This would make

for dust of all sizes meaning no radiation

pressure blowout would occur. Without any reason to believe the debris torus would be optically
thick at the peak wavelength in the HD 172555 spectral energy distribution, we conclude that
this situation is unlikely.

18

The PSD with

and a reduction in the number of grains between 0.1 μm and 1

μm (Figure 6 bottom), reconciles the apparent contradiction of mid-infrared emission that is
photometrically stable over 27 years (Figure 1) and dust between 0.02 m – 1
being removed from the torus in

(

m in radius

) yr by radiation pressure (Figure 5). As

previously discussed this PSD provides a better than 95% confidence level fit with the Spitzer
IRS spectrum and should remain stable over a lifetime equal to the collisional lifetime of the
torus, which is determined by the lifetime of the largest object in the debris disk and could be
longer than 25 Myr (Jackson and Wyatt 2012). For obsidian, Figure 3 illustrates that

for

particles between 0.02 µm and 1.5 µm and thus they should be quickly ejected from the system
by radiation pressure. We argue that the difference between calculated size of the blowout grains
(Figure 3) of 0.02 µm - 1.5 µm and the blowout grain size of 0.1 μm -1 μm obtained from the
spectral modeling (Figure 6 bottom) are trivial considering the uncertainties associated with
each calculation.

The calculation of

assumes the particles are ~75% SiO2 and ~14% Al2O3 by mole

(Artymowicz 1988 and references therein) while the spectral modeling of Li2009 shows that the
“fine dust” is dominated by a combination of Bediasite and obsidian with an average
composition that is ~69% SiO2, 10% MgO, and 9% Al2O3. Although we have neglected species
with mole percent less than 5%, this comparison shows that the obsidian used in Figure 3 is only
an approximate match to the “fine dust” in HD 172555. As shown in equation 1,
is the bulk density of the grains, so if
(1988),

, where

is larger than the 2370 kg m-3 used by Artymowicz

could be somewhat smaller than the values shown in Figure 3. Another source of

uncertainty comes from the degeneracy associated with the PSDs and spectral modeling

19

described at the beginning of this section. Although, the submicron obsidian grains with
will spiral into the primary in 104-106 yr due to Poynting Robertson drag, as long as the fine dust
is replenished by collisions, the emission will remain stable over a lifetime equal to the
collisional lifetime of the torus, which could be longer than 25 Myr (Jackson and Wyatt 2012).

4 –Constraints on Possible Presence of SiO Vapor
The claim, made by Li2009, that there are 1047 molecules of SiO vapor in HD 172555 is
currently unconfirmed. In this section we explore the conditions necessary to keep 1047
molecules of SiO vapor in HD 172555 over reasonable timescales. In Section 4.1 we show that if
SiO vapor is present in the system, the vapor is not in equilibrium with the dust. Then in Section
4.2 we show that it could take 103-104 yr for SiO vapor to condense onto existing grains. In
Section 4.3 we estimate the photo-dissociation rate of SiO and in Section 4.4 we consider the
chemistry of a self-shielded torus where SiO is created at the same rate it is destroyed by
photolysis. Showing that, unless there is ~1048 atoms or 0.05

of Si and O vapor in the

system, SiO should be destroyed by photo-dissociation in less than 0.2 yr. Finally, in Section 5
we introduce the possibility that Spitzer has observed emission from solid SiO rather than SiO in
the gas phase.

4.1 – Equilibrium of SiO Vapor-Solid System
Assuming the SiO vapor is in thermal equilibrium with the SiO2 dust, we can estimate the
equilibrium vapor pressure of SiO above solid SiOx at a temperature of ~340 K, the approximate
temperature of the fine silica dust found by Li2009. We make the estimate using an empirical

20

formula derived by Ferguson and Nuth (2008) for the equilibrium vapor pressure of SiO above
solid SiOx with a stoichiometric x=1,
(

⁄

)

) ( ⁄ )

(

At 340 K the formula gives
is even lower,

. If we use

(7)
K, the equilibrium vapor pressure

. To convert pressure to number of molecules, we assume that SiO

vapor is the only vapor present in the system and treat it as an ideal gas with pressure,

( )

where

is Boltzmann’s constant. Assuming the SiO

the number of SiO vapor molecules

vapor is in equilibrium with the fine dust, it will have a temperature

K. Lastly, we

assume the SiO vapor is co-spatial with the dust and in a torus with a volume

(

where

( )

) m

is the major radius of the torus and , the minor radius of the torus.

This leads to

(

)

(

)

which is 30 orders of magnitude less than the 1047 molecules of SiO vapor predicted by Li2009.
Thus, if there are 1047 molecules of SiO vapor in the system, they are not in equilibrium with the
21

dust. A model of condensation of glassy silicate material in an impact produced vapor plume
predicts that a significant portion of the vaporized material does not condense during its initial
expansion into space (Johnson and Melosh 2012a, Johnson Melosh 2012b). Thus, the presence of
abundant SiO vapor, which is out of equilibrium and still condensing onto amorphous silica dust,
is an expected outcome for material condensed from an impact produced vapor plume. This
process requires impact velocities higher than ~15 km s-1 for a non-porus silica impactor and
target with lower impact velocities required for less refractory and/or more porous materials
(Melosh 2007, Johnson and Melosh 2012a).

4.2 – Timescale for Condensation
As discussed in Section 3.2, Dynamical modeling, of the circumstellar debris disk created by the
Moon forming impact, shows that typical collision velocities in the disk are

km s-1 (Jackson

and Wyatt 2012). These high collisional velocities are a product of the inclined and eccentric
orbits of the dust particles that are scattered when making close encounters with Earth. Assuming
a similar sized planet is scattering particles in the HD 172555 debris torus, we expect that
km s-1. Although vapor created in an initial

particles should collide with velocities of

hypervelocity impact starts with an initial eccentricity and inclination, we expect that any initial
eccentricity or inclination should be quickly damped down. Thus dust particles will initially
move through the vapor with relative velocities of

. The initially large relative velocity of

dust particles with respect to the vapor will decay in a time

, such that the dust particle hits

a mass of vapor equivalent to its mass, or

(

22

)

kg m-3 is the assumed density of the dust,

where

collision velocity,

m s-1 is the assumed

is the radius of the dust, and all other variables have been previously

defined. Solving equation 11 using the estimate of 1047 molecules of SiO made by Li2009 we
find
(

)(

(

)

)

For submicron dust, any inclination or eccentricity causing a relative velocity with respect to the
vapor should decay in less than a year. We expect that most of the vapor will condense onto the
submicron dust, which dominates the surface area of the debris (Section 3.2). Because this dust
has little or no relative velocity with respect to the vapor, we expect that condensation will occur
primarily by diffusion. Assuming a sticking coefficient of unity, we can estimate the time it takes
the vapor to condense as

(

where
Then

)

is the number of SiO molecules and
is the molecular flux given by

given by

is the surface area of the dust particles.
, where

, and the thermal velocity

estimated the surface area of the fine dust to be
all of this we find

23

is the number density of SiO
m s-1 at

K. Li2009
m2. Combining

(

)(

)

(

)

This result is independent of the total amount of SiO vapor in the system. This estimate also
assumes that the SiO vapor is at the same temperature, ~340K, as the warmest fine dust. This
assumption is likely a lower limit on the SiO vapor temperature, making our lifetime estimate a
maximum condensation lifetime. Thus, if we are observing HD 172555 within 103-104 yr of the
initial impact that created the dust torus, we cannot rule out the existence of SiO vapor using
arguments based on the condensation timescale.

4.3 – Timescale for SiO Photo-destruction
The long condensation lifetime of SiO vapor in HD 172555 allows us to treat material in the
vapor phase and dust as a completely separate chemical system, simplifying the chemistry
substantially. Although SiO vapor has a long condensation lifetime, we must also estimate the
rate of the removal of SiO via the photo-dissociation reaction

. The flux of

photons able to dissociate the SiO molecule at 6 AU from the HD 172555 primary is given by

(

where

)

∫

(

)

is the spectral flux density of HD 172555 at a distance of 6 AU, and

is

the maximum wavelength photon that can dissociate the SiO molecule (dissociation energy =
8.26 eV; Tarafdar and Dalgarno 1990). Following Ch2006, we assume that the HD 172555
primary has solar metallicity, log(g) = 4.5, and an effective temperature

24

K. We then

estimate the stellar photospheric flux, which yields

, using the appropriate stellar photospheric

emission model (Kurucz 1992). Combining this, we find the value of

(

)

quoted in equation 15.

Following Tarafdar and Dalgarno (1990) we use

(

)

SiO photo-dissociation cross-section at

m2 to estimate the

. The lifetime of a free SiO molecule at 6

AU from the primary is then given by

(
(

)

(

)

)

Thus, if SiO is not optically thick at

, it will be destroyed in less than 0.01 yr by

photo-dissociation. To estimate whether we expect
thick at

SiO molecules to be optically

, we must compare the cross-sectional area of the SiO molecules to the

cross-sectional area of the torus containing those molecules. The total cross-sectional area of
SiO molecules is

(

m2

)

(17)

While the total cross-sectional area of the circumstellar torus is

(

) m2

(18)

25

where

AU. With

(

should be optically thick at

we expect that

)

, and every photon of

SiO molecules
should dissociate one

SiO molecule. This increases the photo dissociation lifetime estimate to

(

)

(

)

This lifetime implies that to be observing 1047 molecules of SiO vapor, we must either be
observing HD 172555 within 0.2 yrs of the original impact, which would be extremely
fortuitous, or SiO is being replenished at an unrealistically high rate. This short lifetime is also
inconsistent with observations of system’s mid-infrared photometric flux, which has remained
constant within 4% over the last 27 years (Figure 1).

4.4 – Photochemistry of a self-shielding torus
So far we have only considered the photo dissociation of SiO neglecting much of the possible
chemistry of the system. In Section 4.3 we showed that the SiO vapor will be optically thick at
wavelengths

In this section we consider the possibility that SiO is self-shielded

against photo-dissociation. Note that “self-shielding” does not mean that there is no photolysis
occuring, only that it is confined to the surface of an optically thick torus and that the reformation back reaction creates SiO at the same rate it is destroyed.
The equilibrium chemistry of a self shielded SiO torus is dominated by four reactions. The first
reaction is the photo-dissociation reaction

26

SiO

h

(20)

Which has a rate coefficient

(

Where

)

(

)

is the fraction of the surface area of the torus occupied by SiO, as seen by photons of

wavelength

. This term must be added because atomic Si vapor may also shield the

SiO at

and vice versa. SiO is dissociated by photons with

ionization of Si occurs at
sections, with

(

while the first

. The two species also have very similar photo-crossm and

)

wavelengths

(

)

(

)

m

for

(van Dishoeck 1988). To make order of magnitude estimates for

species abundance, we approximate

(

which implies

(

)

), where

is the fraction of the surface area of the torus occupied

by Si, as seen by photons of wavelength

. This assumes that

,where

is the

fraction of the surface area of the torus occupied by O, as seen by photons of wavelength
. This assumption is valid because O, which has a first ionization energy of ~13.62
eV requiring photons of wavelength
(

)

(

)

, has a maximum value of

given by

. For similar reasons, we have also neglected the ionization of
27

SiO, which occurs at

(Tarafdar and Dalgarno 1990). For our estimates we also

approximate

(

m

)

(

m

)

.

(23)

The second reaction we consider is the radiative association reaction

SiO

h

(24)

m3 s-1 (Andreazza et al. 1995). At

which occurs with a rate coefficient
a temperature of ~340 K the association rate coefficient is

The third reaction we consider if the photoionization of Si

Si

h

Si

(25)

which has a rate coefficient

(

)

(

)

(

)

28

m3 s-1.

As we will show below, Si is largely neutral and self-shielded from photoionization. Thus, we do
not consider the higher ionization levels of Si.

The 4th and final final reaction we consider is the radiative recombination reaction

Si

Si

h

(27)

m3 s-1 (Nahar 1995). The equilibrium between the

where the recombination rate

photo-dissociation of SiO and its radiative association reaction gives the following

[ ][ ]

[

(

]

where [ ]

)

[

]

, is the concentration of species

(

and

)

is the number of species

in

the torus. The equilibrium between the ionization of Si and the radiative recombination gives the
following

[

]

(

which assumes that [

(

)

]

[

)

[ ]

[

][

]

[

]

(

)

] since Si+ is the only ion we have considered and we have

neglected other possible sources of electrons like the stellar wind and easily ionized metal
atoms. Solving these equations we find

29

(

)

(

(

)

)

(

(

)

)

and

√

(

(

)

)

Figure 7 shows that if SiO vapor is produced at the same rate it is destroyed by photodissociation in the system, then for 1047 SiO molecules to be present, there must also be abundant
atomic Si and O vapor in the system. The figure also shows that the total number of ions, atoms,
and molecules in the vapor phase must be
corresponding to more than
possible to have

kg or

of vapor in the system. Although it is

of vapor in the system, this would make the HD172555 debris disk

truly unique.

So far we have also neglected the constraints that the initial composition of vaporized material
give us. In Section 4.1 we briefly mentioned the model of Johnson and Melosh (2012a), which
predicts that impact produced silicate vapor does not condense efficiently during its initial
expansion into space. Assuming the vaporized material is initially composed dominantly of a
combination of silica (SiO2), olivine ([Mg, Fe]2SiO4), and pyroxene ([Mg, Fe]SiO3), the

30

uncondensed vapor will have
system and

, where

is the total number of Si atoms in the

is the total number of O atoms in the system. If there are no major mechanisms to

remove Si or O from the system, the constraints of

and

coupled with the results illustrated

in Figure 7, imply that

.

(33)

So far we have neglected the possible effects of the radiation force on the vapor molecules and
atoms. The ratio of the radiation force to the gravitational force

has been calculated for atomic

Si, O, and Si+ in the  Pictoris system (Fernández et al. 2006). Scaling the

values as described

in Section 3.1 we find

(

For

)

.

(34)

, the particles will quickly be removed from the system by the radiation force. Thus,

atomic O will not be removed from the system by the radiation force, but Si atoms will. Using
the radial velocity equation (equation 2), we estimate the time it will take Si to be removed from
the system to

0.1 yrs. The large uncertainty in

makes it impossible to estimate what

effect the radiation force will have on Si+.

These estimates on the effect of the radiation force are only valid if the torus is optically thin at
the wavelengths corresponding to the atomic transitions.

Following Hilborn (1982) and

Fernández et al. (2006), the wavelength-integrated cross-section of a line transition is

31

(

where

and

)

(

)

are the degeneracies of levels

spontaneous emission from level

to , and

and ,

is the Einstein coefficient for

is the wavelength of the transition. Then the

radiation force on a single atom is given by

∑

where

(

)

is the stellar flux per unit wavelength at the line center. Fernández et al. (2006) argue

that the low temperatures and densities in the Pictoris disk imply that radiative de-excitations
are much faster than collisional or radiative excitations, implying that

or all absorptions are

from the ground state. Using this assumption, and atomic data from the NIST Atomic Spectra
Database, version 2.0 (Martin et al. 1999) we find the

transition of Si will

dominate the radiation force on Si. It is a good example of a strong transition with
,

, and

, with a typical

. The Si atoms in the torus will
m , or

be optically thick at line transition wavelengths as long as
. Thus, if

, Si will be quickly removed form the torus in

0.1 yrs unless efficient braking by collisions with species with

32

occurs.

To estimate the conditions necessary for efficient braking to take place, we estimate the mean
free path of vapor molecules in the torus as

(√

) , where

m2 is a typical

molecular collisional crossection and is assumed to be approximately equal for all the vapor
species and

is the total number density of vapor. The mean free path will be

much less than the size of the torus as long as

(

)

. Thus, if

, an Si atom will undergo many collisions with particles with

(

)

before it can leave

the torus. These collisions will act as a drag force on the Si, keeping Si atoms bound to the torus
and reducing its effective Beta (Fernández et al. 2006). Thus, for the
required to keep 1047 molecules of SiO vapor stable against photo-dissociation, Si will not be
blown out of the torus by radiation pressure.

5 – Solid SiO
If there are less than 1048 molecules of O and Si vapor in the system, SiO will be short lived and
some other material must explain the emission feature at 8 m, a wavelength region dominated
by vibrational lines of SiO and SiO2. Considering that the SiO stretch complex is centered at ~8
μm (Drira et al. 1997), the next most obvious candidate source is solid SiO. Hallenbeck et al.
(1998, 2000) show that a shoulder feature at ~8 μm, similar to the feature seen in the Spitzer
spectra of HD172555, naturally occurs in experiments involving the quick condensation of
submicron dust grains (termed “smokes” by the authors) from MgO

SiO vapor. After a thermal

annealing of the condensed silica/silicate grains, the ~8 μm feature attributed to solid SiO starts
to disappear (Hallenbeck et al. 2000). However, the ~8 μm feature caused by solid SiO is very
stable at temperatures below ~500 K. At 340 K it would take longer than the age of the universe

33

to thermally anneal the grains (Hallenbeck et al. 2000).

Once annealed the “smokes” are

composed of the familiar species, tridymite (SiO2), periclase (MgO), Mg2SiO4 olivine, and
MgSiO3 pyroxene. Since the solid SiO feature is only seen in vapor condensates, we are again
lead to consider impacts with impact velocities greater than ~10 km s-1, which have enough
kinetic energy to partially vaporize bulk silicates (Melosh 2007). This alternative explanation is
consistent with the conclusion made by Li2009 that the HD 172555 debris disk was created by a
massive hypervelocity collision with an impact velocity greater than 10 km s-1.

6 – Discussion
One timescale we have neglected in our discussion is the time is takes for an initially clumped
spatial distribution of debris to become circular. In Jackson and Wyatt’s (2012) numerical study
of the circumstellar debris disk created by a Moon forming impact, they find the initial clumped
spatial distribution of debris takes 104-105 yr to become axisymmetric. The VLT lucky imaging
and MIDI visibility modeling of HD 172555 implies that the debris disk/torus of HD 172555 is
axisymmetric (Pantin & Di Folco 2011, Smith et al. 2012). Assuming that the 104-105 orbit
timescale for circularization can be scaled to the orbital timescale at 6 AU from the HD 172555
primary, we estimate it would take between

for the HD 172555 debris disk

to become axisymmetric following an initial giant hypervelocity impact. The circularization
timescale
lifetime of SiO vapor,

is at least 10 times longer than the maximum condensation
(Section 4.2). If

is an accurate

estimate for the minimum age of the HD 172555 debris disk, then all of the SiO vapor created in
the initial massive impact will have condensed onto existing grains. Either SiO gas is being
continuously created, the SiO gas is all condensed into an amorphous solid phase, or simple

34

dynamical models of the system do not suffice to accurately model it. E.g., scattering of the
circumstellar debris by a planet more massive than Earth could cause the HD 172555 debris disk
to become axisymmetric on a shorter timescale than the estimates of Jackson and Wyatt’s
(2012). It is apparent that more detailed dynamical modeling of the HD 172555 debris disk is
needed.
The Herschel GASPS key program detections of the atomic O 63
estimates an atomic oxygen mass of

, where

m line in HD 172555

is the distance of the oxygen to

the star in AU (Riviere-Marichalar et al., astro-ph 2012). Assuming the oxygen is co-spatial with
the dust are

AU, this corresponds an oxygen mass of

the abundant Si and O vapor, ~1048 atoms or 0.05

. In Section 4.4 we estimate

, are required to keep SiO vapor from

being destroyed by photo-dissociation in less than 0.2 yr. Thus, the observations of RiviereMarichalar et al. (2012) show that there is more than enough oxygen in the system to keep 1047
molecules of SiO vapor stable against photo-dissociation. However, if follow up observations do
not detect SiO vapor the 8 μm feature has to be explained by some previously overlooked
mechanisms, the most likely of which being emission from solid state SiO.

The mid-infrared lucky imaging of Pantin & Di Folco (2011) and the imaging and mid-infrared
interferometry of Smith et al. (2012) suggest that there may be some (~0.5 to 1 AU) separation
of the 10 and 20 um emitting regions, with the longer wavelength emission coming from regions
farther from the central star. If true, this could act as a verification of the constant hypervelocity
grinding model: smaller, hotter dust, producing the bulk of the 10 m radiation, is concentrated
near the collision region, where the nodes of the rubble orbits intersect, while the large, dark,

35

cold rubble first released by the initial massive planetesimal-planetesimal impact dominates the
emission outside of the interaction region, near the apoapsis.

7 – Conclusion
We find that the observed infrared excess of HD 172555 corresponds to a dusty disk or torus,
which is located at ~6 AU from the primary and was created in a recent planetary scale
hypervelocity impact. Our new spectral modeling work and calculations of the radiation pressure
on fine dust in HD 172555 provide a self-consistent explanation for the apparent contradiction of
a radiation pressure blowout lifetime less than one year for submicron grains and an observed
mid-infrared photometry, dominated by submicron grains, that has been stable for at least 27
years. The fine dust smaller than ~0.1 µm is dominantly composed of amorphous silica and
strongly decouples from the radiation field so that it will not be lost from the system by radiation
pressure blowout. We conclude that in HD 172555, dust between 0.1 µm and 1.5 µm is quickly
blown out of the system by radiation pressure but the mid-infrared emission, dominated by dust
smaller than 0.1 µm, and larger than 1.5 µm, can remain stable on 105 yr time scales if limited by
Poynting Robertson drag and even longer if fine dust is replenished by subsequent hypervelocity
grinding.

We also explore the unconfirmed claim, made by Li2009, that ~1047 molecules of SiO vapor are
needed to explain a strong emission feature at ~8 m in the Spitzer IRS spectrum of HD 172555.
We find that SiO vapor cannot be in equilibrium with the dust and should condense in 10 3-104
yrs, a timescale much shorter than the dynamical evolution time required to circularize the
system. Additionally, unless there are ~1048 atoms or 0.05

36

of Si and O vapor in the system,

SiO vapor should be destroyed by photo-dissociation in less than 0.2 yr. A new detection of
massive amounts of OI in the system by Herschel suggests that this might be the case. Motivated
by the unique conditions required to keep SiO vapor in HD 172555, we have considered an
alternative explanation, that the 8 m feature is produced by solid SiO. Experiments by
Hallenbeck et al. (1998, 2000) show an ~8 m feature associated with solid SiO naturally occurs
in fine grained silicate “smokes” created by quickly condensing vaporized silicate. Thus, both
the SiO vapor and solid SiO explanations for the ~8 m feature require vaporization of silicate
material, which requires impact velocities higher than ~10 km s-1 (Melosh 2007). Thus, when
other vaporization mechanism can be ruled out, we conclude that the ~8 m feature is diagnostic
of dust generated by a hypervelocity impact with an impact velocity greater than ~10 km s-1,
consistent with Li2009.

Acknowledgements:
This research was supported by NASA PGG grant NNX10AU88G. We also thank the
anonymous referee for their useful comments.

Appendix A- Rejected models

A.1 - Magma Planet / Hot Disk Emission.
One of the most exciting possible sources of the observed mid-IR emission we have considered
is the direct detection of emission from a magma ocean covered world. The kilometers-deep

37

ocean could easily be created in the giant impacts required to form rocky worlds of Earth-size or
larger. However, we can rule out this possibility, as it would be short lived and is unable to
produce the total luminosity observed by Spitzer. In this section we also consider the possibility
of a self-luminous circumplanetary magma disk. Another way of saying self-luminous is that the
planet or disk is not in thermal equilibrium with the central star. These systems are attractive
because the fine dust and vapor would naturally be stable as long as the planet or disk is still hot.
We can estimate the lifetime of such a system by comparing the total amount of energy an
impact brings into the system to the rate at which the system is radiating energy.

The total luminosity implied by the IR excess seen in HD 172555 is

(Li2009). We

can then estimate the lifetime of the system as shown below.

(

)

Even if we assume an extremely high impact velocity of ~50 km s-1 and an impactor mass,
, or

, we find

. We know that IR photometry of HD

172555 has been stable since its IRAS discovery in 1983 to its re-observation by WISE in 2010
implying a minimum lifetime of ~27 yr (Figure 1). This minimum lifetime is a strong argument
against all but the most extreme self-luminous sources.

38

In addition to the estimated lifetime of such a system, we can also estimate the size and
temperature of such a system required to radiate energy at the rate we observe. We assume that
the body radiates as a black body and find,

,

(A2)

Where R is the radius of the body, is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature
of the body. The black body temperature of the disk of a magma ocean planet is probably less
than

(Miller-Ricci et al. 2009). This means such a system would have to have a

physical radius,

. This size is several orders of magnitude larger than any known

planet therefore ruling out the possibility of magma ocean planet. This large physical size is still
consistent with a circumplanetary disk, but the temperature we used

is much higher

than the temperature implied by spectroscopic observations. If we instead assume the black
body temperature of the disk is ~200 K, or thermal equilibrium at 6 AU as shown by Li2009, we
find the disk must have a radius,

. As we will show in the next section this size

disk is consistent with the size of the Hill sphere of a Jovian planet located at ~6 AU from the
primary.

We have ruled out a magma ocean planet as a possible source for the IR excess because such a
body could not possibly radiate enough energy to explain the flux seen by Spitzer, even at
temperatures much higher than the dust temperature implied by the Spitzer spectra. In addition
to ruling out a magma ocean planet as a possible source, the short lifetime of self-luminous
source radiating thermal energy at the levels seen in HD 172555 argues against them as a

39

possible source for the IR radiation seen by Spitzer.

As such, the only systems that are

consistent with observations are those in thermal equilibrium with the central star.

A.2 - Rejected Model: Cold Circumplanetary Disk
Another system that could possibly explain the Spitzer observations of HD 172555 is a much
larger circumplanetary disk whose energy budget is driven by the central star’s radiation. In this
system the disk is gravitationally bound to a central planet, which means the fine dust in the
system can be longer lived than the radiation pressure blowout lifetime. We can estimate the size
of such a disk by assuming the disk perfectly re-radiates 100% of the impinging radiation as the
IR that Spitzer sees. This means that the total luminosity implied by Spitzer data is equal to the
cross-sectional area of the disk multiplied by the flux from the central star at 6 AU, or

(

(

)

)

and

(A4)

We can then calculate the size of a planet needed to contain a circumplanetary disk of this size in
its Hill sphere. If we ignore eccentricity and assume the planet is 6 AU from a central star of
mass





40

(

)

This means a planet with a mass comparable to Jupiter is required to stabilize the large cold
circumplanetary disk. One possibility that could lead to such a system is a large impact onto one
of the moons orbiting a Jovian planet. Recent observations using the APP coronograph of
VLT/NACO to search for planetary companions by Quanz et al. (2011) rule out a Jovian planet
larger than about four Jupiter masses at a distance of 11 AU from HD 172555. The 3-sigma
upper limit of this non-detection is not enough to rule out a 1 MJup planet at ~6 AU, however.

Another possible source for dust in a circumplanetary disk is a tidally heated moon. Currently the
Io-Jupiter system is thought to be in a quasi-steady state where ~1000 kg s-1 leaves Io and ~1000
kg s-1 leaves the Jovian Hill sphere (Thomas et al. 2004). Using the estimated age of HD 172555
as a BPMG member at ~12 Myr, and the estimated mass of dust in the system of 1021
kg (Li2009), we find the minimum rate at which an Io-like moon would have to lose mass to
produce the dust seen by Spitzer is at least 107 kg s-1 (~104 times greater than any known comet
or Moon in today’s solar system) for 107 yrs in order to produce the debris seen. 1021 kg of
material is also a huge mass for a moon to lose (Ganymede, the largest moon in the solar system,
is only

). Moreover, Io’s mass loss is primarily ionized SO2, not Silicate material

(Dessler 1980, Strobel & Wolven 2001.)

Another possible source for the observed dust is motivated by work done by Canup (2010). This
work argues that giant planet satellite systems form and stabilize via a series of large body
accretions and subsequent migrations. The stable systems seen today are the product of a series
41

of moon formation, migration, tidal disruption, and planetary accretion events. It is possible that
at only ~12 Myr, a giant planet in HD 172555 at ~6 AU has recently (within the last ~1 Myr)
completely lost a moon due to tidal disruption and breakup. We argue against this possible
source using the large spatial extent the dust must have,
planet, the Roche limit is on the order of

For a Jovian

km. The Roche limit scales as the radius of

the planet, so we would need a planet more massive than the Sun to have a tidal disruption create
a disk of the required radius. It is remotely possible that through the process of angular
momentum transport, a small fraction of this material is transported to larger radii but analysis
that is more detailed is required to determine if this idea is plausible.

Although some of the circumplanetary disk models may be able to explain the spectroscopic
observations of HD 172555, tentative observations of the system including both interferometric
visibility and photometric imaging are inconsistent with a localized dust source (Smith et al
2012, Pantin & Di Folco 2011). This rules out all of the circumplanetary disk models, unless we
consider a leaky Hill sphere scenario. In this scenario material is only weakly bound to the
Jovian Hill sphere and is constantly being lost to the circumstellar torus. This scenario does not
change any of the analysis presented in the main text, it only allows for a somewhat different and
arguably less probable creation scenario for the circumstellar debris disk or torus of HD 172555.

42

References
Andreazza, C.M. et al. 1995, ApJ, 451, 889
Artymowicz, P. 1988, ApJ, 335, L79
Backman, D. E., & Paresce, F. 1993, in Protostars and Planets III, ed. E. Levy and J. I. Lunine (Tuscon: Univ. Arizona Press),
1253
Beichman, C. et al. 1998, Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) Catalogs and Atlases, vol. 1,
Explanatory Supplement, NASA RP-1190 (Washington, DC: GPO)
Beichman, C.A., et al. 2005, ApJ, 626, 1061
Benz, W.m Asphaug, E. 1999, Icarus, 142, 5
Blum J. 2010, Res. Astron. Astrophys., 10, 1199
Burns, J. A., Lamy, P. L., and Soter, S. 1979, Icarus, 40, 1
Canup, R.M. 2004, ARA&A, 42, 441
Canup, R.M. 2008, Icarus, 196, 518
Canup, R. 2010, Nature, 468, 943
Chambers, J.E. 2004, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 223, 241
Chen, C.H., et al. 2006, ApJS, 166, 351
Currie, T., et al. 2009, ApJ, 698, 1
Dessler, A. J., 1980, Icarus, 44, 291-295
Drira, I., et al. 1997, Astron. Astrophys., 319, 720
Ferguson, F.T. & Nuth J.A. 2008, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 53, 2824
Fernández, R., Brandeker, A., and Wu, Y. 2006, ApJ, 643, 509
Hallenbeck, S.L., et al. 1998, ApJ, 535, 247
Hallenbeck, S.L., et al. 2000, Icarus, 131, 198

43

Hernandez, J., et al. 2007, ApJ, 662, 1067
Hilborn, R. C. 1982, Am. J. Phys., 50, 240
Ida, S. & Lin, D.N.C. 2004, ApJ, 604, 388
Jackson, A. P., and Wyatt, M. C. 2012, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. XXX, XXX
Johnson, B. C., and Melosh, H. J. 2012, Icarus, 217, 416
Johnson, B.C., and Melosh, H. J. 2012, Nature, 485, 75
Kenyon, S. J., & Bromley, B. C., 2004, ApJ, 602, L133
Krivov, A. V., 2010, Res. Astron. Astrophys., 10, 383
Kurucz, R.L. 1992, in IAU Symposium 149, The Stellar Populations of Galaxies, ed. B. Barbury and A. Renzini
(Dordrecht:Kluwer), 225
Lisse, C.M., et al. 2006, Science, 313, 635
Lisse, C.M., et al. 2007, ApJ, 658, 584
Lisse, C.M., et al. 2008, ApJ, 673, 1106
Lisse, C.M., et al. 2009, ApJ, 701, 2019
Lisse, C.M., et al. 2010, 41st LPSC, Abstract 2390
Lisse, C.M., et al. 2012, ApJ, 747, 93
Martin,W. C., Fuhr, J. R., Kelleher, D. E., Musgrove, A., Sugar, J.,Wiese,W. L., Mohr, P. J., & Olsen, K. 1999, NIST Atomic
Spectra Database, Version 2.0 (Gaithersburg, MD: NIST)
Melosh, H.J. 2007, Meterit. Planet. Sci. 42, 2079
Miller-Ricci, E., et al. 2009, ApJ, 704, 770
Moshir M. et al., 1992, Expanatory Supplement to the IRAS Faint Source Survey, Version 2, JPL D-10015 8/92 (Pasedena:JPL)
Nahar, S. N. 1995, ApJS, 101, 423
Neugebauer, G., el al. 1984, ApJ, 278, L1
Pantin, E. & Di Folco, E. 2011, “VISIR mid-infrared imaging of the HD 172555 debris disk”, Signpost of Planets
Pascucci, I., et al. 2006, ApJ, 651, 1177

44

Quanz, S.P., et al. 2011, ApJ, 736, L32
Riviere-Marichalar, P., et al. 2012, A&A, XXX, XXX
Smith, R., Wyatt, M.C., and Haniff, C.A. 2012, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 422, 2560
Strobel, D. F. and Wolven, B. C., 2001, Astrophysics and Space Science, 277, 271-287
Su, K. Y. L., et al. 2005, ApJ, 628, 487
Takasawa, S., et al. 2011, ApJ, 733, L39
Tarafdar, S. P. and Dalgarno, A. 1990, Astron. Astrophys., 232, 239
Thomas, N., et al. 2004, Jupiter: The planet, satellites and magnetosphere, Bagenal, F., Dowling T.E., and McKinnon, W. (eds.),
Cambridge University Press, 719 pp., p. 561
Van Dishoeck, E. F. 1988, in Rate Coefficients in Astrochemistry, eds. Millar, T. J. and Wiliams, D. A. (Kluwer), p. 49-72
Wright, E.L. et al. 2010 AJ. 140, 1868
Wyatt, M.C., et al. 1999, ApJ, 527, 918
Wyatt, M.C., et al. 2005, ApJ, 620, 492
Wyatt, M. C., et al. 2007, ApJ, 658, 569
Wyatt, M.C., Clarke, C. J., and Booth, M. 2011, CeMDA, 111, 1

45

Figures
2
Spitzer IRS (2005)
IRAS (1983)
WISE (2010)

1.8

Flux density (Jy)

1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
5

10

15
20
Wavelength (mm)

25

30

Figure 1: Infrared photometry and spectrum of HD 1725555. The black curve is the Spitzer IRS
spectrum (observation in 2005) with 1- uncertainty plotted as thinner vertical bars (Ch2006).
The strong emission peak at ~9 μm, interpreted as emission from amorphous SiO2, is apparent.
The red points, with 1- uncertainty plotted, correspond to color corrected flux density from
IRAS Faint Source Catalogue v2.0 (observation in 1983) in the 12 μm and 25 μm band
(Neugebauer et al. 1984, Moshir et al. 1992). The green points, with 1- uncertainty plotted,
correspond to color corrected-flux densities from WISE All-Sky Source Catalogue (observation
in 2010) in the 12 μm and 22 μm band (Wright et al. 2010). For the 12 μm bands we used the
appropriate color correction for a black body spectral energy distribution characterized by a
temperature of 245 K. For the 22 μm and 25 μm bands we used the appropriate color correction
for a spectral energy distribution with

(Wright et al. 2010, Beichman et al. 1998). The

figure illustrates that the infrared flux from HD 172555 has remained fairly constant, within ~4%
over 27 years.

46

200K BB
Amorph Carbon
SiO Gas

Metal Sulfides

Tektite

Amorph Silica (Obsidian)
Fe/Mg/Ca Pyroxenes
Fe/Mg Olivines

Figure 2: The black data with error bars is the Spitzer IRS emissivity spectrum of HD172555.
The orange dashed line is emissivity spectrum of the best-fit compositional model. Relative
abundances for the best-fit model can be found in Li2009. The best-fit model uses small, solid,
optically thin dust grains “fine dust”, SiO gas, and a population of large, cold dust grains
“rubble” (200 K blackbody). The amplitude of each emissivity spectrum gives the relative
contribution of each species to the total observed flux. A 335 K blackbody temperature
dependence has been divided into the as-observed flux to create the emissivity spectrum. For
more information on spectral modeling see Section 3.2 and/or Li2009. (After Li2009).

47

Figure 3: The ratio of the radiation force to gravitational force,  as a function of particle size
for obsidian (solid black line) and astrophysical silicate (dashed black line) dust orbiting HD
172555. The calculation of assumes the particles are ~75% SiO2 and ~14% Al2O3 by mole
(Artymowicz 1988 and references therein) while the spectral modeling of Li2009 shows that the
“fine dust” is dominated by a combination of Bediasite and Obsidian with an average
composition that is ~69% SiO2, 10% MgO, and 9% Al2O3. The horizontal solid line acts as a
guide to the eye to show where

, illustrating that obsidian particles between 0.02 µm and

1.5 µm should be quickly ejected from the system by radiation pressure. For astrophysical
silicate, all particles smaller than 2.7 µm should be ejected from the system by radiation
pressure.

48

Figure 4: Schematic showing the geometry of the debris disk or torus.
torus from the star,

is the minor radius of the torus, and

is the distance of the

is the disk or torus width. Note that

.

Figure 5: Particle lifetime estimates, plotted as a function of particle size for obsidian dust at 6
AU in HD 172555. The solid line represents estimates of the crossing time
out by radiation pressure, assuming a torus with minor radius

of particles blown

AU. The dashed line

represents estimates of the lifetime of particles, spiraling into the primary from an original orbit
of

AU due to Poynting Roberston drag given by

(Burns et al. 1979).
49

(

), where

Figure 6 - Allowable Particle Size Distributions (PSDs) from the best-fit spectral models to
the Spitzer HD 172555 5-35 μm IRS spectrum. Squares on the dashed lines represent each
logarithmic bin in the PSDs used to fit the Spitzer IRS spectrum. The solid red line and solid

50

black line act as guides to the eye and are described in the legend. Top: single power law
as published in Li2009. Middle: 2-part broken power law, with
below 1 μm and

above 1 μm. Bottom:

with a reduction

in the number of grains between 0.1 μm and 1 μm that is consistent with grains being removed
by radiation pressure blowout.

54

Log (Number)

52

50

NO
NSi+
N

48

Si

Ntot

46

44

42
44

46

48

Log (N )

50

52

Si

Figure 7: Equilibrium chemistry of HD 172555 torus. The number of various species in the torus
is plotted as a function of the number of Si atoms
the legend and

. The calculation assumes
,

, and

in the system. The curves are described in
,
,

.

51

