FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

IRAS-based Whole-Sky Upper Limit on Dyson Spheres
Richard A. Carrigan, Jr.,
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, IL 60510, USA
carrigan@fnal.gov
630-840-8755
ABSTRACT
A Dyson Sphere is a hypothetical construct of a star purposely
cloaked by a thick swarm of broken-up planetary material to better utilize
all of the stellar energy. A clean Dyson Sphere identification would give a
significant signature for intelligence at work. A search for Dyson Spheres
has been carried out using the 250,000 source database of the IRAS
infrared satellite which covered 96% of the sky. The search has used the
Calgary database for the IRAS Low Resolution Spectrometer (LRS) to
look for fits to blackbody spectra. Searches have been conducted for both
pure (fully cloaked) and partial Dyson Spheres in the blackbody
temperature region 100 ≤ T ≤ 600 ºK. When other stellar signatures that
resemble a Dyson Sphere are used to eliminate sources that mimic Dyson
Spheres very few candidates remain and even these are ambiguous. Upper
limits are presented for both pure and partial Dyson Spheres. The
sensitivity of the LRS was enough to find Dyson Spheres with the
luminosity of the sun out to 300 pc, a reach that encompasses a million
solar- type stars.
Subject headings: circumstellar matter - extraterrestrial intelligence infrared radiation – stars: AGB and post-AGB – stars: carbon

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Operated by the Fermi Research Alliance, LLC under Contract No. DE-AC0207CH11359 with the United States Department of Energy.

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

1. INTRODUCTION
Advanced civilizations might undertake astroengineering projects on heroic
scales. Searches for signs of astroengineering to look for intelligence elsewhere in the
Universe represent an approach that is complementary to conventional radio and optical
SETI. A Dyson Sphere (Dyson 1960) is a good example of an astroengineering project or
“cosmic archaeology” artifact.
In 1960 Dyson suggested that an advanced civilization might break up a star’s
planets into very small planetoids or pebble-sized fragments to form a “loose collection
or swarm of objects” that would gather all the visible light coming from the star. The
shroud of objects forming a spherical shell would greatly increase the useful area and
available energy for advanced activities. A Dyson Sphere like this that totally envelopes
the host star is called a pure Dyson Sphere to distinguish it from a partial Dyson Sphere
that does not fully cloak the star.
Unlike SETI signals (Tarter 2000) generated as beacons or for communication,
the creation of a cosmic archaeological signature like a Dyson Sphere would not have
required an active strategy on the part of the originating “civilization”. An interesting
distinction between systematic searches for objects like Dyson Spheres and SETI
searches for radio and laser beacons is that for a Dyson Sphere search no presumption has
to be made concerning the motivation of the originating civilization.
There could be several types of partial Dyson Spheres. A star could be surrounded
by a uniform shroud that did not fully attenuate the stellar visible light. A second
possibility is a star eclipsed by a circling ring that is totally opaque to visible light. It is
difficult to distinguish this case from a pure Dyson Sphere. However the Dyson Sphere
luminosity is reduced by, at minimum, two times the fractional coverage of the ring. The
factor of two assumes that for small fractional coverage both the inside and outside of the
ring radiate. In this article this possibility is subsumed in the pure Dyson Sphere
signature. Note that a ring could be easier to construct than a shell but would also have
less useful area and available energy. Dyson Sphere engineering is discussed in the
appendix.
For a Dyson Sphere the stellar energy from the star would be reradiated at a lower
temperature. If the visible light was totally absorbed by a thin “shell” a pure Dyson
Sphere signature would be an infrared object with luminosity equivalent to the invisible
star and a blackbody temperature corresponding to the radius of the spherical shell. For a
sun-like star with the shell at the radius of the Earth the temperature would be
approximately 300 ºK. Interestingly Dyson does not discuss the radiation distribution
from his object. Dyson’s approach is a more general perspective since among other
complications the different parts of the reradiating swarm of objects in the shell could be
at different distances from the star.
The apparently distinct signature of a Dyson Sphere would seem to make it an
ideal candidate for cosmic archaeology. This article is devoted to a Dyson Sphere search
using LRS, the Low Resolution Spectrometer on board IRAS, an infrared satellite that
flew in 1983. IRAS identified 250,000 infrared point sources and scanned 96% of the
sky. IRAS is described in more detail section 3. In many ways the IRAS database is ideal
for a Dyson Sphere search because IRAS employed four filters centered at 12, 25, 60, and

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

100 μm and a spectrograph that together covered much of the radiation range emitted by
a Dyson Sphere with a temperature between 100 and 600 ºK.
Prior to the search reported here using the LRS spectrograph plus the IRAS filters
a preliminary search was performed using only the filter information. For the preliminary
search sources were retained only if the estimated temperatures lay between 150 ≤ Te ≤
500 ºK based on the 12, 25, and 60 μm filters. Sources were selected by several cuts
including the temperature estimate and the requirement that FQUAL, the IRAS database
flux quality factor, be greater than 1 for all of the 12, 25, and 60 filters. (In the database
FQUAL(i) was set to 1 if there was only an upper limit in the ith filter because there was
no “hours-confirming” observation, to 2 for moderate quality where at least one “hoursconfirming observation was missing, or to 3 for high quality.) The preliminary search
estimated 1 out of every 600 IRAS sources might pass a test making it a potential Dyson
Sphere candidate. However the actual temperature difference distribution formed from
the filter temperatures estimated from the ratios F[12]/F[25] and F[25]/F[[60] was flat so
that a 3 σ peak in one bin might have required about 25 sources. This suggested that less
than one in 10,000 of the IRAS sources could potentially be a Dyson Sphere. The filter
technique suffered from a significant limitation because of the effects of zodiacal light
and cirrus in the 60 and 100 μm bands. The presence of zodiacal or cirrus dust in these
bands is a limitation on the use of all four filters. To overcome these problems the search
reported here has used only the 12 and 25 µm filters coupled with the IRAS spectrograph.
Earlier searches for Dyson Spheres included a program by Jugaku & Nishimura
(2003) to look for partial Dyson Spheres as well as several IRAS-based searches by Slysh
(1985) and Timofeev et al. (2000) using all four IRAS filters.
The following sections discuss Dyson Sphere mimics, the IRAS infrared satellite
as a Dyson Sphere search tool, the new search using the IRAS Low Resolution
Spectrometer, a discussion of possible candidates, the relation to earlier Dyson Sphere
and SETI searches, and concludes with remarks on the implications of the search for
limits on Dyson Spheres and observations on the possibility of future investigations and
searches. An appendix covers Dyson Sphere engineering.

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

2. DYSON SPHERE MIMICS
To identify a Dyson Sphere one has to rule out more conventional natural sources
with similar signatures. On the other hand, it is conceivable that a real Dyson Sphere
could have been classified as a more familiar object. A number of astronomical objects
have infrared signatures somewhat like a Dyson Sphere. Indeed, the birth and death
phases of many stars are associated with heavy dust clouds that can give rise to a black
body signature.
Objects with resemblances to Dyson Spheres include stars with thick dust shells,
regions of dust in a galaxy and very young stars that form in regions of dust, Mira
variables, planetary nebulae, as well as other Asymptotic Giant Branch stars (AGB) and
post AGB stars. The challenges of classification of such objects with mid-infrared
signatures are laid out by Volk et al. (1992) in their discussion of a search for extreme
carbon stars.
Typically at a late stage of a star’s evolution the outer atmosphere can be blown
away. Molecules such as SiO and hydroxyl ions (OH) form as the gas condenses and can
give rise to natural OH masers. Often the dust cloud is not thick enough to hide the star.
Many of these sources show silicate emission while others exhibit silicate absorption.
They may also show pulsations. An OH/IR signal is evidence against a possible Dyson
sphere.
Carbon stars are an important component of this class. Many but not all carbon
stars have a prominent SiC emission line at about 11.3 μm. For example extreme C stars
with thick envelopes may not have the feature (K. Volk et al. 1992). The line position,
width, strength, temporal behavior, and perhaps asymmetry can give important
information about the dust clouds surrounding the star (Thompson et al. 2006). For some
cases the SiC line is non-existent or too small to be detected. Under those circumstances
the carbon star might closely resemble a Dyson Sphere. Much of the appreciation of
carbon stars as infrared objects arose after Dyson published the Dyson Sphere conjecture
in 1960.
Typically galaxies detected by the IRAS satellite are relatively close and are not
point sources. Even a nearby Dyson sphere should be a point source in an infrared
telescope.
A Dyson Sphere candidate with a blackbody distribution can have several
characteristics such as a blackbody temperature, the distance from our Sun, magnitude in
the infrared, and variability. It may also have a stellar signature in the visible or near
infrared. As seen in Volk, Kwok, and Woodsworth (1993) and Chen et al. (2001) some of
the source types discussed above populate the same region of an infrared color-color plot
as a Dyson sphere candidate would. Non-Dyson Sphere objects can be eliminated using
discriminants like spectral lines in the infrared or radio regime, implausible blackbody
temperatures, established classifications, and statistical departures from a blackbody
distribution.
3. IRAS AS A DYSON SPHERE SEARCH TOOL
For a comprehensive Dyson Sphere search it is useful to survey a significant part
of the sky as IRAS did. Some satellite-borne spectrographs like the IRS on the Spitzer

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

have characteristically covered limited regions of the sky. An ideal Dyson Sphere search
instrument would also be sensitive to temperatures ranging from roughly 100 to 600 ºK
so it would need to cover wavelengths from 3 to 100 μm. This eliminates 2MASS and
NICMOS on Hubble (Thompson et al. 1998) as principal search tools. Ground-based
infrared telescopes have problems in the 10 to 100 μm regime because of high sky
background. Finally good angular resolution would be helpful for a Dyson Sphere search
to sort out associations with nearby stars.
The database from the IRAS satellite (Beichman 1987) is currently the best
existing resource available to address these requirements, in part because IRAS was
designed to study dust and dust is often a part of objects that resemble a Dyson Sphere.
The IRAS primary mirror had a diameter of only 60 cm so that the diffraction limited
circle that enclosed 80% of the energy had a radius of 25 arc seconds for the 25 μm filter.
The IRAS supplement states that “…the in-scan pointing errors [for IRAS] were typically
smaller than 5 arc seconds.” Further “…the limiting flux density, away from confused
regions of the sky, was about 0.5 Jy at 12, 25 and 60 µm and about 1.5 Jy at 100 µm for
point sources…” The LRS spectrometer sensitivity extended below 4 Jy as measured in
the 25 μm filter for the search reported here.
Of course data from other instruments can be used to rule out a Planck
distribution hypothesis for an individual IRAS source. IRAS 16562-4256 is a case in
point. The LRS distribution almost appears to have a 357 ºK Planck distribution although
there is a hint of an 11.3 µm feature. Filter data from MSX, the Midcourse Space
Experiment (Price et al. 2001), follows the LRS data but shows a rise in the 4 µm filters.
The MIRS spectrographic data from the Japanese Infrared Telescope in Space (IRTS)
mission in 1995 (Murakami 1996) is generally higher and shows strong features at 8 and
11 µm. Data from 2MASS (Skrutskie 2006) rises to meet the MIRS and MSX data in the
5 µm region. All of this additional information suggests a rapidly fluctuating source with
lines that may come and go.
The 2MASS survey with nearly 500 M sources was more sensitive than IRAS and
had much better angular resolution. However a blackbody source centered on the 12 μm
IRAS filter must be at least 10 Jy to register in the 2MASS 2.17 μm filter, a factor of
more than ten higher than the minimum IRAS sensitivity. The GLIMPSE Galactic
Infrared Mid-Plane Survey (Benjamin et al. 2005) has used the Spitzer Infrared Array
Camera (IRAC) to cover the galaxy from longitudes of ±65 deg and latitudes |b|<1
degrees (wider at the galactic center) using four filters at 3.6, 4.5, 5.8, 8.0 µm with a
sensitivity down to the millijansky level. Use of GLIMPSE coupled with 2MASS for a
Dyson Sphere survey is discussed later in the “future possibilities” section. If an IRAS
source can be correlated with a 2MASS or Spitzer object, one can exploit their better
angular resolution and pointing accuracy to establish correlations with other source
information.
4. THE IRAS LOW RESOLUTION SPECTROMETER SEARCH
The Dyson Sphere search reported here has used the extended Calgary atlas for
the IRAS Low Resolution Spectrometer (see below). The preliminary search noted earlier
used the 12, 25, and 60 μm filters to do a blackbody fit. The requirement that
FQUAL(60) > 1 was dropped for this new search to address the problem that higher

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

temperature Dyson Sphere sources would give smaller values in the 60 μm filter. Using
the LRS data also overcomes the impact of cirrus and zodiacal light on the 60 μm IRAS
filter as well as the associated impossibility of fitting a Planck distribution with just two
filter points and still obtaining a measure of the statistical significance.
4.1 The Calgary LRS Sample
The Calgary group has compiled a comprehensive atlas of 11224 sources
containing a significant portion of the available useful IRAS Low Resolution Spectra
(Kwok et al. 1997). From this sample 10982 sources satisfy the requirement FQUAL(12)
and FQUAL(25) be greater than one.
The original IRAS LRS data set contains some problems that appear when the
short (“blue”) and the long (“red”) wavelength spectrographic sets are compared (Cohen
et al. 1992). The corrected values generated by the Calgary group were chosen rather than
the original IRAS set. These earlier problems were due in part to the assumption “that
Alpha Tau has a spectrum like a 10000 ºK blackbody at these wavelengths which
overlooks a SiO band in the spectrum near 8 microns.”
The Calgary atlas assigns each LRS source to one of a number of categories on
the basis of spectrographic features and the background continuum shape. Kwok et al.
(1997) summarizes characteristics of the categories used for classification by Calgary
including the ones that might contain Dyson Spheres. Parenthetically, the Calgary group
has devised an extended classification system partly with the object of improving
automatic classification and has considered broadening the data set further (Gupta et al.
2004). The search reported in the present publication uses the original Calgary set since it
is readily available and has been used for a wide range of applications. The original IRAS
LRS automated classification scheme for the atlas of the 5425 best LRS spectra is also
feature-based. In practice it has not been used because it covers only half of the spectra in
the Calgary set. Furthermore, the Calgary group has pointed out some problems with the
original classification. An alternative classification system could be developed based on
the type of source. This might be helpful but it is necessary to keep an open mind since
one is looking for an unusual object that could be mimicked by more conventional
objects and misclassified. Note that while the Calgary and original LRS catalogs are
comprehensive, they are not necessarily the last word on IR spectra and identification
since more data is now available from facilities such as the Spitzer Space Telescope and
2MASS.
The search discussed here used a sequential series of cuts to reduce the data
sample by moving from a coarse to a finer grained net and ultimately selecting a set of
objects that could be Dyson Sphere candidates. The cuts included temperature, Calgary
class, IRAS object type (the IRAS variable IDTYPE-association with other catalogs, was
limited to 0-no association, 2-stellar, 3-other catalogs, and 4-appearance in multiple
catalogs), a qualitative scan of the spectral distribution to look for a Planck-like spectrum,
lines, or large fluctuations, further cuts on established classifications, and ultimately
limits on the least squares fluctuations. Factors giving rise to the fluctuations are
discussed below in 4.5 Fitting to a Blackbody Distribution. A source with another wellestablished classification was generally discarded unless there was some reason to doubt

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

the classification. These cuts and scans are discussed in the following subsections and
summarized in Table 1.
4.2 Temperature
Dyson’s original hypothesis envisioned a sphere constructed with a radius to the
star corresponding to the temperature range where water is a liquid. A broader picture
might include a temperature span that incorporates the range of temperatures over which
some automata could operate. An initial temperature estimate for each IRAS source in the
sample was made using the ratio of the 12 and 25 micron filters. The ratio of the two
filters gives a putative Planck temperature based on the assumption that the spectral
distribution of the source is a single black body convoluted with the filter responses. The
points on the curve of temperature versus filter ratio have been fitted with an arbitrary
fourth order polynomial to provide temperature estimators for the analysis. The initial
temperature span for this search was set somewhat arbitrarily to be 100 ≤ T1 ≤ 600 ºK
where T1 is the color temperature
T 1 = c 0 + ∑ c k ( f12 / f 25 ) k
(1)
k

based on the flux ratio f12/f25 where f12 is the IRAS FLUX(12), f25 is the FLUX(25), and
ck are the fitting constants. The fitted constants for the curve were c0 = 98.0, c1 = 433.1,
c2 = -386.0, c3= 240.2, c4 = -47.0. Applying these temperature cuts leaves a sample of
6521 sources.
4.3 Selection by Calgary Groups
In an effort to limit the sample for individual source investigation the LRS spectra
for an earlier sample of 387 sources selected using the 12, 25, and 60 μm filters were
examined and compared to the Calgary IRAS classification. The spectra most similar to a
Planck distribution fell in the C, F, H, P, and U groups. Carbon stars are typically
classified as C. F objects typically have featureless spectra and are often oxygen or
carbon-rich stars with small amounts of dust. H cases have a red continuum often with a
9.7 μm silicate or an 11.3 μm emission feature attributed to PAH (Polycyclic Aromatic
Hydrocarbons). For the H cases the blackbody distribution usually has a relatively low
temperature. Often H cases are planetary nebulae or are in HII regions. For the Calgary
LRS IDTYPES = 0, 2 with temperatures below 200 ºK the LRS spectrum rises smoothly
with wavelength, that is the fluctuations are small. P cases can have a red continuum with
a sharp rise at the blue end of the spectrum or either an 11.3 or 23 μm PAH emission
feature. Initially the P group was not analyzed. Later the group was investigated further
but eventually all of the P classification candidates were rejected. Sources in the U group
have "unusual spectra showing a flat continuum" where the nature of the source is
typically unknown.
The other categories were not investigated for various reasons. The A group
sources had a 9.7 μm absorption feature. They are often oxygen-rich AGB stars
surrounded by a thick cloud of dust. No A group sources qualified as interesting Planck
spectra in the 387 source sample. E type stars are also oxygen-rich AGB stars but with a
9.7 μm emission feature. Again none qualified in the sample. Stars categorized as I had
noisy or incomplete spectra. L type stars, a small group, had emission lines above a

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

continuum. S types, another small group, had spectra that corresponded to a RayleighJeans optical tail.
Selecting on C, F, H, P, and U resulted in a sample of 2240 sources. The largest
excluded group was E. It contained 3058 sources.
4.4 Selection by IRAS Object Type
The preliminary search focused on “pure” Dyson Spheres where there would be
no visible source. Sample selection was done by taking objects with the IRAS variable
IDTYPE equal to 0. Strictly IDTYPE = 0 corresponds to no catalog identification of the
object. This requirement was later relaxed in two stages. In the first stage objects were
included where IDTYPE = 2, an identified stellar object. After the IDTYPE = 0, 2
selection 1230 objects remained. Many sources in the 1230 sample were associated with
near-by objects that are either visible or 2MASS stars. Once more it is emphasized that
this approach allows the possibility of both pure and partial Dyson Spheres.
In a second stage sources with IDTYPE = 3, 4 were investigated. To facilitate
processing only F and U sources were scanned. These categories contained essentially all
of the interesting Dyson Sphere-like objects found in the IDTYPE = 1, 2 scan. This
sample included 297 sources and resulted in an overall set with 1527 sources.
4.5 Fitting to a Blackbody Distribution
A large fraction of the 1527 source sample was fitted using a weighted and an
unweighted least squares fit to a blackbody distribution. The weighted least squares form
was
2
(2)
L(T , a m ) = ∑ (Pνi − a n λi Ci ) Pνi / 92

(

)

i

where Ci are the so-called Calgary corrected spectral values corresponding to the raw
LRS values in Watts/m2/μm multiplied by the wavelength λi and the Calgary λ-dependent
correction, an is a normalization factor introduced for graphical purposes, and Pνi is
proportional to the blackbody spectrum as a function of frequency (expressed in terms of
λi, T) to fit the LRS spectral distribution
⎞
⎛
⎟
⎜
2πhcam an ⎟
⎜
.
(3)
Pνi (am , T ) =
⎜ 3 ⎛ hc λi kT
⎞⎟
− 1⎟ ⎟
⎜ λi ⎜ e
⎠⎠
⎝ ⎝
Here T is the blackbody temperature in Kelvin, am is the fitting amplitude, h is Planck’s
constant, c is the speed of light, and k is Boltzmann’s constant. The least squares form is
essentially Pearson’s χ2 statistic where the Pνi weight the individual squares of the
deviations. The least squares was minimized by adjusting T and am. (Strictly a value of 91
should have been used rather than 92 since there are two degrees of freedom for the fit.)
An unweighted least squares was also calculated using
⎛
uL = ⎜⎜
⎝

⎞

∑ (Pν − a λ C ) / 92 ⎟⎟ / N
2

i

i

n

i

i

⎠

(4)

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

N = ∑ Pνi / 92

.

(5)

In practice this was the more useful measure of significance. However, as noted, the
weighted form was used for determining T and am. In the first portion of the cut sequence
the least squares statistics were used to appraise but not reject sources.
Some consideration was given to the possibility of using the unweighted least
squares to eliminate sources directly in the early part of the cut sequence. Deviations in
the least squares arose from factors such as temporal variations in the source, mismatch
between the “blue” and “red” elements of the LRS (actually two spectrometers with
different resolutions), and rogue points that might have been generated in part by cosmic
rays. Some of these features were apparent in the graphical display when comparing the
red and blue parts of the LRS and the filter values. In short, the least squares was not just
a statistical measure. On the other hand when the blackbody distribution least squares
augmented with a Gaussian line was used to fit C stars there was no question that stars
with distributions that contained lines 10 σ or more above a blackbody distribution had
least squares below 0.1. Conversely, lines could still be seen down to 2-3 σ above a
blackbody distribution. A second approach to using the least squares was to compare the
blackbody fit (two parameters) to a second degree polynomial (three parameters). If they
were approximately equal or the polynomial was a better fit then no clear case could be
made for arguing the spectrum was a Planck distribution. This was often the case when
the blackbody least squares was greater than 0.1. However for the initial scan and rescan
sources were not eliminated from consideration based on the blackbody least squares.
4.6 Direct Scanning
Each source in the IDTYPE = 0, 2 sample was examined using the Strasbourg
SIMBAD viewer to see if there was a nearby optical or 2MASS source. These cases were
tagged but not eliminated. For the IDTYPE = 3, 4 set only the interesting cases were
examined with the viewer. Typically, the spectrum for a source was reviewed by plotting
the IRAS filter values (divided by the appropriate temperature adjusted Planck color
correction from the IRAS Supplement) and the Calgary corrected spectroscopy data sets
as well as the three filter values for the brightest/nearest 2MASS source. Direct scanning
of the spectra for non-Planck shapes, obvious spectral lines, large data scatter, or other
discriminants eliminated about 80% of the 1527 object sample. These sources were
tagged as non-Dyson Sphere candidates. In a second pass the non-candidates with
unweighted least squares values below 0.25 were rescanned again to confirm that sources
had been eliminated in a consistent way.
Figure 1 (IRAS 17446-4048) illustrates a very common source type in the Calgary
sample. These are sources with the 11.3 μm silicon carbide (SiC) emission feature typical
of carbon stars. Often the background below the line is close to a blackbody spectrum.
Both Calgary and SIMBAD classify 17446-4048 as a C star. The LRS spectral data are
plotted in two sets, the short wavelengths (x) and the long wavelengths (dots). The filter
values for F[12] and F[25] are shown as diamonds. The Planck distribution fit to the LRS
including a Gaussian is plotted as a solid curve. The dotted curve is a fit to the corrected
F[12], F[25], and F[60] filters. The 2MASS values are shown as triangles. Several filter
points from the DIRBE experiment (Diffuse IR Background Explorer) on COBE are
shown (open circles). These have large errors and an angular resolution of only 0.7

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

degrees but do suggest a blackbody distribution that extends below the LRS wavelengths.
Notice that the 2MASS points are also consistent with the blackbody distribution. The
spectrum here is fitted with a Gaussian centered at 11.3 µm with a width (σ) of 0.7 µm
and an amplitude of 0.3 compared to the Planck distribution at 11.3 µm and a blackbody
distribution with T = 594 ºK (with the line in the fit). The peak of the Gaussian line is
13 σ above the Planck distribution. In this search the possibility was initially held open
that it might be argued that something like the 11.3 µm feature could have arisen out of
the construction of a Dyson Sphere. However the strength of the line is consistent with a
natural process. Parenthetically this bright infrared source is close to the direction of the
galactic center and at a distance of 1.48 kpc, has an apparent bolometric magnitude of
5.72 (Groenewegen et al. 2002) and is likely quite variable (note that the filter points are
substantially higher than the LRS). There is a faint visible star in the same direction.
Figure 2 for IRAS 19566+3423 shows a 10.2 μm fitted silicate absorption feature
that sometimes occurs in OH/IR stars. SIMBAD classifies it as a star with an OH/IR
envelope while the Calgary classification is U. There is no nearby visible star but there is
a weak 2MASS source associated with it. The spectrum here is fitted with a Gaussian
with an amplitude of 0.7 compared to the Planck distribution, a width (σ) of 0.9 µm, and
a blackbody distribution with T = 246 ºK. The dip of the Gaussian line is also 13 σ below
the Planck distribution. The source is near the galactic plane but away from the center.
There is also an OH maser signal associated with the source.
Lines and absorption features like those in Figures 1 and 2 were identified based
on peak amplitudes greater than 2 σ above background. This is a reasonable approach
since a serious Dyson Sphere candidate would have to have a high statistical significance
compared to any other possible explanation. Note that “line” here is used to specify a
peak in the distribution that in some cases might be an amalgam of several lines.
After the direct scan examination 295 sources remained. About three quarters of
these were eliminated because of a convincing identification of the source with a known
object like a carbon star (14%, classif in Table 1), a nascent spectral line often coupled
with a classification issue (56%), a fitted LRS temperature outside the original band
(5%), or a non-Planck shape (0.5%, np in Table 1). The nine remaining H sources (3%)
were also eliminated. An H source type typically has a low temperature (none of the nine
remaining had temperatures above 180 ºK), is often in an HII region, and may have an
associated OH maser. Of the five H cases with intriguing Planck spectra fits and
relatively low unweighted least squares (IRAS 09032-3953, 13129-6211, 15103-5754,
17311-4924, 20028+3910) four had previously been identified as planetary nebulae or
carried a GLMP planetary nebulae catalog identification (Garcia-Lario, Manchado, Pych,
Pottasch 1997) associated with colors similar to planetary nebulae. Figure 3, IRAS
13129-6211, illustrates a case for the Calgary H classification. It may be near an HII
region. The blackbody temperature is 132 ºK. In this case the source is near a visible star.
Removal of all these sources left a sample of 65 possible candidates.
Larger least squares in the 65 source sample were loosely associated with high
values in the F[100] filter (typically due to dust). More than 80% of the H (and P) sources
were in bright sky regions with high F[100] values (F[100] > 100) while only 25% of the
C and F sources had F[100] > 100. Several “bright sky” cuts were tried based on this but
the cuts were either not effective or were unduly constricting on the search. This
approach was even less effective for the F[60] filter. Similarly CIRR3, the “total surface

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

brightness of the sky surrounding the source in a 1/2 degree beam at 100 microns,” was
not a useful discriminant. This was often high for sources close to the galactic plane so it
excluded those sources rather than ones with poor fits.
The unweighted least squares values were used at this point to cut out some 43
sources because they had least squares values > 0.25. Typically for this situation the
correlation coefficient for the Planck fit was below 0.6-0.7, it was difficult to unfold
Gaussian lines, and a polynomial fit was often better than a Planck fit. Notice that these
sources could still be Dyson Sphere candidates since they were ruled out because the
available data from IRAS data was not strong enough statistically. Five more sources
with unweighted least squares above 0.19 were eliminated because they had an
association with a very bright 2MASS star (IRAS 06169-1235, 13553-5256, 16167-5118,
17096-3243, 21114+5013). A bright 2MASS source can give rise to a Rayleigh-Jeans tail
that extends into the IRAS LRS region.
Finally one low least square case was eliminated because the source had
previously been associated with a conjunction with an asteroid. This was found in the
process of seeking an explanation for why no CO line appeared for this object when it
was selected for observation in a group of putative carbon-rich AGB stars (Volk, K. et
al., 1993). The spectral information for IRAS 19159+1556 is shown in Figure 4. There is
a wide discrepancy between the spectrometer and the filter values and also MSX (open
squares). The IRAS variability index is 99%. Further the F[100] filter is ten to twenty
times higher than the other filters (but roughly consistent with a Planck fit to the LRS).
The temperature is low, 208 ºK, suggesting that it perhaps should have been classified H
rather than U. There is also no Spitzer information, perhaps because the source is too
bright. (The source is not in the Spitzer GLIMPSE region.)
5. POSSIBLE CANDIDATES
This cut process left only sixteen candidates. Thirteen of these had least squares
above 0.15. The three in the low least squares set are listed first in Table 2 ordered by the
IRAS identification. The galactic coordinates are given after the IRAS identification.
VAR, the IRAS percent likelihood of variability and IDTYPE are shown next. The
presence of a visible star is indicated by one of three tags – bright, normal, or weak in the
next column. This already subjective classification is handicapped for some crowded star
fields. A quantitative estimate for any visible or infrared star associated with the object is
given by the 2.2 µm Ks filter value in magnitudes. An asterisk marks cases for Ks shown
in SIMBAD. The Calgary classification and fitted blackbody temperature follow. The
fitted Planck distribution amplitude, am, and the unweighted least squares are shown next.
After that there is a rating on the possible Dyson Sphere candidate (3 for nothing wrong,
2 for good but other classification, 1 for a problem, 0 for a significant problem). The Y
axis in the spectral figures can be converted to Janskys by dividing by Facc. The table also
has notes on each source including the spectral classification where known. Interestingly
7 of the 16 sources were LRS spectra not included in the IRAS LRS Atlas set and two of
these had low least squares.
Notice that only U and F sources remain. U sources had temperatures more along
the line of the original Dyson suggestion for a temperature while the F source
temperatures were higher. Most sources had a visible or 2MASS counterpart or both. In

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

retrospect, focusing on just the F and U classifications would have resulted in a search
sample one third smaller. What was gained by the search over other categories was more
confidence that Dyson Sphere-like candidates were not being misclassified into these
sets. This was particularly true for C cases which provided a yardstick on how small an
amplitude a spectroscopic line could have had before it was lost in a blackbody
distribution.
Figure 5 shows the spectrum of IRAS 20369+5131 in the low least squares set,
the closest approximation to a Dyson Sphere signature in the sample. There is also
confirming MSX infrared data shown as open squares for this source. For completeness
several filter points from DIRBE are shown as open circles. At small wavelengths they
lie well above the extrapolated blackbody distribution, MSX, and the closest 2MASS
source. It may have been that the wide angular resolution of DIRBE overlapped a second
source. There is no visible star and a null search (Deguchi et al. 2005) for the SiO maser J
= 1 - 0 radio line. The blackbody temperature is 376 ºK. The Calgary classification is U.
While this looks like a pure Dyson Sphere SIMBAD classifies it as a carbon star.
Typically this classification would be based on other spectra in the millimeter regime.
However no such information was found in a literature search. The source is slightly
above the galactic plane and in a direction away from the galactic center. The height
above the galactic plane may suggest it is relatively nearby.
Determining the distance of a featureless infrared source is difficult. It may be
possible to estimate a kinematic distance for a partial Dyson Sphere or an associated
source such as a binary companion. This could be estimated with a proper motion or a red
shift (Jiang et al. 1996), perhaps from a maser signal. Two of the sixteen sources had
measured proper motion error ellipses and ten of them had visible sources. No kinematic
distance determination was made for IRAS 20369+5131. On the other hand Jiang et al.
(1997) have estimated a distance of 4.63 kpc for another of the sixteen sources, IRAS
03078+6046. This source is discussed further below.
In an early IRAS-based Dyson Sphere search Slysh (1985) developed a
bolometric formula for the peak flux density of a Dyson Sphere spectrum:
35 1 L
,
(6)
S m ( Jy ) =
T D 2 Lo
where D is the distance to the source in kpc and L and Lo are the luminosities of the
putative Dyson Sphere and the Sun. Notice that this is independent of the Dyson Sphere
radius except for the fact that the temperature is a function of radius. This equation can be
solved to get a bolometric distance for a Dyson Sphere:
Dbol (L ) =

35 ⎛ L ⎞
⎜ ⎟.
S mT ⎜⎝ Lo ⎟⎠

(7)

For IRAS 20369+5131 Dbol = 42 pc for a Dyson Sphere with the luminosity of the Sun.
For a partial Dyson “Sphere” due to a ring the bolometric distance is of the order
of Dr = Dbol × 2 × f c where fc is the fractional areal coverage of the ring. For a ring
that covers 0.5% of the sphere the effective bolometric distance will be one tenth of that
for a full coverage sphere. Partial Dyson Spheres effectively need to be closer in order to
be detected.
Another gauge of source distance is to assume that the source is at a scale height
above or below the galactic plane and then use b, the galactic latitude, to calculate

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

another distance, Dscl. Clearly this is not a measurement but a perspective on what the
distance might be. Somewhat arbitrarily assuming a galactic scale height of 250 pc and a
Sun height above the galactic plane of 34.5 pc gives Dscl = 1970 pc for IRAS
20369+5131. The luminosity of a source at that distance would have to be L = 2160 Lsun.
Slysh notes that this is typical of the luminosities of some late red giants. One is then left
with two possibilities, a relatively nearby DS with a luminosity on the order of our sun or
a distant and invisible red giant with no noticeable 11.3 µm emission peak (that is no
peak above 2 σ).
IRAS 20331+4024 is a second source in the low least squares set. It is quite
similar to IRAS 19159+1556, the source ruled out because of a conjunction with an
asteroid. The F[60] and F[100] filters are very high and suggest an even lower
temperature. The bolometric distance is 45 pc. IRAS 20035+3242 is a similar source with
an even lower fitted temperature of 185 ºK. The LRS distribution produces a ragged but
plausible Planck fit and matches the information from MSX with a scale change. IRAS
11544-6408, classified as a post-AGB star by SIMBAD, is also similar but there are hints
of a non-Planck distribution associated with a least squares > 0.19. A recently released
Spitzer IRS measurement (Garcia-Lario campaign ID 1085) shows small but distinct
features and a non-Planck distribution that follows the LRS spectrum. The fitted black
body temperature is 211 ºK.
Figure 6 (IRAS 16406-1406) is a third possible candidate in the low least squares
set. The Calgary classification is F. The 2MASS points match up with the LRS Planck fit.
In this case a polynomial fit is about as good as a blackbody distribution. There is nothing
reported for MSX. Several filter points from DIRBE are shown as open circles. They
suggest a blackbody distribution that extends below the LRS wavelengths. The fitted
blackbody temperature is 538 ºK. There is a faint hint of an emission artifact at 13.5 µm
and a weak visible star. The source is in the direction of the galactic center but above the
galactic plane. There is an indication of variability. With the available information it
would be hard to make a case that this source is an interesting example of a possible
Dyson Sphere candidate. The irregular distribution and possible line artifact further
weaken this source as a candidate. The one solar bolometric distance is Dbol = 55 pc. The
galactic scale distance is 600 pc which would require a luminosity of 130 Lsun.
Figure 7 shows the spectrum for IRAS 03078+6046 in the high least squares set.
This could be a Planck spectrum but the scatter in the points is high. This illustrates the
problem of distinguishing a blackbody distribution when the deviations become larger.
For example, a polynomial fit is slightly better than a blackbody distribution. The
blackbody temperature is 381 ºK. The IRAS variability index is 69% and the filter values
are different than the LRS. Four points from MSX follow the distribution of the LRS but
are 60% higher. Kerton & Brount (2003) have found no CO associations for this source.
There is also no DIRBE data. The object is near the galactic plane but in a direction
opposite to the galactic center. There is not enough information to make a strong case for
the source as a possible Dyson Sphere candidate. The bolometric distance for a Dyson
Sphere with the Sun’s luminosity is Dbol = 86 pc. The galactic scale distance is 4.8 kpc
which would require a luminosity of 3000 Lsun. As noted earlier Jiang et al. (1997) give
D = 4.63 kpc. In fact this source has been used to set Zscl and force rough agreement
between the scale distance and the Jiang et al. determination. If the Jiang distance is used

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

the large luminosity implies a late red giant rather than a Dyson Sphere (although there
appears to be no visible star).
The data for IRAS 18094-1505 in the high least squares set is similar to IRAS
03078+6046 where the scatter in the LRS points is high. However the MSX data does
follow the distribution of the LRS and the 2MASS points are roughly compatible. There
is no DIRBE data. There is a visible star. The Planck temperature is 333 ºK. IRAS
18094–1505 is classified as a semi-regular pulsating variable star. The IRAS variability
index is 8%. The object is near the galactic plane. Combining the LRS, 2MASS, and
MSX data might make a statistically stronger case for the source as a possible Dyson
Sphere candidate. The one solar bolometric distance for a Dyson Sphere is Dbol = 84 pc.
The galactic scale distance is 8 kpc which would require a luminosity of 9000 Lsun. IRAS
18209-2756 (291 ºK), IRAS 18287-1447 (386 ºK), and IRAS 18298-2026 (377 ºK) are
somewhat similar to IRAS 18094-1505. All of them have larger fluctuations. In addition
IRAS 18209-2756 has a very weak hint of a 12 µm emission line. IRAS 20212+4301
and IRAS 18013-2045 are also similar. Adding the MSX and 2MASS points suggest
Planck temperatures greater than 600 ºK for these two. IRAS 18112-1353 resembles
these but has also exhibited a large variation between the MSX, IRAS filters, and LRS
data.
Finally, three of the sixteen sources, IRAS 00477-4900, 02566+2938, and 194057851 have prominent IR short wavelength features observed via 2MASS, MSX, and or
DIRBE. Characteristically, the short wavelength behavior merges into a longer wave
length tail that is only incidentally fitted when just the LRS data is used to match a
Planck distribution. These would seem to be unlikely partial Dyson Sphere candidates
since the dominant mechanism giving rise to the IR is producing the behavior in the
2MASS region.
The distribution of the sixteen sources is shown in Figure 8 on a galactic Aitoff
plot. The three sources with smaller unweighted least squares values are plotted as
squares, the others as circles. The 2240 source sample resulting from the selection on
LRS cases, FQUAL(12) and FQUAL(25) > 1, temperature, Calgary ID types, and
IDTYPE = 0, 2, 3, 4 is also plotted as dots. (For IDTYPE 3, 4 all Calgary classifications
are shown, not just F and U). About three quarters of the 16 sources are near the galactic
plane. Four others are away from the plane suggesting that they are relatively nearby.
Note that the galactic plane is prominent in the 2240 source set. However there is not
much sign of the galactic bulge. This suggests that the LRS might not reach out to the
galactic center for this sample.
6. RELATION TO EARLIER DYSON SPHERE SEARCHES
A number of Dyson Sphere searches have been carried out over the years.
Searches such as Jugaku et al. (2003) and unpublished searches conducted by Conroy, C.
& Werthimer, D. and Globus, A. et al. (2003) were directed toward partial Dyson Sphere
signatures. These groups looked for slight infrared excesses around visible stars. This
approach is sound as a tool to look for cases where the fractional coverage of the Dyson
Shroud is incomplete. Indeed, since pure Dyson Spheres may be hard to construct, partial
Dyson Sphere searches could be the best attack in a search for examples of cosmic

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

archaeology. This approach is not appropriate for a pure Dyson Sphere search because
the host star would not be visible.
As noted earlier Slysh (1985) and TKP (Timofeev, Kardashev, & Promyslov
2000) carried out early searches for Dyson Spheres using IRAS. TKP used blackbody
temperature fits to the four IRAS filters to select about 100 sources with temperatures in
narrow intervals around 115 ºK and 285 ºK from the 3000 brightest IRAS sources. While
the first phase of the program discussed here used something like this approach (three
lowest filters rather than all four) the investigation reported in this article uses the LRS
for the temperature fit. The TKP technique effectively excludes dusty regions where
F[60] and F[100] are large. Of the 14 sources listed in the TKP tables and Figure 3 of
their article, only six have LRS spectra and none of these were in the 1527 source sample
investigated in this search. All six have Calgary classifications that would have excluded
them from this search. For five of the six with LRS data the temperature fits from the
LRS differ from the four filter fits by an average of 110 ºK (the LRS temperatures are all
higher). This illustrates that filter temperature fits can be misleading. Two of the six have
FQ[12] values of 1 which would also have excluded them. Most are associated with
definite stellar types.
Slysh reports on the early IRAS data release noting that there are many sources in
the roughly 200,000 sample with 50 ºK < T < 400 ºK. He gives details on six sources
found by employing four filter blackbody fits. Four of the sources had LRS information.
It is not clear how large a fraction of the IRAS data set was searched to find these
sources. The four filter temperatures reported in the paper range from 85 to 350 ºK. One
of the sources is in the 1527 source sample. That source, IRAS 04530+4427 (Slysh
0453+444), has a prominent 12 micron emission line and is classified as a carbon star
(CGCS 6092). IRAS 05073+5248 (Slysh 0507+528) was excluded from the 1527 source
set because of the E classification. It is associated with NV Aur, a Mira Cet that has an
OH/IR maser associated with it. IRAS 05361+4644 (Slysh 0536+467) has an odd
spectrum that includes a 12 micron peak. It was also classified as E by Calgary and
therefore excluded. SIMBAD associates it with the carbon star BD+46 1033. IRAS
17411-3154 (Slysh G 357.3-1.3) has a strong absorption feature at 10 microns. It was
classified A by Calgary and excluded. For the four with LRS data the temperature fits
from the LRS differ from the four filter fits by an average of 44 ºK (the LRS temperatures
are all higher).
In summary none of the Slysh or TKP sources is included in the list of interesting
sources reported here and only one is in the 1527 source sample. The examples from
these papers demonstrate that the LRS is an effective tool in discriminating against filter
spectra that only roughly follow a Planck distribution. The examples also suggest that
relying on information from the 60 to 100 micron region may obscure an evaluation of a
source in the Dyson Sphere regime covered by the F[12] and F[25] micron filters.
7. RELATION TO SETI SEARCHES
Over the last decades several wide-ranging searches have been made for radio
ETI signals. In Project Phoenix (Tarter 2000) the SETI Institute and its collaborators have
used the Arecibo 300 m diameter radio telescope as well as the 42 m dish at Green Bank
and the 64 m Parkes telescope in Australia to look at on the order of 1000 individual

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

targets within 250 light years principally selected for characteristics that might be
hospitable for life. These included F, G (Sun-like), and K type stars. A region from -2º to
+38º declination in celestial coordinates was searched with Arecibo with a sensitivity of
O(1 Jy). (The band is shown in Figure 8.) Individual observations were typically for 140 280 s per channel. The system monitored the band from 1.2 to 3 GHz. This band includes
the 21 cm hydrogen line “water hole.” No robust ETI signals have been detected.
The sixteen sources listed in Table 2 were compared to the Phoenix target list.
None of the sixteen is in the Phoenix list. This is not surprising since a pure Dyson
Sphere is not like our Sun. Even the Dyson Sphere candidates here with an associated
visible star have unusually high infrared luminosity and would not be confused with an
ordinary sun.
The Berkeley SERENDIP search (D. Werthimer, private communication) that
operates the SETI@home program has also used data from Arecibo. SERENDIP has run
continuously for a commensal survey measurement with other Arecibo programs.
Characteristically while one observer uses the Gregorian feed, SERENDIP collects data
from a 1420 MHz feed located near the 400 MHz feed at the other end of the rotating
platform suspended above the reflecting dish. This approach has resulted in a wider
effective sky coverage than Phoenix at the expense of some loss of sensitivity compared
to Phoenix. SERENDIP sampled over ~1 Hz windows in a 100 MHz frequency range
centered around the 21 cm line. Two of the 16 sources discussed above were in the
SERENDIP survey region (IRAS 02566+2938 and IRAS 20035+3242, both high least
squares sources). No concrete SETI signatures were found in the course of SERENDIP so
in that context these two IRAS sources are free of SETI-like signatures to the level of the
search.
Somewhat similar programs have been conducted at Harvard. Likewise several
optical searches have been carried out. None of these projects has detected a confirmed
ETI signal. A SETI search of thirteen of the sixteen sources discussed in this article is
planned for the Allen Telescope Array (ATA) in the near future. There is, of course, no
particular reason to expect that a Dyson Sphere would be an ETI radio or optical emitter.
8. CONCLUDING REMARKS
This Dyson Sphere search has looked at a significant fraction of the IRAS LRS
sources with temperatures under 600 ºK. Since IRAS covered 96% of the sky this is
essentially a whole-sky search. Indeed this search may be one of the only SETI/cosmic
archaeology whole-sky searches conducted so far. Unlike many radio and optical SETI
searches this one does not require purposeful intent to communicate on the part of the
originating source of the signature of intelligence.
The one sun bolometric distance, Dsol, depends on both T, the blackbody
temperature, and Sm, the peak flux density. The largest Dsol for the sixteen source sample
was 118 pc for an Sm of 8.6 Jy. Most of the 65 source sample had fluxes above 4 Jy
which could give Dsol values in the range 150 pc. The IRAS LRS reached down to filter
fluxes of 1-2 Janskys in the F[12] and F[25] filters so that the IRAS LRS could in
principle have found a Dyson Sphere with the luminosity of our sun out to 300 pc. This
reach encompasses a region that contains on the order of a million solar type stars.
Interestingly, if the effective galactic disk scale height is in the 100-200 pc range this

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

view (that is, based on the one solar luminosity estimate) suggests that the sample of
Dyson Spheres found with the IRAS LRS would be scattered more over the whole sky
rather than lying near the galactic plane. As seen in Figure 8, perhaps one third of the
potential candidate sources are scattered over the whole sky but the other two thirds are
in the galactic plane. These sources are probably more luminous and at greater distances.
This search has shown that at best there are only a few quasi-plausible Dyson
Sphere signatures out of the IRAS LRS sample in the 100 < T < 600 ºK temperature
region. This limit includes both pure and partial Dyson Spheres. With several possible
exceptions all the “good” sources identified in this search have some more conventional
explanation other than as a Dyson Sphere candidate. In spite of the fact that there are
many mimics such as stars in a late dusty phase of their evolution good Dyson Sphere
candidates are quite rare!
8.1 Possible Future Investigations and Searches
More information on candidates in the sixteen source list could help to decisively
rule them out or even strengthen a case for some of them as potential Dyson Spheres.
Specifically observations of maser signals associated with a source should eliminate it as
a candidate. Improved infrared observations could also eliminate sources.
The angular resolution for Spitzer is ten to twenty times better than IRAS while
the sensitivity is three orders of magnitude greater. Could Spitzer/GLIMPSE data be used
to substantially extend the search for Dyson Sphere candidates or to rule out candidates in
the sixteen source list?
The GLIMPSE survey (Benjamin, et al. 2005) has used the Spitzer Infrared Array
Camera (IRAC) to survey the galactic disk in a band of galactic longitude of +/-65
degrees and +/- 1 degrees in latitude. One third of the IRAS sources covered in this
Dyson Sphere search lie in this region. In GLIMPSE this region contains 50 to 100
million sources, 90% of which are cool red giants. According to E. Churchwell (private
communication) this is in line with an earlier model (Wainscoat, et al. 1992) of the
infrared sky. The IRAS database contains roughly 80,000 sources in the GLIMPSE band
so that one might aspire to collect a sample of potential candidates one thousand times
larger, that is O(10,000) sources with some characteristics of a Dyson Sphere. From a
different perspective since Spitzer is one thousand times more sensitive, the bolometric
reach for a one sun equivalent would be past the center of the galaxy. Parenthetically, the
Spitzer IRAC camera effectively saturates for the bright sources found by IRAS so that
GLIMPSE is often silent on the sources surveyed here.
IRAC has filters centered at 3.63 µm, 4.53 µm, 5.78 µm, and 8.0 microns. A
Planck distribution peak centered at 6 microns corresponds to a blackbody temperature of
850 ºK. This is substantially higher than maximum temperature investigated in this
Dyson Sphere search. Because of the filter range the IRAC filter set will see only the
rising portion of the Planck distribution for a 300 ºK Dyson Sphere. At 200 ºK there
might only be a signature in the 8 micron filter. The camera for the Japanese satellite
Akari (formerly Astro-F) will provide all-sky, high spatial resolution information for 2–5,
5-12, and 10-25 µm filters in the future. A Planck distribution could be fitted to the
filters, particularly if the 2MASS filters at 1.23, 1.66, and 2.16 µm were also used. For
some sources additional spectrographic information from the Spitzer IRS spectrograph or

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

perhaps a ground-based instrument like Gemini could be used to define the Planck shape
and rule out spectral features. The Spitzer GLIMPSE survey might be useful for sorting
out the lower end of IRAS distributions, particularly to get information on the difficult 8
µm line region and also to give better information on source positions. Unfortunately
only one of the sixteen candidate sources falls in the GLIMPSE region and there appears
to be no information on it, possibly because the bright source has saturated the pixels in
the region.
A second reason to be interested in the GLIMPSE study is that it could give a
richer sample in the sky coverage region of the SERENDIP SETI survey. About twenty
percent of the 2240 source sample was covered in the SERENDIP survey. Altogether 6%
of the 2240 source sample reported in this paper is within the SERENDIP – GLIMPSE
overlap region. Assuming the overall GLIMPSE survey could yield a thousand times
more Dyson Sphere-like sources (~104 sources) then GLIMPSE might give about 70 with
SERENDIP SETI nulls. This would codify a fraction for Dyson Sphere-like sources with
no SETI signals at a certain level. It would not, however, advance the investigation of
Dyson Sphere-like signatures.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author would like to thank, J. Annis, C. Beichman, and K. Volk for guidance.

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

APPENDIX: DYSON SPHERE ENGINEERING
The premise of the search reported here was to look for Dyson Spheres based on
the original idea put forward by Dyson including his addendum with additional
information (Dyson 1960). This concept was a “loose collection or swarm of objects
traveling on independent orbits…” Dyson’s model leads to a sun where the optical
radiation is effectively shielded by a shell-like shroud and the shell radiates somewhat
like a blackbody with the radius of the shroud. As noted earlier, this is similar to a carbon
star surrounded by a thick, low temperature dust cloud. The assumption of a fully
shrouded body is restrictive and perhaps ingenuous. A partial Dyson Sphere would be a
more practical object to build. The search described here initially started by ruling out
infrared sources with associated visible stars. Later it turned out that allowing visible
stars did not unduly complicate the search and those cases were included. In any case the
original premise of a pure Dyson Sphere constitutes a rather clean signature. The spirit of
the search was to use the signature without investigating the underlying hypothesis in
detail. This too is ingenuous because it leads to a particular signature. It is worth
reemphasizing that a number of other interesting searches have looked for partial Dyson
Spheres. The following paragraphs discuss the scale of the construction of a Dyson
Sphere as an engineering project and then go on to the costs to construct a “sphere”,
criticisms of the Dyson hypothesis, and the stability of the sphere.
The mass of a Jupiter-scale Dyson Sphere would be 2*1027 kg. Earth’s biosphere
is estimated to be in the 1015 – 1016 kg range. The largest ocean liner is 1.5*108 kg while
the immobile Great Wall of China is on the order of 1012 kg and took 2500 years to build.
The International Space Station weighs 2*105 kg so that it is a factor of ten billion trillion
smaller than a Jupiter-class Dyson Sphere. In short, a Dyson Sphere is a large object!
Dyson’s perspective on this is to note that increases of scale such as this can be reached
in 3000 to 4000 years based on a population growth of O(1%/year).
The energy cost of constructing a Dyson Sphere is high. In his paper Dyson notes
that the energy to disassemble and rearrange a Jupiter size planet is equivalent to
800 years of total solar radiation, not the much smaller amount of solar radiation falling
on the planet’s surface. (The 800 year number is of the order of the gravitational self
energy of Jupiter.) This poses a bootstrap problem in the building process. Initially the
available power would be low but could rise as more surface area developed. In any case
the construction time would probably be much longer than 103 years. For scale, Earthbased projects such as cathedral or military fortification construction like the Great Wall
of China have required times of 102 to 103 years. Mass loss time scales for circumstellar
dust clouds can be in the 103 to 105 year range. Creation of these clouds requires a
significant part of the stellar energy.
One of the criticisms of Dyson’s proposal from the start has been based on the
incorrect presumption that Dyson’s object was a rigid, hollow sphere. Papagiannis (1985)
has given a convincing calculation showing that a rigid spherical shell could not be built
if only gravitational force is considered (that is, neglecting radiation pressure and
centripetal effects). He then goes on to argue that a system of “space structures” would
only obscure 1% of the light from the star. This is one of the justifications used for partial
searches such as those of Jugaku. This argument would seem to ignore a shroud
consisting principally of thin silicon chips, solar panels, or carbon nanotubes. Put

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

differently, it is difficult to anticipate the size or the technology going in to the individual
cells in a Dyson Shroud developed by an advanced intelligence.
Another criticism of the Dyson hypothesis says that a spherical swarm is not a
stable system. Somewhat similar systems are studied in connection with the stability of
elliptic and spiral galaxies as well as with planetary formation in the solar system.
Presumably if instabilities develop in a rotating Dyson Sphere it could collapse to a disk
under its own gravitational attraction. On the other hand the individual cells in the shell
could be actively steered, perhaps by solar sails.

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

REFERENCES

Beichman, C. A., 1987, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 25, 521
Benjamin, R., et al., 2005, ApJ 630, L149
Chen, P. S., Szczerba, R., Kwok, S., Volk, K., 2001, A&A 368 1006
Cohen, M., Walker, R., & Witteborn, F., 1992, Astron.J., 104, 2030
Deguchi, S., et al., 2005, Publ. Astron. Soc. Jap., 57, 933
Dyson, F., 1960, Science 131, 1667
Garcia-Lario P., Manchado A., Pych W., Pottasch S. R., 1997, Astron. Astrophys., Suppl.
Ser., 126, 479
Groenewegen, M., et al., 2002, A&A 390, 511
Gupta, R., Singh, H. P., Volk, K., & Kwok, S., 2004, ApJ Sup 152, 201
Jiang, B., et al., 1996, ApJS, 106, 463
Jiang, B., et al., 1997, Astronomical Journal 113, 1315
Jugaku, J. & Nishimura, S., 2003, Bioastronomy 2002: Life Among the Stars,
Proceedings of IAU Symposium #213, R. Norris and F. Stootman, eds, ASPC 213, 437
Kerton, C. R. & Brunt, C.M., 2003, Astron. Astrophys. 399, 1083
Kwok, S., Volk, K., & Bidelman, W. P., 1997, ApJS, 112, 557
Murakami, H., et al., 1996, PASJ 48, L41
Papagiannis, M. D., 1985, p. 268, in The Search for Extraterrestrial Life: Recent
Developments, M. D. Papagiannis (Editor), Reidel Pub. Co., Boston, Massachusetts
Price, S. D., et al., 2001, AJ 121, 2819
Skrutskie, M. F., et al., 2006, AJ 131, 1163
Slysh, V. I., 1985, p. 315, in The Search for Extraterrestrial Life: Recent Developments,
ed. M. Papagiannis, D., Reidel Pub. Co., Boston, Massachusetts, (1985)
Tarter, J., 2000, Ann. Rev. Astron and Astrophys. 48, 511
Thompson, G. et al., 2006, ApJ 652, 1654
Thompson, R. L., et al., 1998, ApJ 492, L95
Timofeev, M. Y., Kardashev, N. S., & Promyslov, V. G., 2000, Acta Astronautica
Journal, 46, 655
Volk, K., Kwok, S. & Langill, P., 1992, ApJ 391, 285
Volk, K., Kwok, S. & Woodsworth, A. W., 1993, ApJ 402, 292
Wainscoat, R. J., et al., 1992, ApJ Supp. 83, 111

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

FIGURE CAPTIONS & FIGURES

1.
IRAS 17446-4048, a typical carbon star. The 11.3 μm SiC emission feature is
characteristic of C stars. IRAS filter values - diamonds, DIRBE points – open circles,
2MASS – triangles, LRS (low) – x, LRS (high) – dot, fit to filter – dotted line, fit to LRS
- solid. line (Scale: F(Jy) = y axis/0.0046)
2.
IRAS 19566+3423 showing 10.2 μm silicate absorption feature occurring in
OH/IR stars. The solid triangles are 2MASS points. (Same legend as Fig. 1, scale: F(Jy) =
y axis/0.0103)
3.
IRAS 13129-6211, a typical Calgary H type spectrum often associated with HII
regions. (Same legend as Fig. 1, scale: F(Jy) = y axis/0.0051)
4.
IRAS 19159+1556, a second interesting H-like source. Note wide deviation
between the LRS and the IRAS and MSX filters. (Same legend as Fig. 1, scale: F(Jy) = y
axis/0.0560)
5.
IRAS 20369+5131, the closest approximation to a Dyson Sphere spectrum found
in the search. MSX points – open squares. DIRBE points (open circles) do not agree with
the 2MASS values and are possibly from another source. (Same legend as Fig. 1, scale:
F(Jy) = y axis/0.0168)
6.
IRAS 16406-1406, a third possible source but with a high deviation and a
relatively high temperature. Note hint of an emission feature at 13.5 µm. (Same legend as
Fig. 1, scale: F(Jy) = y axis/0.00425)
7.
IRAS 03078+6046, a Planck-like spectrum with high deviation. It is hard to make
a case for a source with fluctuations this high. (Same legend as Fig. 1, scale: F(Jy) = y
axis/0.0541)
8.
Galactic Aitoff plot for the sixteen sources. Three lowest least squares sources –
squares, others - circles (one is shadowed). Sources in the 2240 source sample - dots. The
SETI Arecibo region lies between the 38º and -2º bounds. The galactic plane is clear in
the distribution but not the galactic bulge.

- 23 -

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

TABLES
Table 1
Source flow through cuts
Selection
IRAS sample
Calgary LRS sample
FQUAL(12), FQUAL(25)>1
100 ≤ Temperature ≤ 600 ºK
Selecting C†, F, H*, P*, U
IDTYPE = 0, 2, 3, 4
Possible sources by direct scan
-Line(166),classif(40),T(14),H(9),nonplnck(1)
Statistical uncertainty < 0.25
Somewhat interesting sources
Most interesting but with questions
*
later eliminated, †mostly lines

Sources
245,889
11224
10982
6521
2240
1527
295
65
22
16
3

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

IRAS
name
16406-1406
20331+4024
20369+5131
00477-4900
02566+2938
03078+6046
11544-6408
18013-2045
18094-1505
18112-1353
18209-2756
18287-1447
18298-2026
19405-7851
20035+3242
20212+4301

Galactic coor.
longitude Lat.
(mod 180)
4.10 20.20
79.83
0.10
89.09
6.29
-56.44 -68.40
153.54 -25.31
139.17
2.59
-62.91
-2.17
9.21
0.47
15.08
1.56
16.34
1.77
5.03
-6.88
17.56
-2.39
12.66
-5.25
-44.51 -29.33
70.13
0.57
80.64
3.42

Table 2
Interesting sources
VAR Visible Ks
Calg. T
amin unLSQ
star?
(mag)
class fit (K) (LRS)
74
33
43
4
2
69
21
93
8
99
99
20
35
4
11
7

8.7 *

bright
normal

normal
normal
weak
normal
bright
weak
normal

7.9
1.862 *
2.07 *
11.96
5.18
6.85
6.81
7.94
9.42
11.02
1.96
11.92
5.76

*
*

*
*

F
U
U
F
F
F
U
U
F
F
U
F
F
F
U
F

538
177
376
550
429
381
211
330
333
387
291
386
377
518
185
412

2.353
294
16.42
1.64
3.26
3.742
39.1
7.66
6.84
3.48
5.91
5.65
3.602
2.17
46.03
3.06

0.096
0.066
0.072
0.159
0.188
0.163
0.191
0.208
0.208
0.218
0.246
0.195
0.249
0.154
0.176
0.246

DS
Notes
rating
3
3
2
1
2
3
1
0
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
1

Hint of 13.5 µm
8 µm?, H?, MSX, fil ≠ LRS
C* but no reference?
Prominent 2MASS, DIRBE
M7, brt 2MASS
MSX > LRS
post AGB, PN?,8 µm?
2MASS means higher T?
2MASS means higher T?
MSX > LRS
Weak hint of 12 µm
MSX < LRS
Prominent 2MASS, DIRBE
Peculiar star
MSX, 2MASS: T > 600 ºK?

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

Fig. 1: IRAS 17446-4048
1.2

Normalized flux

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0

5

10

15

20

Lamda (microns)

25

30

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

Fig. 2: IRAS 19566+3423
1.2

Normalized flux

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0

5

10

15

20

Lamda (microns)

25

30

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

Fig. 3: IRAS 13129-6211
0.5

Normalized flux

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0

5

10

15

20

Lamda (microns)

25

30

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

Figure 4

Normalized flux

10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
0

5

10

15

20

Lamda (microns)

25

30

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

Figure 5

1.2

Normalized flux

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0

5

10

15

20

Lamda (microns)

25

30

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

Fig. 6: IRAS 16406-1406
1.2

Normalized flux

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0

5

10

15

20

Lamda (microns)

25

30

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

Fig. 7: IRAS 03078+6046
1.2

Normalized flux

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0

5

10

15

20

Lamda (microns)

25

30

FERMILAB-PUB-08-352-AD REVISED

Figure 8

Arecibo
60

38
º

-2º

30

-180

180
0

Arecibo

-30

-60

b

