=== arXiv:2607.06684v1  [2026-07-07]
TITLE  : Extreme Debris Disks: Insights into Violent Collisions in Planet Formation and Destruction
AUTHORS: Kate Y. L. Su, Attila Moor, Agnes Kospal, George H. Rieke, Antranik A. Sefilian, Renu Malhotra, Ilaria Pascucci, Alan P. Jackson
ABS    : Debris disks are dusty structures around mature stars, primarily identified by infrared excesses in the stellar spectra. A subset, known as extreme debris disks (EDDs), exhibits stochastic infrared variability, believed to result from large-scale violent collisions that contribute to the formation or destruction of rocky planetary bodies. We analyze JWST and Spitzer mid-infrared spectra for 21 EDDs to investigate the connection between impact-produced dust mineralogy and the age and dynamical state of these systems during various stages of planet formation and evolution. Our findings indicate that EDDs contain significantly more optically thin, small dust grains compared to those typically seen in protoplanetary and debris disks. Predominantly submicron in size, these grains are thermally altered, as shown by their high levels of silica and crystalline silicate composition. Along with stochastic infrared variability, these features define EDDs as a subclass of debris systems where dust is generated from large collisions between Moon- and Mars-sized bodies. Our results not only provide diagnostic information about the physical conditions of violent events during terrestrial planet formation, aiding in differentiating the complex outcomes of these impacts, but also offer a potential marker for identifying planetary systems experiencing dynamical instability.

=== arXiv:2607.00192v1  [2026-06-30]
TITLE  : Spectroscopic Monitoring of Metal Lines in Polluted White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: Laura K. Rogers, Michael M. Shara, Amy Bonsor, Siyi Xu, Érika Le Bourdais, Patrick Dufour, John Debes, Omri Nolan
ABS    : The disruption and accretion of planetary material onto white dwarfs is expected to be inherently dynamic and stochastic, potentially driving variability in the accretion rate and therefore the shape and depth of the photospheric metal absorption lines. This paper presents an 18-year optical spectroscopic monitoring campaign of five warm (11,000-23,000K) polluted white dwarfs with sinking timescales of days-months, observed using Magellan/MIKE and SALT/HRS to directly test this prediction. At four of the five systems, no statistically significant variability is detected over baselines of 15-18 years corresponding to hundreds to thousands of diffusion timescales, with inferred accretion rates stable to within 15-30% (1$σ$) showing remarkably stable accretion on decadal timescales. This implies that either the processes maintaining the accretion of the disrupted planetary material are stable on the same timescales, or that currently uncharacterized photospheric processes act to smooth observable abundance variations on these timescales. The one exception, WD 0106$-$328, shows statistically significant variability in the 4481A Mg II doublet from the ground-based data. Yet no significant equivalent width or abundance changes are seen between two Hubble Space Telescope ultraviolet spectra taken in 2016 and 2025, despite probing a larger set of transitions. This may imply that the ground-based observations witnessed a stochastic excursion from a stable baseline accretion rate, rather than a sustained change in the bulk accretion rate.

=== arXiv:2607.00105v2  [2026-06-30]
TITLE  : AGN radiative feedback as the main regulator of [O III] outflow activity and obscuration in X-ray AGN
AUTHORS: Carolina Andonie, Andrea Merloni, Catarina Aydar, Benny Trakhtenbrot, Johannes Buchner, Brivael Laloux, Mara Salvato, Peter Boorman
ABS    : Large-scale ionised outflows and nuclear obscuration are fundamental manifestations of AGN activity, yet direct observational evidence linking these phenomena remains scarce. We use the eROSITA Final Equatorial Depth Survey, among the largest uniform optical spectroscopic datasets of X-ray AGN, to investigate how AGN accretion rate affects ionised outflow kinematics and X-ray obscuration. Our sample comprises 2.840 AGN at z&lt;0.82 with high-quality SDSS spectra. Through optical spectral fitting, we measure Eddington ratios ($λ_{Edd}$) and [O III] emission-line kinematics, tracing ionised outflows. In addition, we use archival eROSITA X-ray spectroscopy with X-ray stacking analyses to constrain the obscuration of the sample, $N_H$. We find that (1) 35% of the entire sample hosts a [O III] outflows ($W_{80}&gt;600$ km/s), with the outflow incidence increasing with the AGN luminosity from 15% at $L_{AGN}&lt;10^{44}$ erg/s up to 60% at $L_{AGN}&gt;10^{46}$ erg/s; (2) the outflow incidence increases with Eddington ratio from 29% at $\log λ_{Edd}&lt;-2.3$ to 50% at $\log λ_{Edd}&gt;-1.7$; and (3) the AGN obscuration decreases with Eddington ratio, as sources with $\logλ_{Edd}&gt;-1.7$ are 5 times less obscured than lower Eddington ratios AGN. In addition, we find that 1% of the sample populates the "forbidden region" of the $N_H-λ_{Edd}$ plane, where the outflow incidence peaks at 52%, consistent with a short-lived feedback phase. Notably, when matching the Eddington ratios samples in AGN luminosity, these trends vanish, implying that radiation pressure drives changes in outflow activity and obscuration, while the black hole mass does not play a significant role. Our results are in agreement with AGN radiative feedback scenarios, where the Eddington ratio regulates the AGN environment by driving powerful, galaxy-wide outflows and shaping the amount of circumnuclear material.

=== arXiv:2606.26411v1  [2026-06-24]
TITLE  : A Spitzer Space Telescope Exploration Science Program to Search for Y Dwarf Variability
AUTHORS: Michael C. Cushing, Jesica L. Trucks, Kevin K. Hardegree-Ullman, Adam J. Burgasser, Sean J. Carey, Jonathan J. Fortney, Christopher R. Gelino, John E. Gizis
ABS    : We present the results of a Spitzer Space Telescope Exploration Science Program to search for and characterize variability in Y dwarfs. We observed 14 Y dwarfs over a 24 hr period at [3.6] and [4.5] and then repeated the observations a few months later. We add two Y dwarfs, WD 0806-661B and WISE J085510.83-071442.5, that were also observed with Spitzer so that our sample includes all Y dwarfs observed for variability with Spitzer. We infer variability fractions of 59%+-15% and 64%+10%-13% for [3.6], and [4.5], in the first epoch, and 35%+17% -11% and 75%+8% -15% in the second epoch. We also find that Y dwarf Spitzer light curves are generally stable over timescales of months, but in some cases can show clear changes in amplitude. Combining our results with a similar Spitzer survey of L and T dwarfs by Metchev et al. (2015), we find the mid-infrared variability fraction of L, T, and Y dwarfs weakly supports the hypothesis that brown dwarf variability is caused by variations in the horizontal and/or vertical structure of condensate clouds.

=== arXiv:2606.10710v1  [2026-06-09]
TITLE  : Hubble as a Unique Discovery Engine of the Fate of Massive Stars and Black Hole Formation
AUTHORS: Avishai Gilkis, Eva Laplace, Charles D. Kilpatrick, Maria R. Drout, Anna J. G. O'Grady, Christopher A. Tout
ABS    : How stellar-mass black holes are formed is an open question in astrophysics, with very limited observational constraints. It is not known which types of stars are more likely to produce black holes, and whether the formation process is accompanied by strong or weak electromagnetic transients - or none at all - and this issue remains a critical missing piece in the puzzle of the fate of massive stars. Recent theoretical work predicts that many stellar-mass black holes form from hot, UV-luminous massive stars, including Wolf-Rayet-like progenitors, and searches focused primarily on luminous cool supergiants may therefore miss a substantial fraction of black-hole formation events. While the coming decade will bring major advances in time-domain astronomy through Rubin/LSST, Roman, JWST, and wide-field transient surveys, none of these combines UV sensitivity, sub-arcsecond imaging, and decade-long continuity. HST uniquely enables direct searches for disappearing hot massive stars associated with black-hole formation. We outline a roadmap for extending HST's role in this area into the 2030s through a dedicated, large program to re-image nearby galaxies in the UV and identify candidate disappearing stars and unusual low-luminosity transients identified by complementary surveys. Theoretical event rates imply that the nearby galaxy population accessible to HST should yield of order one detectable black-hole-forming disappearance event per year. Extending HST operations into the 2030s would therefore provide crucial insights into the unsolved problem of black hole formation.

=== arXiv:2605.27274v1  [2026-05-26]
TITLE  : The Structural Case for the Eco-Civilization Paradigm
AUTHORS: Lei Zhu, William Zhu
ABS    : This paper establishes a quantitative and structural framework for civilizational continuity under rapid, non-linear ecological transitions. Utilizing empirical data on Earth's Energy Imbalance (EEI), currently measured at 1.36 W/m^2, we demonstrate that the planetary system is on a deterministic trajectory toward a new ecological equilibrium, breaching the 1.5 degrees C thermodynamic threshold in less than 6.5 years. We show that mitigating direct anthropogenic waste heat emissions is statistically insufficient, as 35/36-ths of the annual energy imbalance stems from atmospheric radiative forcing rather than localized thermal output. Consequently, preserving legacy centralized socioeconomic frameworks is unfeasible. We present the structural case for the "Eco-Civilization Paradigm" -- a decentralized network of autonomous, modular eco-communities engineered to insulate core life-support functions, localized energy networks, and edge computation from cascading macro-system failures. Finally, we outline the systemic requirements for this transition, including the realignment of asset valuation frameworks from geography-dependent to engineering-dependent metrics, the mobilization of youth-driven innovation capital, and the strategic reallocation of global industrial manufacturing capacity to safeguard civilizational survival.

=== arXiv:2605.26142v1  [2026-05-22]
TITLE  : From Hubble to HWO: Bridging the Frontier of White Dwarf Exoplanet Science
AUTHORS: Laura K. Rogers, Siyi Xu, Martin Barstow, Simon Blouin, Amy Bonsor, Andrew M. Buchan, Sarah L. Casewell, Tim Cunningham
ABS    : White dwarf stars, the endpoint of stellar evolution for 97% of stars in our Milky Way, offer a unique and powerful window into the bulk elemental composition of rocky exoplanetary bodies. Up to 50% of single white dwarfs are observed with photospheric metal lines from accreted exoplanetary bodies (called 'polluted' white dwarfs), and spectroscopic observations reveal the bulk composition of this material. High-resolution (R&gt;15,000) UV spectra are essential for detecting many elements present in the material, such as the volatile elements imperative for habitability studies (C, N, O, P, S) and key rock-forming elements required to constrain interior structure (e.g. Fe, Si, Mg, Al, Ni). HST, through its COS and STIS spectrographs, remains the only facility capable of performing this science in the near future. Looking to the next decade, the scientific case for continued HST UV observations of polluted white dwarfs is compelling on three fronts (i) as a standalone to enable the bulk composition of exoplanetary material to be measured in a statistically significant sample, (ii) as essential groundwork for the Habitable Worlds Observatory (HWO), and (iii) in a powerful synergy with JWST, to enable characterization of the bulk mineralogy and bulk elemental composition of exoplanetary material. This white paper argues that continued UV spectroscopic capabilities with HST is a high-return investment for white dwarf and exoplanet science, and preserving and prioritizing HST's UV capabilities through at least 2035 is crucial to maximize the scientific return from HST, JWST, and HWO.

=== arXiv:2605.23433v1  [2026-05-22]
TITLE  : Quasiradial oscillations of rotating hybrid neutron stars
AUTHORS: Zi-Yue Zheng, Ting-Ting Sun, Huan Chen, Xiao-Ping Zheng, Jin-Biao Wei, G. F. Burgio, H. -J. Schulze
ABS    : We investigate fundamental quasiradial oscillations in slow-rotation approximation of pure and hybrid neutron stars, employing equations of state of nuclear matter from Brueckner-Hartree-Fock theory or the relativistic mean field model, and of quark matter from the Dyson-Schwinger quark model, performing a Gibbs construction for the mixed phase in hybrid stars. Characteristic differences between neutron-star and hybrid-star fundamental quasiradial oscillation frequencies during spin-down are pointed out.

=== arXiv:2605.21093v1  [2026-05-20]
TITLE  : The Search for Technosignatures: a Review of Possibilities
AUTHORS: Clément Vidal, Benji L. Fields, Damian R. Sowinski, Mark Elowitz, Stuart Bartlett, Richard J. Terrile, Alex Ellery, Daliah Bibas
ABS    : This paper aims to review the diverse range of technosignatures that have been proposed in the literature. We organize the review by scales, starting carefully from Earth, then zooming out to Earth's orbit, the solar system, including the Moon, the Earth-Moon Lagrange points, the inner solar system, the asteroid belt, interstellar objects, the outer solar system, the Kuiper belt, the solar gravitational lens region, and the Oort cloud. We then introduce the Kardashev and Barrow scale before exploring exoplanetary technosignatures, from surface, atmospheric to orbital sources. We next consider stellar technosignatures that may involve massive energy utilization, stellar modification or stellar pollution, and end with a section about compact objects. We then review attempts to detect interstellar communication, and discuss many dimensions of the search space from first principles. Then we consider interstellar travel technosignatures, and end with galactic, extragalactic and universal signatures. We end with a discussion about synergies between biosignatures and technosignatures searches, anomaly detection, multimodal strategies, instruments for detecting technosignatures, how to evaluate and prioritize the search, as well as epistemological issues.

=== arXiv:2605.19059v1  [2026-05-18]
TITLE  : VarWISE: Infrared Variability via NEOWISE Single Exposure Photometry
AUTHORS: Matthew Paz, J. Davy Kirkpatrick, Rajiv Uttamchandani, Troy Raen, Roc M. Cutri
JOURNAL: Matthew Paz et al 2026 ApJS 284 41
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4365/ae562f
ABS    : The Near-Earth Object Wide-field Infrared Explorer (NEOWISE) mission provides a decade of all-sky time-series data at 3.4 and 4.6um and an unprecedented opportunity for the discovery and characterization of variable objects. This paper presents VarWISE, a catalog of infrared-variable objects discovered within the NEOWISE single-exposure data. We employ unique methodologies, including the spatial clustering of apparitions and the adoption of novel machine learning-based variable detection (VARnet) and classification (XGBoost) to identify and characterize significant variability. The catalog includes a prediction of variable object type and best-fit period values for each object, if its variations are cyclical, along with other calculated parameters to characterize the nature of the variability. The VarWISE Pure Catalog, containing only variables of highest confidence, has 457,080 objects, 49.81% of which are new discoveries; the VarWISE Extended Catalog, containing all sources, has 1,918,082 objects, 82.02% of which are new. We discuss caveats for each variable type and highlight a few new objects found during a quick perusal of the catalogs' contents.

=== arXiv:2605.01190v1  [2026-05-02]
TITLE  : Statistically Significant Linear Alignments Among High-Confidence Transient Candidates on POSS-I Photographic Plates
AUTHORS: Brian Doherty
ABS    : I report the detection of statistically significant linear alignments and anomalous spatial clustering among high-confidence transient candidates in the VASCO catalog of vanishing sources on Palomar Observatory Sky Survey (POSS-I) photographic plates (1949-1957). A machine learning classifier scores 107,875 candidates by their likelihood of being genuine transients. Searching the 36,215 candidates with probability &gt;= 0.50 for collinear groupings narrower than 3 arcsec, I find 7 plates with alignments of 5-8 sources that exceed Monte Carlo expectations (p &lt; 0.03, 10,000 iterations). The aligned sources are point-like, not streaks, which rules out any continuously luminous object crossing the field during the 45-minute exposures. The implied angular rates (1-15 arcsec/s) overlap with the geosynchronous regime but are inconsistent with low or medium Earth orbits, and no artificial satellites existed during the POSS-I era. When I project each alignment onto Earth's surface assuming a high-altitude object, 6 of 7 maintain constant geographic longitude with sub-degree spread (combined p ~ 3e-10). Four of these cluster near -96 deg longitude (central United States); one falls within 0.3 deg of the longitude of the Hanford nuclear production site on a nuclear test window date. Close pairs (&lt; 30 arcsec) occur at 16.2x the random rate, and the nights with alignments are the same nights with excess close pairs (Fisher exact p &lt; 0.0001). Plate artifacts cluster near the ecliptic plane (26%), but high-confidence transients are depleted there (16%; chi-square test p = 3.3e-82), which rules out asteroids, comets, and zodiacal debris as the dominant source. No transient reappears at the same sky position on a different night. All of these transients predate Sputnik 1.

=== arXiv:2604.21886v1  [2026-04-23]
TITLE  : The Dyson Minds 2025 Workshop: SETI around Black Holes
AUTHORS: Olivia Curtis, Van Hunter Adams, Daniel Angerhausen, Joseph Bates, Anamaria Berea, Steven J. Dick, Martin Elvis, Sunil P. Khatri
JOURNAL: PASP 138 046001 (2026)
DOI    : 10.1088/1538-3873/ae5a02
ABS    : The Dyson Minds 2025 Workshop, held at the Center for Brains, Minds &amp; Machines at MIT and organized by Penn State, MIT, and The Ultraintelligence Foundation, brought together researchers in astrophysics, engineering, artificial intelligence, computer science, and philosophy to examine "Dyson Minds" -- large-scale post-biological intelligences powered by energy harvested from supermassive black holes (SMBHs). Building on the ideas of F. J. Dyson (1960, 1966) and I. J. Good (1966), participants explored the physical, engineering, behavioral, and observational consequences of civilizations embodied as machinery operating near the universe's most powerful energy sources. The workshop aimed to develop new observational strategies capable of detecting signatures of such systems. Despite the highly cross-disciplinary scope, discussions centered on how a Dyson Mind might be constructed, how it might behave, and how those factors would shape strategies for the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. Key themes included the thermodynamic, mechanical, and stability limits of Dyson swarms; the trade-offs between power availability and communication latency in distributed minds; and how observability changes depending on whether Dyson Minds act as coherent entities or as loosely coordinated collectives. Across these topics, the consensus was that details of architecture and behavior strongly influence observational signatures. A major recommendation was to apply anomaly-detection methods to archival datasets, including those from WISE, JWST, and the Event Horizon Telescope, to identify unusual sources potentially overlooked by standard reduction pipelines. By integrating insights from multiple disciplines, the meeting advanced concrete, observation-focused strategies for future technosignature searches around SMBHs.

=== arXiv:2604.17516v5  [2026-04-19]
TITLE  : Kardashev's Conundrum: Statistical Falsification of Exponential Energy Growth, the Non-Observation of Type II Technosignatures, and the Kardashev-Sagan-Nakamoto Resolution
AUTHORS: Sebastian Gurovich
ABS    : We test the standard Kardashev conjecture -- that a technologically advanced civilisation's energy production grows at a fixed one percent per year -- against six decades of global energy-production data (1965-2024), with consequences for the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. Markov Chain Monte Carlo inference falsifies the one-percent rate, returning a posterior $r=2.01\%\pm0.03\%~\mathrm{yr^{-1}}$; a linear model and a free-rate exponential fit the data equally well and are statistically indistinguishable. Extrapolated to the Type~II threshold (the solar luminosity), the linear form implies a transition time of order $10^5$ Hubble times, while the exponential branch is excluded as a sustained trajectory by waste-heat and carrying-capacity limits. Neither adequate description therefore reaches energy-scaling Type~II coherently -- Kardashev's Conundrum. The observational consequence is that Type~II technosignatures, Dyson spheres in particular, are unlikely on physically realistic trajectories, offering a candidate explanation for the null results of Dyson-sphere surveys and a data-driven entry in Cirkovic's ``logistic'' category of Fermi-paradox solutions. The root cause is that the Kardashev state variable, power, is dimensionally incomplete: it captures energy throughput but not the information richness of its use. We therefore propose the Kardashev-Sagan-Nakamoto renormalisation, dividing energy production by the global proof-of-work hashrate to define $B=P/H$ in $\mathrm{J\,Hash^{-1}}$ -- the KarNak unit -- a dimensionally complete information--energy variable motivated by the Landauer limit, on which the Type~II concept is preserved.

=== arXiv:2604.15089v1  [2026-04-16]
TITLE  : An FUor-like Outbursting Class I Protostar in NGC 7538
AUTHORS: Aidi Fang, Zhiwei Chen, Lin Du, Sheng Zheng
ABS    : We report on the discovery of an FUor-like Class I protostar in NGC~7538. The source, named NGC~7538~MIR, exhibited a giant luminosity burst ($ΔK_s\sim5$) and a prolonged high-luminosity state lasting at least five years. Its mid-infrared (mid-IR) light curves, constructed from WISE/NEOWISE multiepoch data, presented a rapid rise and slight fading after the peak, placing this event among long-duration eruptive phenomena observed in protostars, for example, FUor-type events. The evolution of W1/W2 luminosity and $W1-W2$ color can be naturally split into three phases, pre-burst, burst and post-burst, suggesting that different physical processes may dominate in the three phases. The evolution of NGC~7538~MIR is consistent with a transition from variability influenced by circumstellar extinction (pre-burst) to a phase with greatly enhanced accretion luminosity (burst), and followed by a gradual relaxation of the circumstellar environment (post-burst). Overall, the observed IR variability of NGC~7538~MIR is consistent with an FUor-like accretion event occurred at an early evolutionary stage, highlighting the importance of long-term IR monitoring for identifying episodic accretion events in deeply embedded protostars.

=== arXiv:2604.12868v2  [2026-04-14]
TITLE  : Hot blue progenitors of stellar-mass black holes
AUTHORS: Avishai Gilkis, Eva Laplace, Maria Drout, Charles Kilpatrick, Anna O'Grady, Christopher Tout
ABS    : While the connection between massive stars and supernova explosions is well established observationally, the link between massive stars and black hole formation remains elusive. Some massive stars may collapse directly to black holes without a successful supernova, and may therefore be observed as disappearing stars. We investigate the expected photometric properties of such black hole progenitors by combining detailed single and binary stellar evolution models with physically motivated prescriptions linking pre-collapse core structure to explosion or direct collapse outcome, together with stellar atmosphere calculations, producing synthetic photometry across standard ultraviolet to infrared filters. Weighting by an initial mass function and empirical binary distributions, we predict both the observable distribution of progenitor brightness and colour and the rate of direct-collapse events, which we estimate to be about 0.4 per century for a galaxy forming stars at 1 Msun/yr. We find that black hole progenitors are predominantly hot and blue at the pre-collapse stage, with many in Wolf-Rayet phases and luminous in the ultraviolet, while only a minority are red supergiants. Consequently, searches that focus primarily on red supergiants are likely to miss a substantial fraction of direct-collapse events. Monitoring campaigns that include ultraviolet-sensitive observations of nearby star-forming galaxies therefore provide a promising route to detecting disappearing massive stars, offering a direct observational probe of black hole formation. Our results provide predictions to interpret such surveys and constrain the channels that lead to black hole formation.

=== arXiv:2604.16470v4  [2026-04-09]
TITLE  : Plate Sensitivity Is Invariant Across Geomagnetic Storm Intensity at Harvard and Palomar: A Protocol for Artifact Control in Historical Plate Archive Studies
AUTHORS: Kevin Cann
ABS    : Historical photographic plate archives anchor a growing body of time-domain astronomy, but time-domain claims drawn from them are vulnerable to plate-sensitivity variations correlated with environmental modulators that can mimic real astrophysical signals. I present a simple, broadly applicable protocol for testing such artifact hypotheses: regress catalog-aggregate reference-population metrics (stellar detection counts or plate limiting magnitudes) against the suspected modulator. Under the artifact hypothesis, the reference metric varies systematically; under the null hypothesis, it does not. I apply the protocol to test whether geomagnetic storm activity, measured by the planetary Kp index, modulates plate sensitivity at two independent observatories. At Harvard College Observatory, the DASCH DR7 archive provides limiting magnitudes for 12,510 exposures across 500 sky positions: no significant trend across Kp bins (Spearman rho = -0.011, p = 0.234). At Palomar, the MAPS Catalog of POSS-I records stellar detection counts for 638 fields: no significant trend (Spearman rho = 0.017, p = 0.673). Plate sensitivity is invariant across the full range of geomagnetic activity at both sites. The principal airglow-based artifact objection to recent claims of Kp-dependent transient suppression in the POSS-I archive is directly falsified at two observatories.

=== arXiv:2604.05332v1  [2026-04-07]
TITLE  : A Catalog of Mid-infrared Variable Sources in the Ecliptic Poles
AUTHORS: Minjin Kim, Suyeon Son, Shinyu Kim, Luis C. Ho, Woong-Seob Jeong, Bomee Lee, Yujin Yang
ABS    : We construct a catalog of mid-infrared (MIR) variable sources using the multi-epoch 3.6 (W1) and 4.5 $μ$m (W2) dataset from the Near-Earth Object Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (NEOWISE) at the north and south ecliptic poles (NEP and SEP). The catalog provides well-sampled light curves that cover areas within a radius of 5 degrees from the poles, which are frequently observed by current and forthcoming missions. By carefully processing the NEOWISE data to secure reliable photometric measurements, we identified 2764 and 27581 variables in the NEP and SEP, respectively, using the probability deviating from the non-variable and the correlation coefficient between W1 and W2. Cross-correlation with various complementary datasets reveals that, in the NEP, variability is dominated by active galactic nuclei, whereas stellar objects are more common in the SEP due to its proximity to the Large Magellanic Cloud. In particular, proper motion measurements from Gaia and MIR color-color diagrams are ideal for narrowing down the physical origin of the MIR variable sources. We identify three MIR transients in the NEP. Interestingly, all coincide with obscured QSOs, suggesting a physical connection between transient events and circumnuclear obscuration. Finally, we discuss the potential applications of our catalog in synergy with existing and future time-domain surveys.

=== arXiv:2604.04810v1  [2026-04-06]
TITLE  : Independent Recovery of Vanishing Sources on POSS-I Photographic Plates Using Automated Source Detection and Cross-Epoch Matching
AUTHORS: Zachary Hayes
ABS    : We present an independent pipeline for detecting candidate vanished sources on digitized first-epoch Palomar Observatory Sky Survey (POSS-I) photographic plates. The pipeline detects and PSF-filters sources on POSS-I Red DSS cutouts, applies local astrometric registration refinement, and identifies candidates by cross-epoch matching against POSS-I Blue and POSS-II Red with Pan-STARRS DR1 rejection. On a 20-case benchmark harness, the pipeline recovers 8/9 sources in the April 1950 field and 3/3 in the July 1952 field, with a false positive rate of about 0.2 per 10 arcmin field on random non-crowded controls. A full-footprint sweep over the POSS-I coverage using 30 arcmin patches yields a filtered catalog of 2.85 million candidate vanished sources after post-processing PSF cuts, deduplication, and Pan-STARRS DR1 rejection. Cross-matching against the published 5,399-source Solano et al. (2022) catalog yields 3,450 matches (63.9%) with median separation 0.94 arcsec; among unrecovered catalog entries within our footprint, we find no Pan-STARRS DR1 counterpart within 3 arcsec. Applying Bruehl and Villarroel (2025)-style temporal windows to this catalog over the 368 POSS-I observation nights in the 1949-1957 interval gives a post-test calendar-day relative risk of 1.35 for the +1 day window, but the effect is not statistically significant (95% CI 0.91-2.00; two-sided Fisher p = 0.17) and is sensitive to coding unobserved days as zero-transient days. A negative binomial model of nightly candidate counts with nightly patch coverage as exposure is likewise null (IRR = 1.03, 95% CI 0.89-1.18, p = 0.71). The catalog-level replication is strong; the temporal association remains inconclusive.

=== arXiv:2604.06234v1  [2026-04-04]
TITLE  : Storm-Driven Suppression and Post-Storm Enhancement of Photographic Plate Transient Detections at Geosynchronous Altitude: Empirical Evidence and a Candidate Dusty Plasma Mechanism
AUTHORS: Kevin Cann
ABS    : The VASCO project has identified over 100,000 sub-second optical transients on photographic plates from the First Palomar Observatory Sky Survey (1949-1957), all predating artificial satellites. Cann (2026a) established that transient detection rates are dose-dependently suppressed during geomagnetic storms (Z = -3.391, p = 0.0007), ruling out emulsion defects and confirming the transients as real, magnetospherically coupled phenomena. Villarroel et al. (2022) constrained the source altitude to ~42,000 km (geosynchronous orbit) through an Earth-shadow deficit. This paper presents two results. First, a pre-registered empirical test reveals the full temporal recovery profile: transient rates remain suppressed at 55% of baseline during days 7-21 post-storm, then rise to 309% of baseline during days 25-45 (p = 0.00066, Wilcoxon rank-sum; all robustness checks significant). Combined with the dose-response staircase, the overall significance reaches 3.6-4.7 sigma (Fisher's method, range reflecting sensitivity to the independence assumption). Second, we propose a candidate physical mechanism: storm-enhanced electromagnetic trapping of charged micrometeoroid dust at L ~ 6.6, followed by aggregation of icy cometary grains under restored cold plasmaspheric conditions. A flux dilution analysis demonstrates that specular reflection from a partially reflective icy aggregate only 1-4 m in diameter suffices to produce the observed plate magnitude at 42,000 km. This mechanism connects the VASCO transients to independently observed magnetospheric dust swarms correlated with geomagnetic activity (Sommer 2024) and explains the extinction of the transient population following the onset of the space age. Multi-site replication is required to confirm these results.

=== arXiv:2604.04956v3  [2026-04-03]
TITLE  : The Planetary Cost of AI Acceleration, Part II: The 10th Planetary Boundary and the 6.5-Year Countdown
AUTHORS: William Yicheng Zhu, Lei Zhu
ABS    : The recent, super-exponential scaling of autonomous Large Language Model (LLM) agents signals a broader, fundamental paradigm shift from machines primarily replacing the human hands (manual labor and mechanical processing) to machines delegating for the human minds (cognition, reasoning, and intention). The uncontrolled offloading and scaling of "thinking" itself, beyond human's limited but efficient biological capacity, has profound consequences for humanity's heat balance sheet, since thinking, or intelligence, carries thermodynamic consequences. The Earth has already surpassed the heat dissipation threshold required for long-term ecological stability, and projecting based on empirical data reveal a concerning trajectory: without radical structural intervention, anthropogenic heat accumulation will breach critical planetary ecological thresholds in less than 6.5 years, even under the most ideal scenario where Earth Energy Imbalance (EEI) holds constant. In this work, we identify six factors from artificial intelligence that influence the global heat dissipation rate and delineate how their interplay drives society toward one of four broad macroscopic trajectories. We propose that the integration of artificial intelligence and its heat dissipation into the planetary system constitute the tenth planetary boundary (9+1). The core empirical measurement of this boundary is the net-new waste heat generated by exponential AI growth, balanced against its impact on reducing economic and societal inefficiencies and thus baseline anthropogenic waste heat emissions. We demonstrate that managing AI scaling lacks a moderate middle ground: it will either accelerate the breach of critical planetary thermodynamic thresholds, or it will serve as the single most effective lever on stabilizing the other nine planetary boundaries and through which safeguarding human civilization's survival.

=== arXiv:2603.20407v3  [2026-03-20]
TITLE  : Searching for Fast Astronomical Transients in Archival Photographic Plates
AUTHORS: Ivo Busko
ABS    : Fast astronomical transients were observed by the VASCO Project (Villarroel et al 2020) in photographic sky surveys conducted in the 1950s. Those searches analyzed the Palomar Observatory Sky Survey (POSS-I and POSS-II) digitized plates. In this article, we present a preliminary report on a similar but independent search using archival plates taken at the Hamburg Observatory with the Großer Schmidtspiegel 1.2-m Schmidt camera, also from the mid-1950s. These plates were digitized by the APPLAUSE Archive, which provides both images and tables of detected objects. By analyzing pairs of plates taken in rapid sequence (about 30 minutes apart) of the same sky regions, we find evidence of transients similar to those previously reported by the VASCO Project for POSS plates. While the analysis is ongoing, one notable result is that our findings independently confirm that these transients exhibit systematically narrow full width at half maximum (FWHM) compared to stellar point spread functions. This provides further support for their interpretation as sub-second optical flashes, consistent with reflections from flat, rotating objects in orbit around Earth.

=== arXiv:2603.17299v1  [2026-03-18]
TITLE  : Optical variability and optical--mid-infrared dust lags in Type~1 changing-look AGNs
AUTHORS: Yu Tao, Jie Tang, Xuan Wei
ABS    : Changing-look active galactic nuclei (CL AGNs) show large changes in luminosity and optical spectral state on time-scales of a few years, and provide a valuable probe of time-dependent accretion in the disc-BLR-torus system. We present a systematic statistical study of their optical variability in a well-defined Type-1 phase, using g- and r-band light curves from the Zwicky Transient Facility for 165 CL AGNs. A subsample of 34 objects also has NEOWISE W1 and W2 light curves, which we use to measure optical-mid-infrared time lags. We use structure functions and a damped random-walk model to characterize variability amplitudes and time-scales on rest-frame scales from tens to a few hundred days, and examine their dependence on black hole mass, luminosity, and Eddington ratio. In the Type-1 phase, the short-time-scale optical variability amplitude on about 30-day time-scales shows little dependence on black hole mass, luminosity, or Eddington ratio. By contrast, the longer-term amplitudes on 150-300 day time-scales, as well as the damped random-walk time-scales, increase slowly with black hole mass and luminosity, but still show no clear dependence on Eddington ratio. The sample shows a ubiquitous bluer-when-brighter trend and larger variability at shorter wavelengths, consistent with continuum variability from a multi-temperature accretion disc. For the NEOWISE subsample, the dust lag-luminosity relation inferred from the optical-mid-infrared lags is similar to that of normal Type-1 AGNs. Overall, CL AGNs in the Type-1 phase behave like normal Type-1 AGNs within the standard disc-BLR-dusty torus framework, but are more prone to large continuum reconfigurations on year-like time-scales.

=== arXiv:2603.11994v1  [2026-03-12]
TITLE  : The Cold Debris Disk Surveys I. Host Star Properties
AUTHORS: Scott J. Kenyon, Benjamin C. Bromley, Joan R. Najita
JOURNAL: Astronomical Journal, 171, 223, 2026
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/ae46a2;
ABS    : We describe the dynamical, photometric, and spectroscopic data available for stars targeted by Spitzer and Herschel to search for cold circumstellar dust emission from debris disks, a collection that we name the Cold Debris Disk Surveys (CDDS). These data include Hipparcos and Gaia parallaxes, 0.4-1250 micron photometry, spectral types, effective temperatures, gravities, bolometric luminosities, visual extinctions, metallicities, lithium abundances, rotational periods, projected rotational velocities, the Ca~II HK and IR triplet activity indicators, and X-ray luminosities for 3675 stars. Within this sample, we investigate the frequency of stellar and planetary companions (including potential new proper motion companions); use the data to assign CDDS stars to the field or one of many moving groups, open clusters, or stellar associations; and investigate correlations between stellar activity indicators. In future papers, we plan to explore the magnitude and frequency of infrared excess emission as a function of host star properties; to search for new companions with Gaia; and to examine the evolution of infrared excesses with the ages of stars in clusters and the field.

=== arXiv:2603.07677v1  [2026-03-08]
TITLE  : WD 1054-226 revisited: a stable transiting debris system
AUTHORS: J. Korth, A. J. Mustill, H. Parviainen, E. Villaver, J. W. Kuehne, V. J. S. Béjar, Y. Hayashi, N. Abreu García
ABS    : A growing number of white dwarfs (WDs) exhibit one or more signs of remnant planetary systems, including transits, infrared excesses, and atmospheric metal pollution. WD 1054-226 stands out for its unique, highly structured, and persistent photometric variability. We aim to investigate the long-term stability and nature of the periodic signals observed in WD 1054-226 to better understand the origin and evolution of its transiting material. We analyse all available TESS light curves from Sectors 9, 36, 63, and 90 using Lomb-Scargle (LS), Box-Least-Squares (BLS), and Gaussian process (GP) periodogram analyses. We complement these with multiband, high-cadence ground-based photometry from LCOGT, MuSCAT2, ALFOSC, and ProEM to test for colour dependence and confirm the periodicities. We confirm the persistence of the previously-reported 25.01 h and 23.1 min periodicities over a six-year baseline. The 25.01 h signal shows some temporal evolution, while the 23.1 min dips are highly coherent on long timescales. A transient 11.4 h feature, previously reported, is detected only in early TESS sectors and is absent in recent data. No significant colour dependence is found in the ground-based observations. The stability of both the 25.01 h and 23.1 min signals indicates a long-lived, dynamically sculpted debris structure around WD 1054-226. The lack of colour dependence implies high optical depth, consistent with an opaque, edge-on debris ring rather than an optically thin dust population. This makes WD 1054-226 a key laboratory for testing models of remnant planetary systems around white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:2603.06227v1  [2026-03-06]
TITLE  : Mid-infrared Variability-based AGN Selection using the Multi-epoch Photometric Data from WISE
AUTHORS: Shinyu Kim, Minjin Kim, Suyeon Son, Luis C. Ho
JOURNAL: 2026, ApJ, 1000, 245
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ae4ecd
ABS    : We assess the systematics and efficiency of an AGN selection method based on mid-infrared (MIR) variability. To this end, we utilize various types of active and inactive galaxies from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, matching them with multi-epoch photometric data from the NEOWISE mission. Using W1 and W2 band light curves with a $\sim10$-year baseline, we find that combining the likelihood of deviation from non-variability with the correlation coefficient between the W1 and W2 bands reliably identifies AGNs. Specifically, this MIR-based method recovers $\sim 28.2\%$ of optically selected AGNs. Applying the same technique to inactive galaxies, we identify AGN candidates at fractions ranging from $0.4$ to $11.8\%$, indicating that MIR variability allows us to detect AGN candidates even in optically inactive hosts. While some variable sources exhibit transient-like light curves, possibly originating from tidal disruption events or supernovae, their contribution to the total variable population is less than a few percent, indicating a minimal impact on our results. Across all subsamples, the AGN fraction marginally increases with star formation activity, implying coordinated evolution between central black hole growth and star formation. Finally, the AGN fraction inferred from our method drops dramatically in classical LINERs, consistent with their low accretion rates and absence of a dusty torus.

=== arXiv:2602.23270v1  [2026-02-26]
TITLE  : Dyson spheres on H-R diagram
AUTHORS: Amirnezam Amiri
ABS    : The construction of Dyson spheres, megastructures designed to capture the total radiative output of stars, can be one of the most compelling techno-signature scenarios for advanced extraterrestrial civilizations. By considering equilibrium temperatures, we investigate the luminosities and fluxes of Dyson spheres built around two promising classes of host stars: white dwarfs and red M-dwarfs. Using radiative balance arguments and representative stellar parameters, we compute the temperature-radius relationship for full energy interception and place these hypothetical structures on the Hertzsprung-Russell (H-R) diagram to assess their observational signatures. Our results show that Dyson spheres around white dwarfs produce cooler and fainter blackbody emissions, peaking in the near- to mid-infrared, while those around M-dwarfs radiate more strongly but at longer wavelengths. In both cases, the equilibrium temperature decreases as R_ D^-1/2, while the total luminosity and observed bolometric flux remain fixed by the stellar output. These findings highlight the astrophysical suitability of low-luminosity stars as Dyson sphere hosts and provide practical constraints for future techno-signature searches using infrared surveys.

=== arXiv:2602.23004v1  [2026-02-26]
TITLE  : Warm Debris Disk Candidates around Nearby FGK Stars from LAMOST DR12
AUTHORS: Xing Luo, Qiong Liu
ABS    : Warm debris disks around main-sequence stars trace late-stage terrestrial planet formation. Motivated by the need for systematic searches of such systems, we identify debris disk candidates around FGK stars within 150 pc by combining a spectroscopically selected sample from LAMOST DR12 with Gaia astrometry and multi-band infrared photometry. Infrared excesses are identified through SED fitting and validated using conservative, source-by-source checks. This approach yields a final sample of 12 debris disk candidates including ten new detections. Stellar age research indicate that most of the host stars are several billion years old. NEOWISE monitoring reveals no significant W1/W2 variability, consistent with a circumstellar origin of the infrared excess. while a search for co-moving companions using Gaia DR3 reveals possible companions for only two candidates at very large projected separations ($\gtrsim 10^4$~au). Three candidates exhibit excess emission in both the W3 and W4 bands, allowing estimates of characteristic dust properties. This work establishes a small yet reliable sample of debris disk candidates anchored in homogeneous LAMOST spectroscopy, providing a foundation for future studies of debris disk evolution and stellar activity.

=== arXiv:2602.22832v1  [2026-02-26]
TITLE  : Detection of circumstellar disks around nearby young brown dwarf candidates
AUTHORS: N. Phan-Bao, M. S. Bessell, E. L. Martín
JOURNAL: Astronomy and Astrophysics, 700, 2025, A153
ABS    : It is important to detect and study circumstellar disks around late-M and brown dwarfs of nearby young associations to understand how these very low-mass objects form and how rocky planets form around them. The detection of new very low-mass members of nearby young associations will also significantly improve our current understanding of young associations. We searched for new young very low-mass members with circumstellar disks in a sample of 3928 candidates. We constructed spectral energy distributions of all candidates using observational photometric data from DENIS, 2MASS, and WISE and trigonometric parallaxes from Gaia to detect infrared excess emission that indicates the presence of circumstellar disks. We then followed up spectroscopic observations of candidates to search for lithium to confirm their youth. The H_alpha emission line was used to detect accretion. We detected 23 among the 3928 candidates with circumstellar disks: Ten objects are new, and 13 were previously reported in the literature. Our mass estimates also indicate that 21 are brown dwarf candidates and 2 are very low-mass stars. DENIS J0534552-104808 has a Gaia distance of 238 pc and might be the first brown dwarf candidate member of a foreground population in front of the Orion D cloud. This foreground population is probably associated with the supergiant kappa Ori. Based on our spectroscopic observations, we detected lithium in 11 candidates. We also identified seven accretors and one potential accretor. The intense long-lived accretion detected in DENIS-P J0500245-333042, a 20 Myr old brown dwarf candidate may be additional evidence to favor the formation of rocky planets around very low-mass objects.

=== arXiv:2602.19858v1  [2026-02-23]
TITLE  : Probing the Milky Way Halo with RR Lyrae Stars from Gaia Data Release 3
AUTHORS: T. Muraveva, L. Monti, D. Massari, M. De Leo, A. Garofalo, G. Clementini, E. Ceccarelli, U. Michelucci
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 708, A384 (2026)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202658986
ABS    : The Milky Way (MW) stellar halo, containing debris from past accretion events, serves as a fossil record of hierarchical mass assembly. Due to their distinct properties, RR Lyrae stars (RRLs) serve as excellent tracers for identifying and characterising the halo's substructures. We analysed a sample of 4933 RRLs, for which we calculated the integrals of motion and orbital parameters. We applied the domain-informed novelty detection CLustering in Multiphase Boundaries (CLiMB) framework to identify RRL membership in the MW substructures. We analysed the metallicity distributions of RRLs in major accreted system remnants as a snapshot of their chemical evolutionary status during early epochs. We calculated the weighted mean metallicity ([Fe/H]) and the corresponding standard deviation for Gaia Sausage/Enceladus ([Fe/H] = $-1.57 \pm 0.25$ dex), Sequoia ([Fe/H] =$ -1.64\pm0.26$ dex), and the Helmi streams ([Fe/H] = $-1.66\pm0.19$ dex). The metallicity distribution of RRLs in Thamnos was found to be bimodal, with the metal-poor peak likely representing the genuine accreted Thamnos population ([Fe/H] = $-1.94\pm0.20$ dex), in agreement with recent works based on spectroscopic abundances. Our analysis shows that the substructures ED-1 and L-RL3 are highly contaminated by thick disc stars. However, the metal-poor tails in their metallicity distributions may be signatures of remnants from small accreted systems. We also identify over-densities of RRLs in correspondence with the recently reported substructures Shiva and Shakti, which we suggest are of in-situ origin. Finally, we applied the RRL-based mass-metallicity relation of galaxies to test the nature of the identified dynamical substructures.

=== arXiv:2602.17736v1  [2026-02-18]
TITLE  : Undetected past contacts with technological species: implications for technosignature science
AUTHORS: Claudio Grimaldi
JOURNAL: The Astronomical Journal, 171, 154, 2026
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/ae394b
ABS    : In the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI), the highly incomplete sampling of the technosignature search space is often considered as a plausible explanation for the persistent lack of detections over six decades of searches. If correct, this would imply that technosignatures may already have reached Earth without being detected or correctly identified. Here, we explore this possibility using a Bayesian inference framework to estimate present-day detectability given $n\ge 1$ undetected contacts over the past 65 years -- the period since the first SETI experiment. We show that achieving high detectability of technosignatures emitted within a few hundred light-years of Earth would require implausibly large $n$ values, even exceeding the population of habitable planets within that range. More conservative estimates can be obtained only assuming that emitters are tightly clustered near Earth or that their population in the Milky Way has undergone a very recent and sudden boost. This tension is further exacerbated for short-lived technosignatures and persists whether they are omnidirectional, as in Dysonian megastructures, or directional, as in intentional communication attempts. These findings suggest that, if undetected past contacts from the Milky Way have indeed occurred, the best prospects of detection may lie in searches extending over several thousand light-years, though only a few detectable technoemissions would be expected.

=== arXiv:2602.15171v2  [2026-02-16]
TITLE  : A Response to paper Critical Evaluation of Studies Alleging Evidence for Technosignatures in the POSS1-E Photographic Plates by Watters et al. (2026)
AUTHORS: Beatriz Villarroel, Alina Streblyanska, Stephen Bruehl, Stefan Geier
ABS    : We respond to the critique by Watters et al. (2026) of the statistical analyses in Villarroel et al. (2025) and Bruehl &amp; Villarroel (2025). We argue that the critique conflates object-level validation with ensemble-level statistical inference and relies on a reduced, heterogeneously filtered subset originally constructed for a different scientific purpose. We further question whether the aggressively filtered subset used in Watters et al. (2026) demonstrates a meaningful improvement in sample purity, given the twenty-fold reduction in sample size. Our simple, visual check does not suggest that it does. The subset further lacks complete temporal information and is seriously statistically underpowered for testing the reported Earth-shadow deficit. We emphasise that the horizontal separation metric used for plate assignment and time reconstruction as in Watters et al. (2026) depends on the inclusion of the cos(Dec) factor to ensure geometric consistency. Any omission would alter plate assignment and inferred observation times. Moreover, the analyses presented in Watters et al. (2026) do not include uncertainty estimates or error propagation, limiting the interpretability of the claimed null results. We conclude that the principal findings reported in Villarroel et al. (2025) and Bruehl &amp; Villarroel (2025) are not invalidated by the analyses presented in Watters et al. (2026).

=== arXiv:2602.12495v1  [2026-02-13]
TITLE  : Dark matter effects on the properties of hybrid neutron stars
AUTHORS: Jin-Biao Wei, G. Wu, H. Chen, G. F. Burgio, H. -J. Schulze
ABS    : We study the effects of dark matter on the properties of hybrid neutron stars, in particular the influence on the mass-radius relation, the value of the maximum mass, and the hadron-quark phase transition. To single out the equilibrium configurations of dark-matter-admixed hybrid neutron stars (DHSs), we also study their radial oscillations. Both the stellar structure equations and the radial oscillation equations are solved for the two-fluid system, where the ordinary matter component and dark matter component couple only through gravity. For the ordinary matter components, we adopt the Brueckner-Hartree-Fock method for nuclear matter, and the Dyson-Schwinger or the field-correlator model for quark matter. For the dark matter component, we use a non-self-annihilating self-interacting fermionic model. We find that the presence of dark matter in DHSs leads to a decrease of the critical mass of the hadron-quark phase transition, a related possible onset of quark matter in dark-matter accreting stars, and a significant reduction of radial oscillation frequencies.

=== arXiv:2602.09553v1  [2026-02-10]
TITLE  : A Narrowband Technosignature Search Toward the Hycean Candidate K2-18b Using the VLA and MeerKAT
AUTHORS: C. D. Tremblay, S. Chaudhary, Megan G. Li, Sofia Z. Sheikh, T. Myburgh, D. Czech, D. E. MacMahon, P. B. Demorest
ABS    : K2-18b, a sub-Neptune exoplanet located in the habitable zone of its host star, has emerged as an important target for atmospheric characterization and assessments of potential habitability. Motivated by recent interpretations of JWST observations suggesting a hydrogen-rich atmosphere consistent with Hycean-world scenarios, we conducted a coordinated, multi-epoch search for narrowband radio technosignatures using the Karl G. Jansky Very Large Array equipped with the COSMIC backend and the MeerKAT telescope with the BLUSE backend. Our observations span frequencies from 544MHz to 9.8GHz and include multiple epochs that cover at least one full orbital period of the planet. In this work, we outline, create, and apply a comprehensive post-processing framework that incorporates observatory-informed RFI masking, drift-rate filtering based on the expected dynamics of the K2-18 system, multibeam spatial discrimination, primary and secondary transit filtering (when applicable), and SNR-based excision of weak and strong spurious signals. Across all bands and epochs, no signals consistent with an astrophysical or artificial origin were identified at a limit of 10^12 to 10^13W. These non-detections allow us to place upper limits on the presence of persistent, isotropic narrowband transmitters within the K2-18 system, providing the first interferometric technosignature constraints for a Hycean-planet candidate. Our results demonstrate the efficacy of coordinated multiepoch interferometric searches and establish a methodological framework for future technosignature studies of nearby potentially habitable exoplanets.

=== arXiv:2602.07939v2  [2026-02-08]
TITLE  : New solution to the hyperon puzzle of neutron stars: Quantum many-body effects
AUTHORS: Hao-Fu Zhu, Guo-Zhu Liu, Xufen Wu, Ye-Fei Yuan
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. D 113, 043050 (2026)
DOI    : 10.1103/gxyr-v5h7
ABS    : The hyperon puzzle refers to the challenge of reconciling the existence of hyperons in neutron star cores and the observed high masses of neutron stars. The recent discovery of PSR J0952-0607 ($2.35\pm0.17 M_{\odot}$) has intensified this challenge. Existing solutions fail to achieve such a high mass, and often predict unrealistically fast cooling that is at odds with observations. Here, we propose a novel solution to the hyperon puzzle. Using the Dyson-Schwinger equation approach, we incorporate the quantum many-body effects caused by strong baryon-meson interactions into the equation of state for cold baryonic matter and find it stiff enough to support a maximum hyperon-star mass of $M_{\mathrm{max}} \approx 2.59 M_{\odot}$, which can explain all the observed high neutron-star masses. The resulting proton and hyperon fractions are remarkably low, thus the nucleonic and hyperonic direct Urca processes are significantly suppressed. As a result, fast cooling typically does not occur in ordinary neutron stars.

=== arXiv:2601.21946v3  [2026-01-29]
TITLE  : Critical Evaluation of Studies Alleging Evidence for Technosignatures in the POSS1-E Photographic Plates
AUTHORS: Wesley Andrés Watters, Laura Dominé, Sarah Little, Cameron Pratt, Kevin H. Knuth, Matthew Szenher
ABS    : Recent studies by B. Villarroel et al. have assembled and analysed datasets of unidentified features measured from digital scans of pre-Sputnik photographic plates. We have examined the claims in these papers using two previously published datasets that are closely related to those used in the Villarroel et al. studies. For these datasets, the assumption of a spatially uniform-random background distribution of features, essential to the Earth shadow analysis, is shown to be false. After finding the null distribution of feature count deviations from the background, we find no statistically significant deficit in the shadow. We find that the reported correlation between the timing of feature observations and nuclear tests becomes insignificant after properly normalizing by the relevant number of observation days, and is almost completely determined by the observation schedule of the Palomar telescope. We uncover important inconsistencies in the definitions of the datasets used in these studies, as well as the use of unvalidated datasets containing catalogue stars, scan artefacts, and plate defects. We find an overall gradual increase in number density of features toward the corners and edges of plates, as well as examples of (i) empty north-south strips that span multiple plates; (ii) clusters and voids having geometric shapes; and (iii) amorphous clusters. We also highlight a circular argument used in these studies, that leverages the results of an inferential analysis to justify conclusions about the origin of the features as well as the validity of the measurements. Finally, we also review the literature concerning historical searches for optical transients in photographic plates corresponding to gamma ray bursts (GRBs); following decades of work, researchers were unable to make a confident identification of a GRB-associated optical transient.

=== arXiv:2601.18965v1  [2026-01-26]
TITLE  : The MIRI Excess around Degenerates (MEAD) Survey II: A Probable Planet detected via IR Excess around WD 0644+025
AUTHORS: Sabrina Poulsen, John Debes, Ashley Messier, Erika Le Bourdais, Carl Melis, Misty Cracraft, Samuel Boucher, Mukremin Kilic
ABS    : The MIRI Excess Around Degenerates (MEAD) Survey is a cycle 2 JWST program designed to image nearby white dwarfs with MIRI at 10 and 15 microns. This survey targeted 56 white dwarfs within 25 pc to search for mid-infrared excesses, flux deficits from collision-induced absorption, and resolved substellar companions. In this paper we present our analysis of WD 0644+025, an unusually massive white dwarf (0.95 Msun) and the MEAD target exhibiting the most significant mid-infrared excess. The observed JWST MIRI photometry shows a 7.3 sigma excess at 15 microns and a 3.6 sigma excess at 10 microns, which may be associated with either a planetary companion or a circumstellar dust disk. This excess corresponds to a companion mass of 6.8 Mjup (Teff=261 +/- 9 K) with orbital distance &lt;11.8 au, although substantially lower masses are possible if we consider a closely orbiting insolated companion. No spatially resolved sources are detected within 200 au, with contrast curve analysis excluding planets more massive than 2 Mjup beyond ~12 au. Metal pollution is confirmed in both archival Keck HIRES spectra from 1999 and new observations from 2025, with no evidence suggesting the accretion rate has substantially changed over the decades. We explore possible dust disk morphologies to describe the observed IR excess, and find that traditional debris disks struggle to fit our data. WD 0644+025 thus represents a compelling case study in the growing population of white dwarfs with cold infrared excesses, and highlights JWST's ability to probe planetary system remnants inaccessible to prior infrared observatories.

=== arXiv:2601.16253v2  [2026-01-22]
TITLE  : Accretion Rate Changes Detected in a Polluted White Dwarf
AUTHORS: Jay Farihi, Hiba Tu Noor, Carl Melis, Beth L. Klein, Snehalata Sahu, Boris T. Gänsicke, Mark C. Wyatt, Seth Redfield
ABS    : This letter reports statistically significant changes in the equivalent widths of MgII and CaII lines in the dusty and polluted white dwarf WD 0106-328, based on six epochs of spectroscopy using the VLT and Keck spanning 25 yr. Furthermore, the ratio of these two equivalent widths may also vary, with a 7% probability of being constant. Between 2000 and 2025, both Mg and Ca have experienced decreases in accretion rates, of approximately 20 and 60%, respectively, but with individual variation during the interim. These metal abundance decreases are the first empirical corroboration of diffusion theory in white dwarfs, which predict sinking timescales on the order of days for this star. However, the persistent atmospheric metals require a more gradual, circumstellar process, where one possibility is viscous spreading in an ionized disk of metals, consistent with $α\approx0.1$ within that formalism. The combination of optical and ultraviolet spectroscopy with the Hubble Space Telescope detects all the major rock-forming elements (O, Mg, Si, Fe), and demonstrates that Fe dominates the accreted material by mass, and that it is delivered mostly as pure metal from within a differentiated parent body. This inference is consistent with the possibility that chemically-segregated accretion may result from a combination of planetary assembly, fragmentation, disk evolution, and be observed on relatively short timescales.

=== arXiv:2601.10188v1  [2026-01-15]
TITLE  : A Highly Magnetic Ultra Massive White Dwarf with a 23-minute Rotation Period
AUTHORS: Jincheng Guo, Xiaofeng Wang, Qichun Liu, Alexei V. Filippenko, Thomas G. Brink, Jingkun Zhao, WeiKang Zhang, Yi Yang
ABS    : We present a physical characterization of TMTS J00063798+3104160 (J0006), a rapidly rotating,ultra-massive white dwarf (WD) identified in high-cadence light curves from the Tsinghua University-Ma Huateng Telescope for Survey (TMTS). A coherent 23-minute periodicity is detected in TMTS, TESS, and ZTF photometry. A time series of low-resolution spectra with the Keck-I 10 m telescope reveals broad, shallow hydrogen absorption features indicative of an extreme magnetic field and shows no evidence for radial-velocity variations. Atmospheric modeling yields a magnetic field strength of $\sim$ 250 MG, while Gaia astrometry and photometry imply a mass of 1.06 $\pm$ 0.01 M$_{\odot}$. A significant infrared excess is detected in the WISE W1 band and is well fitted by a 550 K blackbody, likely arising from residual material of a merger. We interpret the 23-minute photometric modulation as the rotation period of an isolated, massive WD formed likely through the merger of a double WD binary. With one of the shortest rotation periods known among candidate merger remnants and with constraints from a deep Einstein Probe X-ray nondetection, J0006 provides a rare and important observational window into the poorly explored intermediate stages of post-merger evolution.

=== arXiv:2601.05317v1  [2026-01-08]
TITLE  : The fate of the failed supernova candidate M31-2014-DS1
AUTHORS: Emma R. Beasor, Nathan Smith, Jeniveve Pearson, Bhagya Subrayan, Edo Berger, David J. Sand, Jay Strader
ABS    : The fate of massive stars above 20M$_{\odot}$ remains uncertain. Debate persists about whether they die as supernovae (SNe), or if they collapse directly into black holes (BHs) with little or no optical outburst -- so-called ``failed supernovae''. The source M31-2014-DS1 experienced an optical outburst in 2014 and has remained faint at visual wavelengths since then. Due to its persistent faintness, it has been proposed as a failed SN candidate. We present new observations of this candidate obtained using the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), the Submillimeter Array (SMA), and Chandra. The JWST observations demonstrate that a luminous mid-infrared source persists at the same location a decade after the star faded at visual wavelengths. We model its current spectral energy distribution (SED) as a dust-enshrouded star. No X-ray emission is detected, disfavoring the hypothesis that the late-time luminosity is powered by accretion onto a BH. We find that the remaining source is highly obscured by an asymmetric distribution of circumstellar dust, making it difficult to quantify its physical properties using spherically symmetric radiative transfer codes. The dust geometry requires that the inferred bolometric luminosity is only a lower limit, as a significant fraction of the central source's radiation may escape without being reprocessed by dust. We discuss the implications of these findings in the context of failed SN models and consider the potential overlap with signatures expected from a stellar merger, which also seems to provide a plausible explanation of this source.

=== arXiv:2512.14832v1  [2025-12-16]
TITLE  : Luminous Fast Blue Optical Transients in the 2040s
AUTHORS: A. A. Chrimes, N. Sarin, D. Coppejans, P. J. Groot, A. Inkenhaag, P. G. Jonker, T. L. Killestein, D. A. Perley
ABS    : Luminous Fast Blue Optical Transients (LFBOTs) are a class of extragalactic transient of uncertain origin. Several hypotheses have been put forward which could feasibly be consistent with the sample number of events discovered thus far, including tidal disruption events around intermediate mass black holes, failed supernovae and mergers of stars with black holes. Whatever their origin, it is clear that better understanding LFBOTs will provide unique insight into the black hole formation/growth, central engine physics and transient-host galaxy interactions - themes which are expected to drive research in transient astronomy over the coming decades. The vast majority of LFBOTs are missed by current photometric surveys, or not efficiently selected for detailed follow-up. This white paper outlines the observing capabilities required on a 2040 timescale to maximise the discovery potential from these enigmatic events.

=== arXiv:2512.14664v3  [2025-12-16]
TITLE  : NGC 3521 as the Milky Way near twin: spectral energy distribution from UV to radio decameter ranges
AUTHORS: O. V. Kompaniiets, I. B. Vavilova, Y. V. Vasylkivskyi, O. O. Konovalenko, O. S. Pastoven, I. O. Izviekova, Junais, A. M. Dmytrenko
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 710, A11 (2026)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202558597
ABS    : Milky Way analogues (MWAs) are usually selected from structural and kinematic properties, but robust SED-based similarity criteria are limited by heterogeneous photometry and incomplete wavelength coverage. We present a homogeneous, aperture-photometry SED of the Milky Way near-twin NGC~3521 from the ultraviolet to the radio decameter range. Fluxes are measured within a fixed elliptical isophotal aperture using GALEX, SDSS, WISE, Spitzer/MIPS, Herschel/PACS+SPIRE, and VLA data, and supplemented by meter/decameter constraints. We report new observations obtained in Jan-Feb 2022 with the Ukrainian T-shape radio telescope and derive, for the first time, an upper limit in the 24--32~MHz band. The UV-to-decameter SED (27 points) is modelled with \textsc{CIGALE}, including a dedicated low-frequency radio prescription (\texttt{radio_extra}) that accounts for emission and absorption effects. Using ZTF and NEOWISE data (2014--2025), we detect genuine nuclear variability; optical trends at $\sim2^{\prime\prime}$ primarily trace the compact nucleus, while NEOWISE variability reflects a mix of nuclear changes and warm-dust emission within the larger aperture. The preferred fit yields $M_\star \simeq 6.0\times10^{10},M_\odot$, ${\rm SFR}\simeq1.65,M_\odot,{\rm yr}^{-1}$, $M_{\rm dust}\simeq1.3\times10^{8},M_\odot$, and an effective dust temperature of $\sim23$~K. The decameter constraint gives $S_{28,{\rm MHz}}&lt;11.22$~Jy, consistent with expectations for a Milky Way-like system placed at 10.7~Mpc. We conclude that an integrated, homogeneous SED, especially below 100~MHz, provides a complementary diagnostic for identifying and validating MWAs and for interpreting how Milky Way properties would appear to an external observer.

=== arXiv:2512.14254v1  [2025-12-16]
TITLE  : A Possible Indication of Metallic Iron in White Dwarf Dusty Disks from their "Dirtiness"
AUTHORS: Ayaka Okuya, Satoshi Okuzumi, Aki Takigawa, Hanako Enomoto
ABS    : Polluted white dwarfs provide unique constraints on the elemental compositions of planetary bodies. The tidal disruption of accreting bodies is thought to form circumstellar dusty disks, whose emission spectra could offer additional insights into the mineral phases of the accreted solid material. Silicates are detected in the mid-infrared spectra of several disks, but do not fully account for the near-infrared excess in the disks' spectra. Conductive materials, such as metallic iron, are potential sources of near-infrared emissivity. We investigate the role of metallic iron within silicate dust in the observed spectra of the white dwarfs G29-38 and GD56. Using thermal emission spectra calculations, we analyze the abundance of metallic iron in the dust and the disk structure parameters that best fit the observed spectra. We find that metallic-iron-bearing dust enhances the near-infrared opacity, thereby providing a better fit to the G29-38 spectrum for various silicate compositions than metallic-iron-free dust. The best-fit metal-to-silicate mixing ratio is approximately unity, and for Mg-rich pyroxenes, this value is also consistent with G29-38's stellar atmospheric composition within 1-$σ$ observational uncertainties. Based on the spectral fitting and compositional consistency, Fe-rich silicates without metallic iron cannot be ruled out. The observed GD56 spectrum also favors iron-bearing dust. However, the large observational uncertainties of GD56's stellar elemental abundances hinder a precise comparison between the stellar and dust iron abundances. Upcoming high-precision JWST observations will provide a larger sample, enabling statistical analysis of the correlation between the iron abundances in the atmospheres and circumstellar dust of polluted white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:2512.07924v1  [2025-12-08]
TITLE  : Microlensing Signatures of Dyson Sphere-like Structures around Primordial Black Holes as Technosignatures of Extraterrestrial Advanced Civilizations
AUTHORS: Shant Baghram
JOURNAL: ApJ 997 104 (2026)
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ae29b6
ABS    : We investigate the microlensing detectability of extraterrestrial technosignatures originating from Dyson sphere \textendash like structures, such as Dyson Swarms surrounding primordial black holes (PBHs). These hypothetical swarms consist of stochastically varying, partially opaque structures that could modulate standard microlensing light curves through time-dependent transmission effects. We introduce a probabilistic framework that includes a stochastic transmission model governed by variable optical depth and random gap distributions. We perform a parameter scan and generate heatmaps of the optical transit duration. We study the infrared excess radiation and peak emission wavelength as complementary observational signatures. Additionally, we define and analyze the effective optical depth and the anomalous microlensing event rate for these stochastic structures. Our findings provide a new avenue for searching for extraterrestrial advanced civilizations by extending microlensing studies to include artificial, dynamic modulation signatures.

=== arXiv:2511.22071v1  [2025-11-27]
TITLE  : A Catalogue of Mid-infrared Variable Sources from unTimely
AUTHORS: Zihan kang, Jingyi Zhang, Yanxia Zhang, Changhua Li, Xiao Kong, Minzhi Kong, Jinghang Shi, Shirui Wei
ABS    : The WISE and NEOWISE missions have provided the only mid-infrared all-sky time-domain data, opening a unique observational window for variability studies. Yet, a comprehensive and systematic catalog of mid-infrared variable sources has remained unavailable. In this work, we construct the first large-scale mid-infrared variability catalog based on the unTimely coadded photometry, covering tens of millions of sources. By employing a Bayesian Gaussian mixture model with a Dirichlet process, we identified 8,256,042 variable sources in the W1 band and 7,147,661 in the W2 band, significantly expanding the landscape of known mid-infrared variables. In addition to robust variability metrics, our analysis highlights rare and extreme outliers through dedicated outlier-detection algorithms, enabling the discovery of unusual classes of objects such as eruptive young stellar objects, highly variable active galactic nuclei, and other rare transients. This unprecedented dataset provides a new foundation for time-domain astronomy in the mid-infrared, offering complementary insights to optical and near-infrared surveys, and opening the door to systematic investigations of stellar evolution, accretion processes, and dust-enshrouded astrophysical environments on a Galactic and extragalactic scale.

=== arXiv:2511.10765v1  [2025-11-13]
TITLE  : Jeans Model for the Shapes of Self-interacting Dark Matter Halos
AUTHORS: Yilber Fabian Bautista, Andrew Robertson, Laura Sagunski, Adam Smith-Orlik, Sean Tulin
ABS    : The Jeans model is a semi-analytical approach to modeling self-interacting dark matter (SIDM) that works remarkably well to reproduce the spherically-averaged halo profiles from observations and simulations of relaxed galaxies and galaxy clusters. However, SIDM halos are not spherically symmetric in general since they respond to nonspherical baryon distributions and retain nonsphericity from their initial collapse. In this work, we generalize the Jeans model to describe SIDM density profiles and halo shapes beyond spherical symmetry. Observational tests via halo shapes are especially important for testing SIDM in massive galaxies, $M_{\rm 200} \sim 10^{12} - 10^{13} \; \Msun$, where SIDM and collisionless dark matter halos can have indistinguishable spherically-averaged profiles but distinct halo shapes. We validate our model by comparing to cosmological simulations with baryons for both SIDM with $\sigmam = 1 \cmg$ and collisionless cold dark matter. Our approach differs from previous work in this direction, taking into account the fact that multiple scatterings are required to impact the shape of the halo, as well as being computationally inexpensive to implement. The nonspherical Jeans model can be used in conjunction with halo shape observations (e.g., from gravitational lensing or X-ray data) to directly constrain dark matter self-interactions.

=== arXiv:2511.03394v2  [2025-11-05]
TITLE  : The subtle statistics of the distance ladder: On the distance prior and selection effects
AUTHORS: Harry Desmond, Richard Stiskalek, José Antonio Nájera, Indranil Banik
JOURNAL: Mon Not R Astron Soc (2026)
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stag1144
ABS    : Statistical methodology is rarely considered significant in distance-ladder studies or a potential contributor to the Hubble tension. We suggest it should be, highlighting two appreciable issues. First, astronomical distances are inferred latent parameters, requiring a prior. We show that the (often implicit) uniform priors on distance moduli common to Bayesian distance-ladder analyses bias distances low due to objects being uniformly distributed in volume, which biases the Hubble constant high. Frequentist $χ^2$ methods are unbiased for volume- or redshift-limited samples only if the redshift uncertainty (including peculiar velocities) vanishes, though simulation-based calibration can correct the bias. Second, in a Bayesian framework, selection effects introduce additional posterior factors describing the probability of objects entering the sample under the model. These partly counteract the volume prior, depending on the nature of the selection. After detailed analytic and mock-based studies, we quantify the volume-prior effect in the CosmicFlows-4 and SH0ES samples. Both use frequentist methods, so the effect appears as a potential estimator bias rather than a missing prior. The implied Hubble constant shifts are significant but must not be applied naïvely -- principled selection modelling is also required, as we investigate explicitly for CosmicFlows-4. Both effects should already be captured by the SH0ES pipeline's simulation-based bias corrections. Our work highlights the crucial need to model both distances and selection accurately, either directly in a Bayesian forward model, or via post-hoc simulation-based corrections with realistic source and selection distributions. Such modelling requires samples with known, homogeneous selection criteria, which future surveys should prioritise.

=== arXiv:2510.24945v1  [2025-10-28]
TITLE  : Energy-Conserving Contact Dynamics of Nonspherical Rigid-Body Particles
AUTHORS: Haoyuan Shi, Christopher J. Mundy, Gregory K. Schenter, Jaehun Chun
JOURNAL: APL Computational Physics 2, 016108 (2026)
DOI    : 10.1063/5.0319853
ABS    : Understanding the contact dynamics of nonspherical particles beyond the microscale is crucial for accurately modeling colloidal and granular systems, where shape anisotropy dictates structural organization and transport properties. In this paper, we introduce an energy-conserving contact dynamics framework for arbitrary convex rigid-body particles, integrating vertex-boundary interactions in 2D with vertex-surface and edge-edge detection in 3D. This formulation enables continuous force evaluation and strictly prevents particle overlap while conserving total energy during translational and rotational motion. Simulations of polygonal and polyhedral particles confirm the framework's stability and demonstrate its capability to capture packing behavior, anisotropic diffusion, and equations of state. The framework establishes a robust and extensible foundation for investigating the nonequilibrium dynamics of complex nonspherical particle systems, with potential applications in colloidal self-assembly, granular flow, and hydrodynamics.

=== arXiv:2510.12212v1  [2025-10-14]
TITLE  : YSO Variability in the W51 Star-Forming Region
AUTHORS: Mi-Ryang Kim, Jeong-Eun Lee, Contreras Peña Carlos, Gregory Herczeg, Doug Johnstone, Miju Kang
JOURNAL: JKAS (2025) Vol.58 No.2 pp.231-242
DOI    : 10.5303/JKAS.2025.58.2.231
ABS    : Time-domain studies of mid-infrared and submillimeter variability have shown that at least half of protostars are variable. We present a statistical analysis of mid-infrared variability among young stellar objects (YSOs) in the distant, massive star-forming region W51 using NEOWISE data. From a catalog of 81 protostars, 527 disk objects, and 37,687 other sources including diskless pre-main sequence and evolved contaminants, we identified significant variability in the 3.4 um (W1) and 4.6 um (W2) bands. Because of W51's distance (~5.4 kpc) and extinction, the sample mainly includes intermediate- to high-mass YSOs (&gt;2 Msun), unlike nearby regions dominated by low-mass stars. This mass bias may affect the observed variability. In W2, 11.1% of protostars, 7.6% of disk objects, and 0.6% of PMS+E sources showed secular variability, while 8.6%, 2.3%, and 0.5% showed stochastic variability; similar fractions were found in W1. The variability fraction and amplitude increase toward earlier stages. Protostars exhibit high-amplitude stochastic changes likely driven by dynamic accretion and extinction, whereas disk objects show more secular patterns-linear, curved, or periodic-possibly due to moderate accretion variations or disk geometry. Color-magnitude analysis shows that protostars generally redden as they brighten, consistent with enhanced dust emission or variable extinction, while disk objects show mixed trends: roughly balanced in W1 but more often bluer in W2, suggesting reduced extinction or hotspot modulation. These results highlight distinct mechanisms of variability across evolutionary stages and demonstrate that mid-infrared monitoring offers key insight into accretion and disk evolution in young stars.

=== arXiv:2509.24487v1  [2025-09-29]
TITLE  : Finding rare classes in large datasets: the case of polluted white dwarfs from Gaia XP spectra
AUTHORS: Xander Byrne, Amy Bonsor, Laura K. Rogers, Mariona Badenas-Agusti
ABS    : The Gaia mission's third data release recorded low-resolution spectra for about 100 000 white dwarf candidates. A small subset of these spectra show evidence of characteristic broad Ca II absorption features, implying the accretion of rocky material by so-called polluted white dwarfs -- important probes of the composition of exoplanetary material. Several supervised and unsupervised data-intensive methods have recently been applied to identify polluted white dwarfs from the Gaia spectra. We present a comparison of these methods, along with the first application of $t$-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding ($t$SNE) to this dataset. We find that $t$SNE outperforms the similar technique Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP), isolating over 50% more high-confidence polluted candidates, including 39 new candidates which are not selected by any other method investigated and which have not been observed at higher resolution. Supervised methods benefit greatly from data labels provided by earlier works, selecting many known polluted white dwarfs which are missed by unsupervised methods. Our work provides a useful case study in the selection of members of rare classes from a large, sporadically labelled dataset, with applications across astronomy.

=== arXiv:2509.22541v1  [2025-09-26]
TITLE  : The Origins &amp; Reservoirs of Exocomets
AUTHORS: Michele Bannister, Susanne Pfalzner, Tim Pearce, Alexander J. Mustill, Hubert Klahr, Hideko Nomura, Nagayoshi Ohashi, Rosita Kokotanekova
ABS    : Small bodies exist in distinct populations within their planetary systems. These reservoir populations hold a range of compositions, which to first order are dependent on formation location relative to their star. We provide a general overview of the nature of the reservoirs that source exocomets, from the influence of the stellar environment through planetesimal formation to comparisons with Solar System populations. Once transitioned from a young protoplanetary disc to a debris disc, a star can expect to be rained with exocomets. While exocomets are predominantly detected to date at A-type stars, planetesimals plausibly exist across a range of stellar masses, based on exoplanet abundance, debris disc occurrence and white dwarf infall.

=== arXiv:2509.15913v2  [2025-09-19]
TITLE  : ExoIris: fast exoplanet transmission spectroscopy in Python
AUTHORS: Hannu Parviainen
ABS    : I present ExoIris, a user-friendly Python package for exoplanet transmission and emission spectroscopy. Unlike existing tools, ExoIris models two-dimensional spectrophotometric transit time series directly and supports the joint analysis of multiple datasets obtained with different instruments and at different epochs, as well as modeling stellar spot crossings and the influence of unocculted heterogeneities (the transit light source effect). These features enable a self-consistent estimation of both wavelength-independent and wavelength-dependent parameters. They offer a more robust workflow than the commonly used two-step approach, in which a "white" light curve is fitted first, and the transmission spectrum is then derived from independent fits constrained by the white-light solution. Despite its increased flexibility and robustness, ExoIris remains computationally efficient. A low-resolution transmission spectrum can be estimated from a single JWST NIRISS transit observation in ~5 minutes assuming white noise, and in ~15 minutes when accounting for time-correlated systematics using a Gaussian process noise model, on a standard desktop computer.

=== arXiv:2509.09768v1  [2025-09-11]
TITLE  : Spatially Offset Active Galactic Nuclei in the Very Large Array Sky Survey: Tracers of Galaxy Mergers and Wandering Massive Black Holes
AUTHORS: R. Scott Barrows, Julia M. Comerford
ABS    : The remnants of galaxy mergers may host multiple off-nuclear massive black holes (MBHs), some of which may wander indefinitely within the host galaxy halos. Tracing the population of offset MBHs is essential for understanding how the distribution of MBHs in the Universe evolves through galaxy mergers, the efficiency of binary MBH formation, and the rates at which MBHs are seeded in low-mass satellite galaxies. Offset MBHs can be observationally traced if they are accreting and detectable as spatially offset active galactic nuclei (AGN). In this work, we build the largest uniform sample of spatially offset AGN candidates (328) by matching sources from the Very Large Array Sky Survey (VLASS) to galaxies in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS). Based on the radio source surface density, 29+/-3% are unrelated chance projections. The offset AGN occupation fraction is positively correlated with host galaxy stellar mass, consistent with predictions that most offset MBHs will reside in massive halos. However, this trend vanishes, and may reverse, at the lowest stellar masses, potentially reflecting the weaker host galaxy gravitational potentials. The offset AGN occupation fraction shows no significant evolution with orbital radius, and the agreement with predictions suggests a binary MBH formation rate of &lt;0.5 per merger. Finally, for offset MBHs down to masses of 10^5 Solar masses, the occupation fraction is ~30-70 times lower than the expected value assuming all accreted satellites host a MBH. This result may suggest a relatively low MBH seeding efficiency.

=== arXiv:2509.02254v1  [2025-09-02]
TITLE  : A High Incidence of Mid-infrared Variability in Local Ultraluminous Infrared Galaxies
AUTHORS: Shun Hatano, Masatoshi Imanishi, Takanobu Kirihara, Takashi Yamamoto, Yuxing Zhong, Chenghao Zhu
ABS    : We explore mid-infrared (MIR) variability in local ultraluminous infrared galaxies (ULIRGs; infrared luminsoity $L_{\rm IR}&gt;10^{12}\ L_\odot$) utilizing the $\sim$11 years of photometry from the NEOWISE multi-epoch catalog of {\it Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer} ({\it WISE}). We identify 30 variable ULIRGs with statistically significant MIR variability. The variability is observed on timescales of a few years, implying that the MIR-emitting regions are compact ($\lesssim 1$ pc). The difference between maximum and minimum $W2$ (4.6 ${\rm μ}$m) band luminosity ($ΔL_{\rm W2}$) of the 30 variable ULIRGs range from $ΔL_{W2}$ = $7\times10^{42}$ to $5\times 10^{44}$ erg s$^{-1}$. The $ΔL_{W2}$ of 25 variable ULIRGs out of 30 are greater than $ΔL_{W2}$ = $1\times10^{43}$ erg s$^{-1}$, surpassing the MIR luminosity {range} observed in known supernovae (SNe; $L_{\rm 3.6\ {\rm μm}}$ and $L_{\rm 4.5\ {\rm μm}}$ &lt; 10$^{42.3}$ erg s$^{-1}$). Therefore, the MIR variabilities in these 25 ULIRGs are most likely driven by tidal disruption events (TDEs) or intrinsic changes in their active galactic nuclei (AGN) torus emission. Our sample includes hard X-ray detected AGNs (e.g., UGC 05101) and previously reported TDE candidates (IRAS F01004-2237, IRAS 05189-2524). All 25 also exhibit at least one AGN signature(s) besides the MIR variability, suggesting that even if the MIR variability originates from TDEs, the black holes responsible are likely AGNs. Our results suggest that MIR variability is an effective tool for detecting buried AGNs and highlights the intense nuclear activity in ULIRGs.

=== arXiv:2509.01697v1  [2025-09-01]
TITLE  : Detecting water ice and vapor disks originating from icy planetary bodies around white dwarfs with future PRIMA observations
AUTHORS: Ayaka Okuya, Hideko Nomura
JOURNAL: J. Astron. Telesc. Instrum. Syst. 11(3), 031607 (2025)
DOI    : 10.1117/1.JATIS.11.3.031607
ABS    : Observations of atmospheres of polluted white dwarfs provide insights into the elemental composition of accreted exoplanets and exo-asteroids. However, they poorly constrain the abundance of ice-forming volatile elements due to the properties of white dwarf atmospheres. Instead of focusing solely on atmospheric observations, we propose observing circumstellar water ice and vapor disks formed by the tidal disruption of icy bodies using the future PRobe far-Infrared Mission for Astrophysics (PRIMA) far-infrared enhanced survey spectrometer. PRIMA has the potential to measure volatile abundances in colder circumstellar regions inaccessible by shorter-wavelength observations. We employ a simple disk emission model with disk parameter ranges inferred from previous observations and disk evolution simulations. We find the 44-$μ$m water ice feature promising for observing icy disks. For white dwarfs within 60 pc, 1-hour PRIMA observations could detect water ice with a mass above $10^{20}$ g, representing a potential lower limit of circumstellar disk mass. Water vapor rotational lines also abundantly emerge within the PRIMA wavelength coverage, and 5-hour observations for white dwarfs within 20 pc could detect water vapor with a total disk mass $\gtrsim 10^{20}$ g, depending on the H$_2$/H$_2$O ratio. 19 metal polluted white dwarfs within 20 pc and 210 within 60 pc could be optimal targets for water vapor and ice observations, respectively.

=== arXiv:2508.20172v1  [2025-08-27]
TITLE  : Do White Dwarfs Sample Water-Rich Planetary Material?
AUTHORS: Isabella L. Trierweiler, Carl Melis, Érika Le Bourdais, Patrick Dufour, Alycia J. Weinberger, Boris T. Gänsicke, Nicola Gentile-Fusillo, Siyi Xu
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ae003d
ABS    : Polluted white dwarfs offer a unique way to directly probe the compositions of exoplanetary bodies. We examine the water content of accreted material using the oxygen abundances of 51 highly polluted white dwarfs. Within this sample, we present new abundances for three H-dominated atmosphere white dwarfs that showed promise for accreting water-rich material. Throughout, we explore the impact of the observed phase and lifetime of accretion disks on the inferred elemental abundances of the parent bodies that pollute each white dwarf. Our results indicate that white dwarfs sample a range of dry to water-rich material, with median uncertainties in water mass fractions of $\approx$15\%. Amongst the He-dominated white dwarfs, 35/39 water abundances are consistent with corresponding H abundances. While for any individual white dwarf it may be ambiguous as to whether or not water is present in the accreted parent body, when considered as a population the prevalence of water-rich bodies is statistically robust. The population as a whole has a median water mass fraction of $\approx$25\%, and enforcing chondritic parent body compositions, we find that 31/51 WDs are likely to have non-zero water concentrations. This conclusion is different from a similar previous analysis of white dwarf pollution and we discuss reasons why this might be the case. Pollution in H-dominated white dwarfs continues to be more water-poor than in their He-dominated cousins, although the sample size of H-dominated white dwarfs remains small and the two samples still suffer a disjunction in the range of host star temperatures being probed.

=== arXiv:2508.19860v2  [2025-08-27]
TITLE  : HD 44892: The youngest (or oldest?) gas-harbouring debris disc around an intermediate mass star
AUTHORS: Karolina M. Szewczyk, Olja Panić, Daniela P. Iglesias, Tim D. Pearce, James M. Miley
JOURNAL: Mon Not R Astron Soc (2025)
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staf2150
ABS    : We present the first detections of gas around a 2.1 Myr old debris disc-bearing intermediate-mass star, HD 44892. Gas is detected both in $^{12}$CO (2-1) emission through ALMA Band 6 observations and in absorption in Ca II K and H, seen with high-resolution UVES spectroscopy. $^{13}$CO and C$^{18}$O (2-1) are not detected. The star exhibits a 12 $μ$m fractional excess of $7.86^{+0.11}_{-2.27}$, placing it in the transition stage between protoplanetary and debris discs. Our detection of 1.3 mm emission yields the dust mass of 0.019$\pm$0.009 $M_{\oplus}$ assuming 115 K temperature. The $^{13}$CO non-detection places an upper limit on CO gas mass of $\sim$10$^{-2}$ $M_{\oplus}$. The $^{12}$CO detection yields a CO gas mass of (7.86$\pm$2.05)$\times$10$^{-5}$ $M_{\oplus}$ or (1.62$\pm$0.17)$\times$10$^{-4}$ $M_{\oplus}$ assuming a gas temperature of 20 K or 50 K, respectively. These should be considered as lower limits since $^{12}$CO emission may be optically thick. With UVES, we find variability in Ca II K and H lines, which can be interpreted by transiting circumstellar gas, ruling out interstellar absorption as their origin. Both the dust mass, which is within an order of magnitude of HD 141569, and the gas mass derived here indicate a late gas dispersal stage of the protoplanetary disc. Through our analysis we deem the alternative age of 800 Myr unlikely.

=== arXiv:2508.18348v1  [2025-08-25]
TITLE  : Transiting Planetary Debris near the Roche Limit of a White Dwarf on a 4.97$\,$hr Orbit -- and its Vanishing
AUTHORS: Joseph A. Guidry, Zachary P. Vanderbosch, J. J. Hermes, Dimitri Veras, Mark A. Hollands, Soumyadeep Bhattacharjee, Ilaria Caiazzo, Kareem El-Badry
ABS    : We present the discovery of deep, irregular, periodic transits towards the white dwarf ZTF$\,$J1944$+$4557 using follow-up time-series photometry and spectroscopy from Palomar, Keck, McDonald, Perkins, and Lowell observatories. We find a predominant period of 4.9704$\,$hr, consistent with an orbit near the Roche limit of the white dwarf, with individual dips over 30$\%$ deep and lasting between 15 and 40 minutes. Similar to the first known white dwarf with transiting debris, WD$\,$1145$+$017, the transit events are well-defined with prominent out-of-transit phases where the white dwarf appears unobscured. Spectroscopy concurrent with transit photometry reveals the average Ca$\,$K equivalent width remains constant in and out of transit. The broadening observed in several absorption features cannot be reproduced by synthetic photospheric models, suggesting the presence of circumstellar gas. Simultaneous $g+r$- and $g+i$-band light curves from the CHIMERA instrument reveal no color dependence to the transit depths, requiring transiting dust grains to have sizes $s \gtrsim0.2\,μ$m. The transit morphologies appear to be constantly changing at a rate faster than the orbital period. Overall transit activity varies in the system, with transit features completely disappearing during the seven months between our 2023 and 2024 observing seasons and then reappearing in 2025$~$March, still repeating at 4.9704$\,$hr. Our observations of the complete cessation and resumption of transit activity provide a novel laboratory for constraining the evolution of disrupted debris and processes like disk exhaustion and replenishment timescales at white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:2508.16825v1  [2025-08-22]
TITLE  : Technosignature Searches of Interstellar Objects
AUTHORS: James R. A. Davenport, Sofia Z. Sheikh, Steve Croft, Brian C. Lacki, Jason T. Wright, Chris Lintott, Adam Frank, T. Joseph W. Lazio
ABS    : With the discovery of the third confirmed interstellar object (ISO), 3I/ATLAS, we have entered a new phase in the exploration of these long-predicted objects. Though confirmed discovery of ISOs is quite recent, their utility as targets in the search for technosignatures (historically known as the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence -- SETI) has been discussed for many decades. With the upcoming NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory's Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST), the discovery and tracking of such objects is expected to become routine, and thus so must our examination of these objects for possible technosignatures. Here we review the literature surrounding ISOs as targets for technosignatures, which provides a well-developed motivation for such exploration. We outline four broad classes of technosignatures that are well suited for ISO follow-up, including the type of data needed and the best timing for study. Given the limitations in the current understanding of ISOs, we show that care must be taken in identifying technosignatures based primarily on comparison to objects in the Solar System. We therefore provide a roadmap for careful and consistent study of the population of ISOs in the hope of identifying technosignatures.

=== arXiv:2508.15425v1  [2025-08-21]
TITLE  : Detecting Extraterrestrial Civilizations That Employ an Earth-level Deep Space Network
AUTHORS: Pinchen Fan, Jason T. Wright, T. Joseph W. Lazio
JOURNAL: ApJL 990 L1 (2025)
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8213/adf6b0
ABS    : A major aspect of the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) involves searching for electromagnetic transmissions from extraterrestrial sources, often using our own transmissions as a guide. Previous studies have suggested that humanity's most consistently detectable technosignatures were transmissions from our deep-space networks and interplanetary radar. In this study, we analyze NASA Deep Space Network logs to explore what strategies for selecting SETI targets and scheduling observations would enhance the chances of detecting such networks. Analyzing Deep Space Network uplink transmission logs over the last 20 yr, we find that these emissions were predominantly directed along the ecliptic plane, towards or directly away from the Sun, and towards other planets. The average duty cycle within the Earth Transit Zone is 20 times higher than that across all ecliptic latitudes. In the case of Mars, we find a species that is able to observe the Solar System for radio emission during an Earth-Mars conjunction in the past 20 yr would have had a 77% chance of observing during one of our transmissions, a $4\times10^5$-fold increase over intercepting our Deep Space Network transmission versus a random observer at a random time. These findings quantify how SETI searches might benefit from prioritizing edge-on exoplanet systems and aligning observation windows with exoplanetary conjunctions or planet-planet occultations because they significantly improve the likelihood of intercepting transmissions from any civilizations employing deep-space networks similar to our own.

=== arXiv:2508.14890v1  [2025-08-20]
TITLE  : Estimating Initial Mass of Gaia-Enceladus Dwarf Galaxy with Chemical Evolution Model
AUTHORS: Olcay Plevne, Furkan Akbaba
ABS    : This work investigates the initial mass and chemical evolution history of the Gaia-Enceladus dwarf galaxy. We combine spectroscopic data from APOGEE with astrometric data from Gaia DR3 to identify Gaia-Enceladus candidate stars via a machine-learning pipeline using t-SNE and HDBSCAN. By focusing on kinematic and chemical parameters, especially $\mathrm{[Fe/H]}$, $\mathrm{[Mg/Fe]}$, $\mathrm{[Al/Fe]}$, and $\mathrm{[Mn/Fe]}$, we uncover a population of metal-poor, high-eccentricity stars that align with literature criteria for Gaia-Enceladus debris. We then apply the \textit{OMEGA+} chemical evolution model, incorporating MCMC fitting of the observed abundance trends in the $\mathrm{[Mg/Fe]\times[Fe/H]}$ plane. Our best-fitting model indicates a gas mass of $4.93_{-0.72}^{+0.32}\times10^9\,{M_{\odot}}$ for Gaia-Enceladus, placing it at the higher end of previously suggested mass ranges. The model scenario suggests a short star formation timescale, substantial outflows, and a rapid build-up of metals mainly driven by core-collapse supernovae, with a lesser contribution from Type~Ia supernovae. Comparison with observational data in other chemical planes (e.g., $\mathrm{[Mg/Mn]\times[Al/Fe]}$) supports this scenario, emphasizing a distinct evolution path relative to the Milky Way. Additionally, our results provide indirect evidence that star formation in Gaia-Enceladus likely ceased within the first 4 Gyr, consistent with earlier inferences of an early merger event. These findings highlight the power of chemical evolution modeling in reconstructing the origin and mass of ancient accreted systems. Overall, we show that Gaia-Enceladus, through a rapid star formation and strong outflows, contributed a significant fraction of the metal-poor stellar halo of the Milky Way.

=== arXiv:2508.13119v1  [2025-08-18]
TITLE  : Activity in White Dwarf Debris Disks I: Spitzer Legacy Reveals Variability Incompatible with the Canonical Model
AUTHORS: Hiba Tu Noor, Jay Farihi, Scott J. Kenyon, Roman R. Rafikov, Mark C. Wyatt, Kate Y. L. Su, Carl Melis, Andrew Swan
ABS    : This study presents all available, multi-epoch 3.6 and 4.5 $μ$m photometry from Spitzer Space Telescope observations of white dwarf debris disks, including weekly cadence observations of 16 relatively bright systems, and 5 h staring-mode observations for five of these. Significant variability is detected in 85 per cent of disks and across all timescales probed, from minutes to weeks to years, where the largest flux changes correlate with the longest time baselines, and the infrared excesses persist utterly. While each source is idiosyncratic, the overall results indicate the most variable disks correlate with those that are the brightest (dustiest), and also among those with detected gas, demonstrating both dust and gas are produced via ongoing collisions. There is a correlation between flux and colour changes, where disks tend to appear redder when dimmer and bluer when brighter, consistent with an excess of small dust grains produced in collisions, followed by a gradual return to equilibrium. The overall results are a drastic departure from the predictions of the canonical - geometrically thin, optically thick - disk in both flux and colour, but are broadly consistent with collisional evolution based on a simple model. The data presented herein constitute a legacy resource that can inform time-series studies of polluted and dusty white dwarfs, and importantly serve as a basis for future disk modelling, beyond the pioneering canonical framework.

=== arXiv:2508.03964v1  [2025-08-05]
TITLE  : A Systematic Search for Main-Sequence Dipper Stars Using the Zwicky Transient Facility
AUTHORS: Anastasios Tzanidakis, James R. A. Davenport, Neven Caplar, Eric C. Bellm, Wilson Beebe, Doug Branton, Sandro Campos, Andrew J. Connolly
ABS    : Main-sequence dipper stars, characterized by irregular and often aperiodic luminosity dimming events, offer a unique opportunity to explore the variability of circumstellar material and its potential links to planet formation, debris disks, and broadly star-planet interactions. The advent of all-sky time-domain surveys has enabled the rapid discovery of these unique systems. We present the results of a large systematic search for main-sequence dipper stars, conducted across a sample of 63 million FGK main-sequence stars using data from Gaia eDR3 and the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF) survey. Using a novel light curve scoring algorithm and a scalable workflow tailored for analyzing millions of light curves, we have identified 81 new dipper star candidates. Our sample reveals a diverse phenomenology of light curve dimming shapes, such as skewed and symmetric dimmings with timescales spanning days to years, some of which closely resemble exaggerated versions of KIC 8462852. Our sample reveals no clear periodicity patterns sensitive to ZTF in many of these dippers and no infrared excess or irregular variability. Using archival data collated for this study, we thoroughly investigate several classification scenarios and hypothesize that the mechanisms of such dimming events are either driven by circumstellar clumps or occultations by stellar/sub-stellar companions with disks. Our study marks a significant step forward in understanding main-sequence dipper stars.

=== arXiv:2507.22023v1  [2025-07-29]
TITLE  : Lightcurves of stars in the Chamaeleon I Association
AUTHORS: K. Neumannová, L. Kueß, E. Paunzen, K. Bernhard
ABS    : Star-forming regions are essential for studying very young stellar objects of various masses. They still contain a significant amount of dust and gas. We present a study of light curves of stars in the field of the Chamaeleon I association. We use automatic spectral classification with MKCLASS to identify the spectral types of the stars in the field with a light curve from the NEOWISE and Gaia surveys. The light curves are analysed using the software Peranso and astropy. We also used VSX to identify the variability type. Based on astrometry, we have identified 92 stars, 73 of which are members of the association. We received light curves for 55 stars from the Gaia survey and for 69 stars from the ALLWISE/NEOWISE survey. For 28 of them, it was possible to determine the types of variables, mostly T Tauri and Orion variables. The spectral types of the members are mostly cooler M-type stars, with one being a possible chemically peculiar (CP) star. The non-members associated with light curve measurements include spectral types A-G with one CP candidate.

=== arXiv:2507.21822v1  [2025-07-29]
TITLE  : Detecting Stellar Coronal Mass Ejections via Coronal Dimming in the Extreme Ultraviolet
AUTHORS: James Paul Mason, Allison Youngblood, Kevin France, Astrid M. Veronig, Meng Jin
JOURNAL: ApJ 988 167 (2025)
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ade4bc
ABS    : Stellar flares and coronal mass ejections (CMEs) can strip planetary atmospheres, reducing the potential habitability of terrestrial planets. While flares have been observed for decades, stellar CMEs remain elusive. Extreme ultraviolet (EUV) emissions are sensitive to both flares and CME-induced coronal dimming. We assess the detectability of stellar CME-induced EUV dimming events by adapting a known "Sun-as-a-star" dimming technique -- validated by the Solar Dynamics Observatory's EUV Variability Experiment (EVE) -- to stellar conditions. We adapt the solar data to reflect a range of stellar intensities, accounting for intrinsic brightness, distance, and interstellar medium (ISM) attenuation. We generate synthetic light curves for two different missions: the legacy EUV Explorer (EUVE) and the proposed ESCAPE mission. Our results indicate that dimming detections are well within reach. EUVE's broadband imager was capable of detecting stellar CMEs -- albeit with limited spectral (temperature) resolution -- but that was not part of the observing plan. EUVE's spectroscopic survey lacked sufficient sensitivity for CME detections. Optimizing modern instrument design for this task would make the observation fully feasible. In this work, we present a tool to explore the stellar-CME detection parameter space. Our tool shows that an instrument with performance similar to ESCAPE, setting a 600-second integration period, and integrating the spectra into bands, any star with an X-ray flux $\geq 2.51 \times 10^{-12}$ergs$^{-1}$~cm$^{-2}$ should have a $\geq 3σ$ detection even for a modest few-percent dimming profile, regardless of ISM attenuation. Such measurements would be crucial for understanding the space weather environments of exoplanet host stars and, ultimately, for evaluating planetary habitability.

=== arXiv:2507.20594v2  [2025-07-28]
TITLE  : Thick Disks around White Dwarfs viewed 'Edge-off': Effects on Transit Properties and Infrared Excess
AUTHORS: Soumyadeep Bhattacharjee
ABS    : A significant fraction of white dwarfs (WDs) host dust/debris disks formed from the tidal disruption of asteroids and planetesimals. Several studies indicate that the disks can attain significant vertical heights through collisional cascade. In this work I model the effects of geometrically thick disks on two primary observables: photometric transits by the disk when viewed at high inclinations and infrared dust emission. Specifically, I consider disks with a Gaussian vertical profile with scale heights comparable to or larger than the WD radius. I primarily focus on inclinations $\gtrsim$$87$ degrees (`edge-off'), which can produce significant transits with moderate disk thickness. Both the transit depth and color become strong functions of inclination, and I explore their dependence on the disk parameters. I show that such a setup can produce the recently discovered reddening in the transit of WD J1013$-$0427. Moving to infrared emission, I show that the contribution from the heated inner rim can be substantial even at high inclinations. It can potentially explain the infrared excess observed in two transiting debris systems, WD 1145$+$017 and WD 1232$+$563, consistently with the transits. The other two important radiation components are the optically thin dust emission from the disk's outer layers and the optically thick emission from the backwarmed disk interior. Extending my analysis to G29-38 shows that the former can adequately produce the silicate emission feature with optically thin dust mass of $&gt;$$10^{17}$ grams. The inner dense layers, on the other hand, allow the disk to contain orders of magnitude larger net dust mass. Overall, I show that thick disk effects can be significant and should be taken into account. I motivate detailed studies to quantify the effects accurately.

=== arXiv:2507.19594v3  [2025-07-25]
TITLE  : A Systematic Search for Big Dippers in ASAS-SN
AUTHORS: B. JoHantgen, D. M. Rowan, R. Forés-Toribio, C. S. Kochanek, K. Z. Stanek, B. J. Shappee, Subo Dong, J. L. Prieto
DOI    : 10.33232/001c.156224
ABS    : Dipper stars are extrinsically variable stars with deep dimming events due to extended, often dusty, structures produced by a wide range of mechanisms such as collisions, protoplanetary evolution or stellar winds. ASAS-SN has discovered 12 dipper-like objects as part of its normal operations. Here we systematically search the $\sim 5.1$ million ASAS-SN targets with $13&lt;g&lt;14$~mag for dippers with $Δg\ge0.3$~mag to identify 4 new candidates. We also discover 15 long-period eclipsing binary candidates. We characterized the 19 new and 12 previously discovered objects using the ASAS-SN light curves and archival multi-wavelength data. We divide them into three categories: long-period eclipsing binaries with a single eclipse (13 total), long-period eclipsing binaries with multiple eclipses (7 total) and dipper stars with dust or disk occultations (11 total).

=== arXiv:2507.15964v1  [2025-07-21]
TITLE  : Red Supergiants in the Milky Way and Nearby Galaxies
AUTHORS: Alceste Z. Bonanos
JOURNAL: Galaxies 2025, 13(3), 66
DOI    : 10.3390/galaxies13030066
ABS    : Identifications of red supergiants (RSGs) in the Milky Way and nearby galaxies have experienced an exponential increase in recent years, driven by advancements in selection techniques, the continued expansion of archival datasets, and a steady increase in spectroscopic data. This review describes the advances in methodologies and selection criteria for identifying RSGs and presents the current census of these stars in our own Galaxy and nearby galaxies. It also describes the insights gained from resolving nearby RSGs and their complex circumstellar material in the Milky Way and from the growing samples of RSGs being discovered in the Local Group and beyond. These advances impact the Humphreys--Davidson limit in the cool part of the Hertzsprung--Russell diagram. Furthermore, they provide insight into extreme RSGs and the role of photometric variability and, in particular, of the newly discovered phenomenon of dimming events. Recent observations have enabled the determination of the binarity fraction among RSGs, offering new constraints to stellar evolution. Looking ahead, the synergy between large-scale surveys, high-resolution observations, and emerging machine-learning tools promises to further transform our understanding of the final evolutionary stages of massive stars in the coming decade.

=== arXiv:2507.15794v1  [2025-07-21]
TITLE  : Chasing the formation history of the Galactic metal-poor disc
AUTHORS: Xiaokun Hou, Ruizhi Zhang, Haining Li, Gang Zhao
ABS    : In our previous work, we identified $\sim100,000$ metal-poor stars ([Fe/H] $&lt;$ -1.0) from the LAMOST Survey. This work estimates their chemical abundances and explores the origin and evolution of the Galactic metal-poor disc. Our chemo-dynamical analysis reveals four main populations within the metal-poor disc: (1) a primordial disc older than 12 Gyr with [Fe/H] $&gt;$ -1.5; (2) debris stars from the progenitor galaxy of Gaia-Sausage-Enceladus (GSE), but now residing in the Galactic disc; (3) the metal-poor tail of the metal-rich, high-$α$ disc formed 10-12 Gyr ago, with metallicity lower limit extending to -2.0; (4) the metal-poor tail of the metal-rich, low-$α$ disc younger than 8 Gyr, reaching a lower metallicity limit of -1.8. These results reveal the presence of a primordial disc and show that both high-$α$ and low-$α$ discs reach lower metallicities than previously thought. Analysis of merger debris reveals that Wukong, with extremely low metallicity, likely originate from merger events distinct from GSE. Additionally, three new substructures are identified: ShangGu-1, characterized by unusual [Fe/H]-eccentricity correlations; ShangGu-2, possibly heated disc stars; and ShangGu-3, which can be divided into four subgroups based on differing orbital directions, with two aligning with the previously known Nyx and Nyx-2.

=== arXiv:2507.15896v1  [2025-07-21]
TITLE  : On the Image Profiles of Transients in the Palomar Sky Survey
AUTHORS: Beatriz Villarroel, Enrique Solano, Geoffrey W. Marcy
ABS    : The VASCO project has discovered groups of short-lived transients on historical photographic plates that lack conventional explanation. Hambly &amp; Blair (2024) examined nine such transients reported by Villarroel (2021) and found that they exhibit narrower, rounder profiles, attributing this to emulsion flaws. However, well-established optical principles and atmospheric physics imply that unresolved flashes lasting less than a second naturally appear sharper and more circular than stellar images, particularly on long-exposure plates where stars are significantly blurred by seeing and tracking errors. Such profiles are an expected consequence of sub-second optical flashes, making their findings consistent with the transient interpretation.

=== arXiv:2507.12559v1  [2025-07-16]
TITLE  : The vanishing of the long photometric cycle in AU Monocerotis
AUTHORS: L. Celedón, R. E. Mennickent, D. Barría, J. Garcés, M. Jurković
ABS    : Double periodic variables (DPVs) are a group of semi-detached interacting binaries that exhibit a long photometric cycle with an average length of $\sim33$ times the orbital period of the system. It has been proposed that this long photometric cycle originates from a modulated mass transfer rate from the donor star, which itself is driven by an internal magnetic dynamo. One of the most well-studied DPVs in the Milky Way is AU Monocerotis (AU Mon). We aim to enhance our understanding of the long photometric cycle in AU Mon by characterising its behaviour through the analysis of available photometric data from several databases and surveys. We summarise previous findings on the system and analyse its published multi-wavelength photometry from different sources, covering 46.3 years, to study the variability of its light curve. We find that the orbital period has remained constant over recent decades, but the long cycle of approximately 417 days vanished around 2010. From an O-C analysis, we conclude that the system is experiencing a change in its orbital period of no greater than $0.038\pm0.040$ s yr$^{-1}$, and thus, imposing a value of $2\times10^{-8}$ M$_\odot$ yr$^{-1}$ for $\dot{M}$ in a fully conservative mass transfer regime. A time-series analysis of the disentangling light curve in the Ic filter shows a transient periodicity of approximately 1910 days lasting at least 2000 days before it also disappears around the year 2020. An analysis of the available APASS light curves around the year 2013 shows a strong periodicity at approximately 280 days, which appears to be stronger in the Z filter. We report what is the second observation of the sudden disappearance of the long cycle in a DPV, after the Galactic DPV TYC 5353-1137-1. The disappearance of the long cycle in AU Mon is a strong constraint for current models that aim to explain the long cycle in DPVs.

=== arXiv:2507.10921v1  [2025-07-15]
TITLE  : Quantifying the Active Galactic Nuclei Fraction in Cosmic Voids via Mid-Infrared Variability
AUTHORS: Anish S. Aradhey, Anca Constantin, Michael S. Vogeley, Kelly A. Douglass
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/adeca1
ABS    : Observations and theoretical simulations suggest that the large scale environment plays a significant role in how galaxies form and evolve and, in particular, whether and when galaxies host an actively accreting supermassive black hole in their center (i.e., an Active Galactic Nucleus, or AGN). One signature of AGN activity is luminosity variability, which appears in the mid-infrared (mid-IR) when circumnuclear dust reprocesses UV and optical photons from the AGN accretion disk. We present here a suite of constraints on the fraction of AGN activity in the most underdense regions of the universe (cosmic voids) relative to the rest of the universe (cosmic walls) by using ~12 years of combined multi-epoch data from AllWISE and NEOWISE to quantify mid-IR variability. We find clear evidence for a larger mid-IR variability-AGN fraction among high and moderate-luminosity void galaxies compared to their wall counterparts. We also show that mid-IR variability identifies a rather large and unique population of AGNs, the majority of which have eluded detection using more traditional AGN-selection methods such as single-epoch mid-IR color selection. The fraction of these newly-recovered AGNs is larger among galaxies in voids, suggesting once again more prolific AGN activity in the most underdense large scale structures of the universe.

=== arXiv:2507.05090v1  [2025-07-07]
TITLE  : Bounding destruction timescales of minor planets orbiting white dwarfs with the sesquinary catastrophe
AUTHORS: Dimitri Veras, Matija Ćuk
ABS    : Dynamical activity attributed to the destruction of minor planets orbiting white dwarfs has now been photometrically monitored in individual systems for up to one decade, long enough to measure significant cessation and re-emergence of transit features. Further, periodicities which hint at the presence of debris orbiting exterior to the white dwarf Roche radius, along with widely varying estimates for debris disc lifetimes (up to Myrs), complicate theories for the formation and dynamical evolution of these systems. Here, we illustrate that minor planets orbiting white dwarfs with periods of $\approx$5-25 hours and longer while completely or partially avoiding tidal disruption satisfy the conditions for the occurrence of the sesquinary catastrophe, a phenomenon that occurs in the solar system when impacts from returning ejecta from a moon are fast enough to be erosional to the point of destruction. We hence find that the region corresponding to $\approx$1-4 white dwarf rubble-pile Roche radii represents a danger zone where the collisional timescale for the sesquinary catastrophe to occur is $\sim 10^2-10^5$ yr, suggesting that debris discs around white dwarfs are in a state of semi-continuous replenishment.

=== arXiv:2507.03080v2  [2025-07-03]
TITLE  : ASASSN-24fw: An 8-month long, 4.1 mag, optically achromatic and polarized dimming event
AUTHORS: R. Forés-Toribio, B. JoHantgen, C. S. Kochanek, S. G. Jorstad, J. J. Hermes, J. D. Armstrong, C. Ashall, C. R. Burns
DOI    : 10.33232/001c.143105
ABS    : We discuss ASASSN-24fw, a 13th-magnitude star that optically faded by $Δg = 4.12 \pm 0.02$ mag starting in September 2024 after over a decade of quiescence in ASAS-SN. The dimmimg lasted $\sim$8 months before returning to quiescence in late May 2025. The spectral energy distribution (SED) before the event is that of a pre-main sequence or a modestly evolved F star with some warm dust emission. The shape of the optical SED during the dim phase is unchanged and the optical and near-infrared spectra are those of an F star. The SED and the dilution of some of the F star infrared absorption features near minimum suggest the presence of a $\sim$0.25$M_\odot$ M dwarf binary companion. The 43.8 year period proposed by Nair &amp; Denisenko (2024) appears correct and is probably half the precession period of a circumbinary disk. The optical eclipse is nearly achromatic, although slightly deeper in bluer filters, $Δ(g-z)=0.31\pm0.15$ mag, and the $V$ band emission is polarized by up to 4%. The materials most able to produce such small optical color changes and a high polarization are big ($\sim$20 $μ$m) carbonaceous or water ice grains. Particle distributions dominated by big grains are seen in protoplanetary disks, Saturn-like ring systems and evolved debris disks. We also carry out a survey of occultation events, finding 46 additional systems, of which only 7 (4) closely match $\varepsilon$ Aurigae (KH 15D), the two archetypes of stars with long and deep eclipses. The full sample is widely distributed in an optical color-magnitude diagram, but roughly half show a mid-IR excess. It is likely many of the others have cooler dust since it seems essential to produce the events.

=== arXiv:2506.22100v1  [2025-06-27]
TITLE  : Infrared Variability of Carbon Stars in the LMC Observed with NEOWISE-R
AUTHORS: Kyung-Won Suh
ABS    : We investigate the infrared variability of carbon stars in the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC). Our sample consists of 11,134 carbon stars identified in both visual and infrared bands. Among these, 1,184 objects are known Mira variables based on the Optical Gravitational Lensing Experiment III (OGLE-III) observations. We study the infrared variability of the entire sample using the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) photometric data spanning the past 16 years, including the AllWISE multiepoch data and the Near-Earth Object WISE Reactivation (NEOWISE-R) 2024 final data release. We generate light curves using WISE observations in the W1 and W2 bands and compute Lomb-Scargle periodograms for all sample stars. From the WISE light curves, we derive reliable variability parameters for 1,615 objects. Among these, we identify 672 objects exhibiting clear Mira-like variations: 445 of these are previously known Miras from OGLE-III, while 227 are candidates for new Mira variables identified from the WISE data. We establish period-magnitude and period-color relations in both visual and infrared bands for the known Miras and the newly identified candidates from WISE data. We anticipate that these relations will serve as valuable references for studying carbon stars in other galaxies, including the Milky Way.

=== arXiv:2506.21677v1  [2025-06-26]
TITLE  : Lensing Without Borders: Measurements of galaxy-galaxy lensing and projected galaxy clustering in DESI DR1
AUTHORS: S. Heydenreich, A. Leauthaud, C. Blake, Z. Sun, J. U. Lange, T. Zhang, M. DeMartino, A. J. Ross
ABS    : We present Galaxy-Galaxy Lensing measurements obtained by cross-correlating spectroscopically observed galaxies from the first data release of the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI) with source galaxies from the Hyper Suprime-Cam Subaru Strategic Survey, the Kilo-Degree Survey, the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, and the Dark Energy Survey. Specifically, we measure the excess surface mass density $ΔΣ$ and tangential shear $γ_\mathrm{t}$ for the Bright Galaxy Sample and Luminous Red Galaxies measured within the first year of observations with DESI. To ensure robustness, we test the measurements for systematic biases, finding no significant trends related to the properties of the \acrshort{desi} lens galaxies. We identify a significant trend with the average redshift of source galaxies, however, this trend vanishes once we apply shifts to the Hyper Suprime-Cam Subaru Strategic Survey redshift distributions that are also favored by their fiducial cosmology analysis. Additionally, we compare the observed scatter in the measurements with the theoretical covariance and find excess scatter, driven primarily by small-scale measurements of $r\leq 1 \, \mathrm{Mpc}/h$; measurements on larger scales are consistent at the $2\,σ$ level. We further present the projected clustering measurements $w_p$ of the galaxy samples in the the first data release of DESI. These measurements, which will be made publicly available, serve as a foundation for forthcoming cosmological analyses.

=== arXiv:2506.21224v1  [2025-06-26]
TITLE  : Metal Polluted White Dwarfs with 21 μm IR excesses from JWST/MIRI: Planets or Dust?
AUTHORS: John H. Debes, Sabrina Poulsen, Ashley Messier, Susan E. Mullally, Katherine Thibault, Loïc Albert, Misty Cracraft, Érika Le Bourdais
ABS    : White dwarfs with metal pollution are caused by the accretion of rocky dust from tidally disrupted minor bodies and are signposts for planetary systems. These minor bodies are perturbed by planets that have survived post-main sequence evolution. Open questions exist as to the typical mass of the perturbers and the specific planetary architectures that cause metal pollution. JWST's sensitivity in the mid-IR has opened new doors to deciphering polluted white dwarfs. We present JWST Cycle 1 MIRI imaging of four nearby metal-polluted white dwarfs with the goal of detecting and characterizing planetary companions. With deep mid-IR imaging we are sensitive to cold Jupiter-mass planet analogs. In addition to finding two candidate planetary companions, for the first time we detect significant excesses above the expected photospheric emission at 21~$μ$m for two of our targets, WD 2149+021 and WD 2105-820. WD 2105-280 has a candidate planetary companion at a projected separation of 34 au and an infrared excess--if both candidates are confirmed, it would represent the first WD multi-planet system. We investigate whether these excesses could be caused by very low luminosity warm dust disks or planets. While both are likely, we argue that the most likely explanation for the excesses is that they are the thermal emission from jovian-mass planets in orbits with semi-major axes $&lt;$10 au, using a combination of observational constraints. If most of the candidate planets presented here are confirmed, it would suggest that metal polluted white dwarfs are frequently orbited by at least one giant planet.

=== arXiv:2506.20316v1  [2025-06-25]
TITLE  : Can tidal evolution lead to close-in planetary bodies around white dwarfs II: volcanism and transits
AUTHORS: Yuqi Li, Amy Bonsor, Oliver Shorttle
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staf1028
ABS    : Planetary material accreted by white dwarfs provides unique insights regarding exoplanetary composition. The evolutionary pathways of planetary bodies around white dwarfs are crucial to understanding the presence of close-in planetary material, observed in the form of pollutants in the atmospheres of white dwarfs and planetary material transiting white dwarfs. Periodic transits around white dwarfs potentially reveal the existence of close-in planetary bodies undergoing dust production. Tidal interactions can bring planetesimals that have been gravitationally perturbed onto long-period highly eccentric orbits around white dwarfs towards shorter orbital periods and smaller eccentricities. Tidal interactions may also induce melting and volcanism in these planetesimals, potentially being a mechanism for dust and debris production, the result of which may be seen in transit. Tidally induced volcanism may be triggered in a wide parameter space: for a 100km-sized rocky planetesimals perturbed to a pericentre distance $\lesssim$ 0.01AU ($\gtrsim$ twice its Roche limit), both on long-period (~ 100day) highly eccentric orbits and short-period (~ 10hr) near circular orbits. We comment on the potential link between the resultant volcanic ejecta and observed optical transits.

=== arXiv:2506.18553v1  [2025-06-23]
TITLE  : X-ray and Optical Analysis of the Prototype Polar AN UMa
AUTHORS: S. Ok, M. Yardimci, B. Kalomeni, A. Schwope
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staf1024
ABS    : We present a long-term optical and X-ray photometric study of AN UMa, one of the prototypical polar-type cataclysmic variables, tracing more than 34 years of its accretion history. Observations from both ground-based and space-based facilities have been analysed to investigate state transitions within the system. Throughout this period, significant changes in the light curve have been observed, corresponding to different mass accretion states. From four years of TESS photometry, we derive a revised photometric period that agrees with the spectroscopic period to within 1.2$σ$. These optical observations further suggest switching between two accretion poles. During intervals of high accretion, dips in the X-ray light curve indicate that the primary accretion pole is obscured by an accretion stream elevated above the orbital plane, a feature also evident in the TESS light curves. Additionally, periodogram analysis reveals a periodicity of $\approx$437 days, which may be related to long-term accretion state changes. Following a 16-year high state, AN UMa entered two short-lived low states, lasting 180 and 123 days, during which it faded to a magnitude of 19.2, as recorded by the ZTF and ATLAS surveys. Using the system's low-state brightness and the distance provided by Gaia, we estimate that the system may have a white dwarf with an effective temperature of $\approx$15000~K, and a donor of spectral type M4.7. This work provides a useful reference for future studies of polars with variable accretion geometries and highlights the importance of long-term, multi-wavelength monitoring in the study of magnetic cataclysmic variables.

=== arXiv:2506.14744v1  [2025-06-17]
TITLE  : Technosignature Searches with Real-time Alert Brokers
AUTHORS: Eleanor M. Gallay, James R. A. Davenport, Steve Croft
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/ade4bb
ABS    : We present an exploration of technosignature research that is possible using real-time alert brokers from surveys such as the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF) and the upcoming Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST). Nine alert brokers currently stream up to 1 million alerts each night from ZTF, and LSST is projected to increase this volume by an order of magnitude. While these brokers are primarily designed to facilitate real-time follow-up of explosive transients such as supernovae, they offer a unique platform to discover rare forms of variability from nearby stars in real time, which is crucial for follow-up and characterization. We evaluate the capability for both spatial and temporal searches for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) methods using the currently available brokers, and present examples of technosignature searches using ZTF alert and archival data. We have deployed optical SETI techniques, such as planetary transit zone geometries and the SETI Ellipsoid. We have also developed a search for novel high-amplitude stellar dippers, and present a workflow that integrates features available directly through the brokers, as well as post-processing steps that build on the existing capabilities. Though the SETI methods that alert brokers can execute are currently limited, we provide suggestions that may enhance future technosignature and anomaly searches in the era of the Vera C. Rubin Observatory.

=== arXiv:2506.13459v1  [2025-06-16]
TITLE  : Breakthrough Listen: A Technosignature Search Around 27 Eclipsing Exoplanets Selected from the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite Catalogue
AUTHORS: R. Barrett, C. D. Tremblay, B. Addison, D. C. Price, J. A. Green
DOI    : 10.1017/pasa.2025.10060
ABS    : Here we analyse the archival data for a set of 27 Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) Targets of Interest (TOIs) in search for artificially generated radio signals, or 'technosignatures', interrupted by occultation. Exoplanetary eclipses are notable events to observe in the search for technosignatures, as they mark the geometrical alignment of the target, its host star, and Earth. During an eclipse event, any signal emanating from the target of interest should cease for the duration of the eclipse, and resume after the line-of-sight has been restored. Target observations were made by Breakthrough Listen (BL) using Murriyang, the CSIRO Parkes 64-m radio telescope, coupled with the Ultra-wide Low frequency (UWL) receiver covering a continuous range of frequencies spanning 704-4032 MHz inclusive. Each target was observed in a pattern consisting of six back-to-back 5-minute source and reference sky positions for comparison during data analysis. We performed a Doppler search for narrowband signals with a minimum signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio of 10, a minimum drift rate of $\pm0.1$ Hz/s, and a maximum drift rate of $\pm4.0$ Hz/s using the turboSETI pipeline. In the analysis of 1,954,880 signals, 14,639 passed automated radio interference filters where each event was presented as a set of stacked dynamic spectra. Despite manually inspecting each diagram for a signal of interest, all events were attributed to terrestrial radio frequency interference (RFI).

=== arXiv:2506.09352v1  [2025-06-11]
TITLE  : New Symbiotic Stars from LAMOST DR10 Spectra and Multi-band Photometry
AUTHORS: Jing Chen, Liang Wang, Yin-Bi Li, Xiao-Xiao Ma, A-Li Luo, Zi-Chong Zhang, Ming-Yi Ding, Kai Zhang
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/addec3
ABS    : Symbiotic star (SySt) is long-period interacting binary system, typically consisting of a white dwarf and a red giant surrounded by a nebula. These systems are natural astrophysical laboratories for investigating binary star evolution. In this paper, we identified nine SySts from the LAMOST DR10 low-resolution spectra survey, seven of which were previously known, while two are newly identified. Initially, we selected LAMOST spectra exhibiting typical SySt emission lines (e.g., $\rm H_α, ~H_β, ~H_γ, ~and ~He II$). Subsequently, we utilized the distribution of known SySts on the HR diagram to select SySt candidates, and visually inspected their spectra. Ultimately, we classified all nine as S-type SySts using the $J - H$ vs. $H - K$ diagram. Additionally, based on multi-band photometric data from GALEX, Gaia, 2MASS, ALLWISE, and several X-ray catalogs, we found 12 accreting-only SySt (acc-SySt) candidates, characterized by concurrent ultraviolet and infrared excess and accretion process. Furthermore, we estimated the white dwarf temperatures by fitting their observed SEDs using a combination of Kurucz stellar atmosphere model and Koester white dwarf model. We compared the accretion rates of acc-SySt candidates and confirmed SySts, and found they have similar accretion rate distribution, providing evidence that these acc-SySt candidates constitute bona fide SySts.

=== arXiv:2506.08389v1  [2025-06-10]
TITLE  : Submillimeter and Mid-Infrared Variability of Young Stellar Objects in the M17 HII Region
AUTHORS: Zhiwei Chen, Doug Johnstone, Carlos Contreras Peña, Jeong-Eun Lee, Sheng-Yuan Liu, Gregory Herczeg, Steve Mairs, Geumsook Park
ABS    : We conducted a comprehensive analysis of young stellar object (YSO) variability at submillimeter and mid-infrared (mid-IR) wavelengths for the M\,17 \ion{H}{2} region, using 3.5 years monitoring data from the JCMT Transient Survey at $450$ and $850\,μ$m and 9 years mid-IR monitoring data from the NEOWISE mission. Our study encompasses observations of 198 and 164 bright submillimeter peaks identified within the deep JCMT coadded maps at 450 and $850\,μ$m, and 66 YSOs seen by NEOWISE W2 that were previously identified in mid-IR observations. We find one robust linear submillimeter variable, an intermediate mass protostar, with a $4\%$ peak flux change in 3.5 years of JCMT monitoring that sets a lower limit of $16\%$ luminosity increase for the source. At mid-IR wavelengths, our analysis reveals secular and stochastic variability in 22 YSOs, with the highest fraction of secular variability occurring at the earliest evolutionary stage. This mid-IR fractional variability as a function of evolutionary stage result is similar to what has previously been found for YSO variability within the Gould Belt and the intermediate-mass star formation region M17\,SWex, though overall less variability is detected in M\,17 in submillimeter and mid-IR. We suspect that this lower detection of YSO variability is due to both the greater distance to M\,17 and the strong feedback from the \ion{H}{2} region. Our findings showcase the utility of multiwavelength observations to better capture the complex variability phenomena inherent to star formation processes and demonstrate the importance of years-long monitoring of a diverse selection of star-forming environments.

=== arXiv:2505.08353v1  [2025-05-13]
TITLE  : Tidal Debris Candidates from the $ω$ Centauri Accretion Event and its Role in Building Up the Milky Way Halo
AUTHORS: Borja Anguiano, Arik Mitschang, Takanobu Kirihara, Yutaka Hirai, Danny Horta, Sten Hasselquist, Ricardo P. Schiavon, Steven R. Majewski
ABS    : We identify stellar tidal debris from the $ω$ Centauri ($ω$ Cen) system among field stars in the APOGEE survey via chemical tagging using a neural network trained on APOGEE observations of the $ω$ Cen core. We find a total of 463 $ω$ Cen debris candidates have a probability $P &gt; 0.8$ of sharing common patterns in their chemical abundances across a range of individual elements or element combinations, including [C+N], O, Mg, Al, Si, Ca, Ni, and Fe. Some debris candidates show prograde or retrograde disk-like kinematics, but most show kinematics consistent with the accreted halo, showing high radial actions, $J_{R}$, values. We find that a sample of Gaia-Sausage-Enceladus (GES) members are chemically distinct from the $ω$ Cen core, suggesting that $ω$ Cen is associated to an independent merger event shaping the Milky Way halo. However, a connection between GSE and $ω$ Cen cannot be ruled out. A detailed comparison with $N$-body simulations indicates that the $ω$ Cen progenitor was a massive dwarf galaxy ($\gtrsim 10^8 M_{\odot}$). The existence of a metal-poor high-$α$ chemically homogeneous halo debris is also reported.

=== arXiv:2504.16806v1  [2025-04-23]
TITLE  : V4141 Sgr: Outflows and repeated outbursts
AUTHORS: Jaroslav Merc, Joanna Mikołajewska, Thomas Petit, Berto Monard, Stéphane Charbonnel, Olivier Garde, Pascal Le Dû, Lionel Mulato
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 698, L4 (2025)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202554734
ABS    : In this work, we analyze the ongoing brightening of the poorly studied symbiotic star V4141 Sgr and examine its long-term variability. We present new low-resolution spectroscopic observations of the system in its bright state and combine them with multi-color photometric data from our observations, ASAS-SN, ATLAS, and Gaia DR3. To investigate its long-term evolution, we also incorporate historical data, including photographic plates, constructing a light curve spanning more than a century. Our analysis reveals that V4141 Sgr has undergone multiple outbursts, with at least one exhibiting characteristics typical of "slow" symbiotic novae. The current outburst is characterized by the ejection of optically thick material and possibly bipolar jets, a phenomenon observed in only a small fraction of symbiotic stars. These findings establish V4141 Sgr as an intriguing target for continued monitoring.

=== arXiv:2504.09290v1  [2025-04-12]
TITLE  : On the causes of brightness variability of the young star BP Tau
AUTHORS: M. A. Burlak, K. N. Grankin, A. V. Dodin, A. V. Zharova, N. P. Ikonnikova, V. A. Kiryukhina, S. A. Lamzin, B. S. Safonov
ABS    : We have constructed and analysed the secular light curve of BP Tau, a classical T Tauri-type star. Wave-like variations in the average brightness were detected, with an amplitude of $ΔB\approx 0.2$ and characteristic time-scales of several decades. We argue that three deep dimming events $(ΔB \sim 1.5)$, lasting from 1 hour to several days, are caused by the eclipse of a hot (accretion) spot by dust falling onto the star together with gas. Such eclipses, albeit with smaller amplitudes, may explain the absence of a strictly defined periodicity in the brightness variations of BP Tau associated with axial rotation. We also show that within the distance range of 0.1 to 200 AU, BP Tau does not have a companion with a mass exceeding 0.2M$_\odot.$ The causes of brightness and colour index variations on different time-scales are discussed.

=== arXiv:2504.05401v2  [2025-04-07]
TITLE  : Disentangling Joint Light Curves Using Photocenter Shifts: A Case Study Using NEOWISE Data
AUTHORS: Bringfried Stecklum
ABS    : The data collected by the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE, Wright et al. 2010) and its follow-up Near Earth Object (NEO) mission (NEOWISE, Mainzer et al. 2011) represent a treasure trove for variability studies. However, the angular resolution imposed by the primary mirror implies that close double stars are often unresolved. Then, variability of one or both stars leads to motion of the image centroid along the connecting line. Knowledge of the angular separation, derived from higher-resolution imaging which resolves both components, allows disentangling of the joint light curve into individual ones. This is illustrated by the case of SPICY 1474 which featured an outburst several years ago. Removal of the contribution of the nearby companion, which led to a dilution of the burst strength, revealed that it was ~0.5 mag brighter than in the joint light curve. A comparison with light curves from unTimely suggests that utilizing the photocenter shift may lead to more reliable results.

=== arXiv:2503.21922v1  [2025-03-27]
TITLE  : Dust-void evolution driven by turbulent dust flux can induce runaway migration of Earth-mass planets
AUTHORS: R. O. Chametla, O. Chrenko, F. S. Masset, G. D'Angelo, D. Nesvorny
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 698, A21 (2025)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202451869
ABS    : Torques from asymmetric dust structures (so-called dust-void and filamentary structures) formed around low-mass planets embedded in a non turbulent dust-gas disk can exceed the torques produced by the gas disk component, then governing the planet's orbital dynamics. Here, we investigate how these structures (hence the dust torque) change when the effect of turbulent dust diffusion and dust feedback are included, and the direct implications on the migration of Earth-like planets. Using the \textsc{Fargo3D} code, we perform 2D and 3D multifluid hydrodynamic simulations, focusing on a non-migrating planet with the mass $M_p=1.5\,M_\oplus$ in 2D and on migrating planets with $M_p\in[1.5,12]\,M_\oplus$ in 3D. We vary the $δ$-dimensionless diffusivity parameter in the range $[0,3\times10^{-3}]$ and consider three different Stokes numbers $\mathrm{St}=\{0.04,0.26,0.55\}$, which are representative of the gas, transitional and gravity-dominated regimes, respectively. In our 2D models, we find that turbulent diffusion of dust prevents the formation of the dust-void and filamentary structures when $δ&gt;3\times10^{-4}$. Otherwise, dust structures survive turbulent diffusion flow. However, dust and total torques become positive only in transitional and gravity-dominated regimes. In our 3D models, we find that the dust-void is drastically modified and the high-density ring-shaped barrier delineating the dust-void disappears if $δ\gtrsim10^{-4} $, due to the effect of dust turbulent diffusion along with the back-reaction of the dust. For all values of $δ$, the filament in front of the planet is replaced by a low-density trench. Remarkably, as we allow the planets to migrate, the evolving dust-void can drive either runaway migration or outward (inward) oscillatory-torque migration. Our study thus suggests that low-mass Earth-like planets can undergo runaway migration in dusty disks.

=== arXiv:2503.16733v1  [2025-03-20]
TITLE  : Testing the bloated star hypothesis in the massive young stellar object IRAS 19520+2759 through optical and infrared variability
AUTHORS: Rakesh Pandey, Aina Palau, Javier Serna, Rolf Kuiper, Álvaro Sánchez-Monge, Saurabh Sharma, Raghvendra Sahai, Carmen Sánchez Contreras
ABS    : Using optical time series with Telescopi Joan Oró (TJO), Gaia, TESS, and NEOWISE archival data, we performed a variability study on the candidate bloated massive young stellar object (MYSO) IRAS 19520+2759. This is the first time that a bloated star candidate has been tested for the theoretically predicted periodic variability. The source is found to be variable at optical and mid-infrared wavelengths and classified as a long-period variable MYSO. The observed TJO data gives a period of the source of $\sim$ 270$\pm$40 days (in the Rc band) and $\sim$ 270$\pm$50 days (in the Ic band), which is very close to the value predicted by the theoretical Period-Luminosity relation for a bloated young star of $\sim 10^5 L\odot$. Additionally, a large period of $\sim$ 460$\pm$80 days (in the G band) and $\sim$ 440$\pm$70 (in the Rp band) is also visible in the Gaia light curve. The physical parameters of the source, such as mass, radius, and accretion rate, based on the theoretical predictions for the spherical accretion case and corresponding to a period of 270--460 days, are $\sim 24$--28$\,M\odot$, $\sim 650$--900$\,R\odot$ and $\sim (6$--$9)\times10^{-3}\,M\odot yr^{-1}$. However, these numbers are very sensitive to the effective temperatures assumed in the models. Additionally, these values strongly depend on the geometry of accretion and could significantly decrease for the case of a MYSO accreting through a disc. The observed periodic variability, the observed colour trend, and the nature of the variability are found to be consistent with the pulsational model for a bloated MYSO.

=== arXiv:2503.13971v1  [2025-03-18]
TITLE  : Illuminating Youth: Decades of Mid-Infrared Variability and Color Evolution of Young Stellar Objects
AUTHORS: Neha S., Saurabh
ABS    : The variability of Young Stellar Objects (YSOs) is a crucial tool for understanding the mechanisms driving flux changes. In this study, we present an infrared variability analysis of a large sample of over 20,000 candidate YSOs, using data from the ALLWISE and NEOWISE surveys, which span around a decade with a 6-month cadence. We applied Lomb-Scargle Periodogram (LSP) analysis and linear fitting to the light curves, classifying them into distinct categories: {\it Secular} ({\it Linear}, {\it Curved}, and {\it Periodic}) and {\it Stochastic} ({\it Burst}, {\it Drop}, and {\it Irregular}). Our findings show that 5,467 (26.2$\pm$0.3\%) of the sources exhibit variability, with most (19.7$\pm$0.3\%) showing {\it Irregular} variations, followed by {\it Curved} and {\it Periodic} variations. In addition, 235 sources of {\it Bursts} and 122 {\it Drop} sources were identified. Variability is more pronounced in Class I sources with a higher fraction of variables (36.3$\pm$0.6\%) compared to Class II (22.1$\pm$0.4\%) and Class III (22.5$\pm$1.0\%) sources. The color (W1 $-$ W2) versus magnitude analysis (W2) using linear fitting shows that the trend ``redder-when-brighter" (RWB) is more prevalent (85.4$\pm$0.5\%) among YSOs. In contrast, the trend ``bluer-when-brighter" (BWB) is more common in younger sources compared to more evolved ones, having a BWB fraction of 29.0$\pm$1.1\% for Class I to 4.0$\pm$0.9\% for Class III.

=== arXiv:2503.10222v1  [2025-03-13]
TITLE  : Mathematical modelling for acoustic microstreaming produced by a gas bubble undergoing asymmetric oscillations
AUTHORS: Claude Inserra, Cyril Mauger, Philippe Blanc-Benon, Alexander A. Doinikov
JOURNAL: J. Fluid Mech. 1010 (2025) A48
DOI    : 10.1017/jfm.2025.284
ABS    : An exact solution is developed for the bubble-induced acoustic microstreaming in the case of a gas bubble undergoing asymmetric oscillations. The modeling is based on the decomposition of the solenoidal, first- and second-order, vorticity fields into poloidal and toroidal components. The result is valid for small amplitude bubble oscillations without restriction on the size of the viscous boundary layer $(2ν/ω)^{(1/2)}$ in comparison to the bubble radius. The nonspherical distortions of the bubble interface are decomposed over the set of orthonormal spherical harmonics ${Y_n^m} (θ,φ)$ of degree $n$ and order $m$. The present theory describes the steady flow produced by the nonspherical oscillations $(n,{\pm}m)$ that occur at a frequency different from that of the spherical oscillation as in the case of a parametrically-excited surface oscillation. The three-dimensional aspect of the streaming pattern is revealed as well as the particular flow signatures associated to different asymmetric oscillations.

=== arXiv:2502.18651v3  [2025-02-25]
TITLE  : Variability of Central Stars of Planetary Nebulae with the Zwicky Transient Facility. II. Long-Timescale Variables including Wide Binary and Late Thermal Pulse Candidates
AUTHORS: Soumyadeep Bhattacharjee, Nicole Reindl, Howard E. Bond, Klaus Werner, Gregory R. Zeimann, David Jones, Kareem El-Badry, Nina Mackensen
ABS    : In this second paper on our variability survey of central stars of planetary nebulae (CSPNe) using ZTF, we report 11 long-timescale variables with variability timescales ranging from months to years. We also present preliminary analyses based on spectroscopic and/or photometric follow-up observations for six of them. Among them is NGC 6833, which shows a $980$ day periodic variability with strange characteristics: `triangle-shaped' brightening in $r$, $i$, and WISE bands but almost coincidental shallow dips in the $g$-band. The most plausible explanation is a wide binary with the photometric period being the orbital period. Long-period near-sinusoidal variability was detected in two other systems, NGC 6905 and Kn 26, with periods of $700$ days and $230$ days, respectively, making them additional wide-binary candidates. The latter also shows a short period at $1.18$ hours. We then present CTSS 2 and K 3-5, which show brightening and significant reddening over the whole ZTF baseline. A stellar model fit to the optical spectrum of CTSS 2 reveals it to be one of the youngest post-AGB CSPNe known. Both show high-density emission-line cores. We propose these to be late-thermal-pulse candidates, currently evolving towards the AGB phase. We then present recent HST/COS ultraviolet spectroscopy of the known wide-binary candidate LoTr 1, showing that the hot star is a spectroscopic twin of the extremely hot white dwarf in UCAC2 46706450. Similar to this object, LoTr 1 also has a fast-rotating wide subgiant companion. We suggest that the long photometric period of 11 years is the binary orbital period. Finally, we briefly discuss the ZTF light curves of the remaining variables, namely Tan 2, K 3-20, WHTZ 3, Kn J1857+3931, and IPHAS J1927+0814. With these examples, we present the effectiveness of the von Neumann statistics and Pearson Skew-based metric space in searching for long-timescale variables.

=== arXiv:2502.05502v2  [2025-02-08]
TITLE  : A ZTF Search for Circumstellar Debris Transits in White Dwarfs: Six New Candidates, one with Gas Disk Emission, identified in a Novel Metric Space
AUTHORS: Soumyadeep Bhattacharjee, Zachary P. Vanderbosch, Mark A. Hollands, Pier-Emmanuel Tremblay, Siyi Xu, Joseph A. Guidry, J. J. Hermes, Ilaria Caiazzo
ABS    : White dwarfs (WDs) showing transits from orbiting planetary debris provide significant insights into the structure and dynamics of debris disks. This is a rare class of objects with only eight published systems. In this work, we perform a systematic search for such systems within 500 pc in the Gaia-eDR3 catalog of WDs using the light curves from the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF) and present six new candidates. Our selection process targets the top 1% most photometrically variable sources identified using a combined variability metric from ZTF and Gaia eDR3 photometry, boosted by a metric space we define using von Neumann statistics and Pearson-Skew as a novel discovery tool to identify these systems. This is followed by optical spectroscopic observations of visually selected variables to confirm metal pollution. Four of the six systems show long-timescale photometric variability spanning several months to years, resulting either from long-term evolution of transit activity or dust and debris clouds at wide orbits. Among them, WD J1013-0427 shows an indication of reddening during the long-duration dip. Interpreting this as dust extinction makes it the first system to indicate an abundance of small dust grains (radius $\lesssim$$0.3~{\rm μm}$) in the occulting material. The same object also shows metal emission lines that map an optically thick eccentric gas disk orbiting within the star's Roche limit. For each candidate, we infer the abundances of the photospheric metals and estimate accretion rates. We show that transiting debris systems tend to have higher inferred accretion rates compared to the general population of metal-polluted WDs. Growing the number of these systems will further illuminate such comparative properties in the near future. Separately, we also serendipitously discovered an AM CVn showing a very long-duration outburst $-$ only the fourth such system to be known.

=== arXiv:2502.03584v1  [2025-02-05]
TITLE  : Environmental effects on nearby debris discs
AUTHORS: A. M. Heras, C. Eiroa, C. del Burgo, J. P. Marshall, B. Montesinos
ABS    : We probe the effect of the ISM on debris disc occurrence rates and on the morphologies of the discs. We used results from the Herschel Space Observatory DUNES and DEBRIS surveys of 295 nearby FGK dwarf stars imaged at 100 $μ$m and 160 $μ$m. Most of the 48 debris discs in this sample have small optical depths, making them more likely to be affected by the ISM compared to optically thick discs. Since the stars in our sample are located within the Local Interstellar Cloud, we can infer that their debris discs encounter similar conditions. This allows us to use the stellar space velocity as a single indicator of the forces that can act on the debris disc dust grains when they interact with the ISM. The observed debris disc occurrence rates seem to depend on the stellar space velocities, as expected under the hypothesis that stars with higher space velocities have a higher probability of losing their circumstellar dust. The percentage of sources with debris discs in our sample reaches a maximum of $\approx$25% for stars with low space velocity component values, $|U_{\mathrm{rel}}|$, relative to the local ISM, and decreases for larger $|U_{\mathrm{rel}}|$ values down to the 10% level. A decrease in the average disc fractional luminosity as a function of $|U_{\mathrm{rel}}|$ is also observed. These dependences do not disappear after accounting for the reported higher dispersion of $U$ values with age. In extended discs, the impact of the ISM could also explain the links observed between the stellar space velocities and the debris disc projected ellipticities, position angles, and radii. Although these indications may not be fully conclusive on their own, they collectively reinforce the hypothesis that the ISM influences the occurrence rates and morphologies of debris discs.

=== arXiv:2501.18338v1  [2025-01-30]
TITLE  : Subtle and Spectacular: Diverse White Dwarf Debris Disks Revealed by JWST
AUTHORS: J. Farihi, K. Y. L. Su, C. Melis, S. J. Kenyon, A. Swan, S. Redfield, M. C. Wyatt, J. H. Debes
ABS    : This letter reports 12 novel spectroscopic detections of warm circumstellar dust orbiting polluted white dwarfs using JWST MIRI. The disks span two orders of magnitude in fractional infrared brightness and more than double the number of white dwarf dust spectra available for mineralogical study. Among the highlights are: i) the two most subtle infrared excesses yet detected, ii) the strongest silicate emission features known for any debris disk orbiting any main-sequence or white dwarf star, iii) one disk with a thermal continuum but no silicate emission, and iv) three sources with likely spectral signatures of silica glass. The near ubiquity of solid-state emission requires small dust grains that are optically thin, and thus must be replenished on year-to-decade timescales by ongoing collisions. The disk exhibiting a featureless continuum can only be fit by dust temperatures in excess of 2000K, implying highly refractory material comprised of large particles, or non-silicate mineral species. If confirmed, the glassy silica orbiting three stars could be indicative of high-temperature processes and subsequent rapid cooling, such as occur in high-velocity impacts or vulcanism. These detections have been enabled by the unprecedented sensitivity of MIRI LRS spectroscopy and highlight the capability and potential for further observations in future cycles.

=== arXiv:2501.12977v1  [2025-01-22]
TITLE  : DASCH: Bringing 100+ Years of Photographic Data into the 21st Century and Beyond
AUTHORS: Peter K. G. Williams
ABS    : The Harvard College Observatory was the preeminent astronomical data center of the early 20th century: it gathered and archived an enormous collection of glass photographic plates that became, and remains, the largest in the world. For nearly twenty years DASCH (Digital Access to a Sky Century @ Harvard) actively digitized this library using a one-of-a kind plate scanner. In early 2024, after 470,000 scans, the DASCH project finished. Now, this unique analog dataset can be integrated into 21st-century, digital analyses. The key DASCH data products include ~200 TB of plate images, ~16 TB of calibrated light curves, and a variety of supporting metadata and calibration outputs. Virtually every part of the sky is covered by thousands of DASCH images with a time baseline spanning more than 100 years; most stars brighter than B ~ 15 have hundreds or thousands of detections. DASCH Data Release 7, issued in late 2024, represents the culmination of the DASCH scanning project.

=== arXiv:2501.08967v4  [2025-01-15]
TITLE  : Eigenstate thermalization to non-monotonic distributions in strongly-interacting chaotic lattice gases
AUTHORS: Vladimir A. Yurovsky, Amichay Vardi
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. Research 7, 043354 (2025)
DOI    : 10.1103/4cq3-nfb2
ABS    : We find non-monotonic equilibrium energy distributions, qualitatively different from the Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein forms, in strongly-interacting many-body chaotic systems. The effect emerges in systems with finite energy spectra, supporting both positive and negative temperatures, in the regime of quantum ergodicity. The results are supported by exact diagonalization calculations for chaotic Fermi-Hubbard and Bose-Hubbard models, when they have Wigner-Dyson statistics of energy spectra and demonstrate eigenstate thermalization. The proposed effects may be observed in experiments with cold atoms in optical lattices.

=== arXiv:2501.06462v1  [2025-01-11]
TITLE  : Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) as an Extraterrestrial Atmospheric Technosignature
AUTHORS: Dwaipayan Dubey, Ravi Kopparapu, Barbara Ercolano, Karan Molaverdikhani
DOI    : 10.3847/PSJ/ad98eb
ABS    : Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons are prevalent in the universe and interstellar medium but are primarily attributed to anthropogenic sources on Earth, such as fossil fuel combustion and firewood burning. Drawing upon the idea of PAHs as suitable candidates for technosignatures, we investigate the detectability of those PAHs that have available absorption cross-sections in the atmospheres of Earth-like exoplanets (orbiting G-type stars at a distance of 10 parsecs) with an 8m mirror of Habitable Worlds Observatory (HWO). Specifically, we focus on Naphthalene, Anthracene, Phenanthrene, and Pyrene. Our simulations indicate that under current Earth-like conditions, detecting PAH signatures between 0.2-0.515 $\mathrm{μm}$ is infeasible. To account for the historical decline in PAH production post-industrial revolution, we explore varying PAH concentrations to assess instrumental capabilities to detect civilizations resembling modern Earth. We also evaluate telescope architectures (6m, 8m, and 10m mirror diameters) to put our results into the context of the future HWO mission. With these four molecules, PAH detection remains infeasible, even at concentrations ten times higher than current levels. While larger mirrors provide some advantages, they fail to resolve the spectral signatures of these molecules with significant signal-to-noise ratios. The UV absorption features of PAHs, caused by $\mathrmπ$-orbital $\rightarrow$ $\mathrm{π^*}$-orbital electronic transitions, serve as valuable markers due to their distinct and detectable nature, preserved by the aromatic stability of PAHs. Additional lab measurements are necessary to gather absorption cross-section data beyond UV for more abundant PAHs. This may help further in improving the detectability of these molecules.

=== arXiv:2501.05152v4  [2025-01-09]
TITLE  : High-resolution imaging of the radio source associated with Project Hephaistos Dyson Sphere Candidate G
AUTHORS: Tongtian Ren, Michael A. Garrett, Andrew P. V. Siemion
JOURNAL: MNRAS 538, L56-L61 (2025)
DOI    : 10.1093/mnrasl/slaf006
ABS    : We present high-resolution e-MERLIN and EVN (e-VLBI) observations of a radio source associated with Dyson Sphere candidate G, identified as part of Project Hephaistos. The radio source, VLASS J233532.86-000424.9, is resolved into three compact components and shows the typical characteristics of a radio-loud active galactic nucleus (AGN). In particular, the European VLBI Network (EVN) observations show that it has a brightness temperature in excess of $10^{8}$~K. No radio emission is detected at the position of the M-dwarf star. This result confirms our earlier hypothesis, that at least some of the Dyson Sphere candidates of project Hephaistos are contaminated by obscured, background AGN, lying close to the line of sight of otherwise normal galactic stars. High-resolution radio observations of other Dyson Sphere candidates can be useful in distinguishing truly promising candidates from those contaminated by background sources.

=== arXiv:2501.02050v1  [2025-01-03]
TITLE  : Sporadic Dips from Extended Debris Transiting the Metal-Rich White Dwarf SBSS 1232+563
AUTHORS: J. J. Hermes, Joseph A. Guidry, Zachary P. Vanderbosch, Mariona Badenas-Agusti, Siyi Xu, Malia L. Kao, Antonio C. Rodriguez, Keith Hawkins
ABS    : We present the discovery of deep but sporadic transits in the flux of SBSS 1232+563, a metal-rich white dwarf polluted by disrupted exoplanetary debris. Nearly 25 years of photometry from multiple sky surveys reveal evidence of occasional dimming of the white dwarf, most notably evident in an 8-months-long event in 2023 that caused a &gt;40% drop in flux from the star. In-transit follow-up shows additional short-timescale (minutes- to hours-long) dimming events. TESS photometry suggests a coherent 14.842-hr signal that could represent the dominant orbital period of debris. Six low-resolution spectra collected at various transit depths over two decades show no evidence of significant changes in the observed elemental abundances. SBSS 1232+563 demonstrates that debris transits around white dwarfs can be sporadic, with many years of inactivity before large-amplitude dimming events.

=== arXiv:2412.17086v1  [2024-12-22]
TITLE  : Search for Dyson rings around pulsars: unexpected light curves
AUTHORS: O. Kayali, E. Haliki, K. Bas, R. J. Nemiroff
JOURNAL: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 536, Issue 2, January 2025, Pages 1447-1454
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stae2701
ABS    : Finding Dyson rings around distant pulsars may involve identifying light curve features that have not been previously identified. Previous studies covered the detection of a ring structure uniformly brightened by the central pulsar, mostly in infrared light. Here, more complex light curves are explored, which arise inherently from the pulsar beam spot's commonly predicted superluminal speed. These speeds may cause multiple images of the pulsar's spot on the Dyson ring to appear simultaneously to a distant observer, and so feature bright creation and annihilation events. Therefore, it is possible that even if Dyson ring structures had been observed previously, they might have remained unnoticed. Similar light curve features may appear on naturally occurring dust rings around pulsars that reflect detectable pulsar radiation.

=== arXiv:2412.13963v1  [2024-12-18]
TITLE  : Radial velocity variability fractions of different types of hot subdwarf stars
AUTHORS: Ruijie He, Xiangcun Meng, Zhenxin Lei, Huahui Yan, Shunyi Lan
ABS    : Different types of hot subdwarfs may have different origins, which will cause them to present different radial velocity (RV) variability properties. Only 6$\pm$4% of our single-lined He-rich hot subdwarfs that only show spectroscopic features of hot subdwarfs are found to be RV variable, which is lower than the fraction of single-lined He-poor sdB stars (31$\pm$3%). Single-lined sdB stars with effective temperatures ($T_{\rm eff}$) $\sim$ 25,000 $-$ 33,000 K show an RV-variability fraction of 34$\pm$5%, while lower RV-variability fractions are observed for single-lined sdB stars cooler than about 25,000 K (11$\pm$4%), single-lined sdB/OB stars with $T_{\rm eff}$ $\sim$ 33,000 $-$ 40,000 K and surface gravities about 5.7 $-$ 6.0 (13$\pm$3%), as well as single-lined sdO/B stars with $T_{\rm eff}$ $\sim$ 45,000 $-$ 70,000 K (10$\pm$7%). Single-lined hot subdwarfs with $T_{\rm eff}$ $\sim$ 35,000 $-$ 45,000 K located above the extreme horizontal branch (EHB) show a similar RV-variability fraction of 34$\pm$9% as single-lined sdB stars at about 25,000 $-$ 33,000 K. The largest RV-variability fraction of 51$\pm$8% is found in single-lined hot subdwarfs below the canonical EHB. The detected RV-variability fraction of our composite hot subdwarfs with an infrared excess in their spectral energy distributions is 9$\pm$3%, which is lower than that fraction of single-lined hot subdwarfs. Since the average RV uncertainty we measured in the LAMOST spectra is about 7.0 km/s, the lower detected RV-variability fraction for composite hot subdwarfs is expected because the RV amplitudes associated with long-period systems are lower.

=== arXiv:2412.13162v2  [2024-12-17]
TITLE  : Redshift tomography of the kinematic matter dipole
AUTHORS: Sebastian von Hausegger, Charles Dalang
ABS    : The dipole anisotropy induced by our peculiar motion in the sky distribution of cosmologically distant sources is an important consistency test of the standard FLRW cosmology. In this work, we formalize how to compute the kinematic matter dipole in redshift bins. Apart from the usual terms arising from angular aberration and flux boosting, there is a contribution from the boosting of the redshifts that becomes important when considering a sample selected on observed redshift, leading to non-vanishing correction terms. We discuss examples and provide expressions to incorporate arbitrary redshift selection functions. We also discuss the effect of redshift measurement uncertainties in this context, in particular in upcoming surveys for which we provide estimates of the correction terms. Depending on the shape of a sample's redshift distribution and on the applied redshift cuts, the correction terms can become substantial, even to the degree that the direction of the dipole is reversed. Lastly, we discuss how cuts on variables correlated with observed redshift, such as color, can induce additional correction terms.

=== arXiv:2412.01878v1  [2024-12-02]
TITLE  : The Origins of Lithium Enhancement in Polluted White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: Benjamin C. Kaiser, J. Christopher Clemens, Simon Blouin, Erik Dennihy, Patrick Dufour, Ryan J. Hegedus, Joshua S. Reding
ABS    : The bulk abundances of exoplanetesimals can be measured when they are accreted by white dwarfs. Recently, lithium from the accretion of exoplanetesimals was detected in relatively high levels in multiple white dwarfs. There are presently three proposed hypotheses to explain the detection of excess lithium in white dwarf photospheres: Big Bang and Galactic nucleosynthesis, continental crust, and an exomoon formed from spalled ring material. We present new observations of three previously known lithium-polluted white dwarfs (WD J1824+1213, WD J2317+1830, and LHS 2534), and one with metal pollution without lithium (SDSS J1636+1619). We also present atmospheric model fits to these white dwarfs. We then evaluate the abundances of these white dwarfs and two additional lithium-polluted white dwarfs that were previously fit using the same atmospheric models (WD J1644$-$0449 and SDSS J1330+6435) in the context of the three extant hypotheses for explaining lithium excesses in polluted white dwarfs. We find Big Bang and Galactic nucleosynthesis to be the most plausible explanation of the abundances in WD J1644$-$0449, WD J1824+1213, and WD J2317+1830. SDSS J1330+6435 will require stricter abundances to determine its planetesimal's origins, and LHS 2534, as presently modeled, defies all three hypotheses. We find the accretion of an exomoon formed from spalled ring material to be highly unlikely to be the explanation of the lithium excess in any of these cases.

=== arXiv:2411.12165v1  [2024-11-19]
TITLE  : A slow spin to win -- the gradual evolution of the proto-Galaxy to the old disc
AUTHORS: Akshara Viswanathan, Danny Horta, Adrian M. Price-Whelan, Else Starkenburg
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 703, A183 (2025)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202453063
ABS    : Observational studies are identifying stars thought to be remnants from the earliest stages of the hierarchical mass assembly of the Milky Way, referred to as the proto-Galaxy. We use red giant stars with kinematics and [$α$/M] and [M/H] estimates from Gaia DR3 data to investigate the relationship between azimuthal velocity and metallicity, aiming to understand the transition from a chaotic proto-Galaxy to a well-ordered, rotating (old) disc-like population. To analyse the structure of the data in [M/H]-v$_φ$ space for both high- and low-$α$ samples with carefully defined $α$-separation, we develop a model with two Gaussian components in v$_φ$: one representing a disc-like population and the other a halo-like population. This model is designed to capture the conditional distribution P(v$_φ$ $\mid$ [M/H]) with a 2-component Gaussian Mixture Model with fixed azimuthal velocities means and standard deviations. To quantify the spin-up of the high-$α$ disc population, we extend this two-component model by allowing the mean velocity and velocity dispersion to vary between the spline knots across the metallicity range used. We also compare our findings with existing literature using traditional Gaussian Mixture Modelling in bins of [M/H] and investigate using orbital circularity instead of azimuthal velocity. Our findings show that the metal-poor high-$α$ disc gradually spins up across [M/H] $\sim$ -1.7 to -1.0, while the low-$α$ sample exhibits a sharp transition at [M/H] $\sim$ -1.0. This latter result is due to the accreted debris dominating the metal-poor end, underscoring the critical role of [$α$/M] selection in studying the (old) disc evolution of the Milky Way. These results indicate that the proto-Galaxy underwent a slow, monotonic spin-up phase rather than a rapid, dramatic spin-up at [M/H] $\sim$ -1.0, as previously inferred.

=== arXiv:2410.22250v1  [2024-10-29]
TITLE  : The realm of Aurora. Density distribution of metal-poor giants in the heart of the Galaxy
AUTHORS: Evgeny P. Kurbatov, Vasily Belokurov, Sergey Koposov, Andrey Kravtsov, Elliot Y. Davies, Anthony G. A. Brown, Tristan Cantat-Gaudin, Alfred Castro-Ginard
ABS    : The innermost portions of the Milky Way's stellar halo have avoided scrutiny until recently. The lack of wide-area survey data, made it difficult to reconstruct an uninterrupted view of the density distribution of the metal-poor stars inside the Solar radius. In this study, we utilize red giant branch (RGB) stars from Gaia, with metallicities estimated using spectro-photometry from Gaia Data Release 3. Accounting for Gaia's selection function, we examine the spatial distribution of metal-poor ([M/H]&lt;-1.3) RGB stars, from the Galactic centre (r~1 kpc) out to beyond the Solar radius (r~18 kpc). Our best-fitting single-component cored power-law model shows a vertical flattening of ~0.5 and a slope -3.4, consistent with previous studies. Motivated by the mounting evidence for two distinct stellar populations in the inner halo, we additionally test a range of two-component models. One of the components models the tidal debris from the Gaia Sausage/Enceladus merger, while the other captures the Aurora population -- stars that predate the Galactic disk formation. Our best-fit two-component model suggests that both populations contribute equally around the Solar radius, but Aurora dominates the inner halo with a steeper power-law index of -4.5, in agreement with the nitrogen-rich star distribution measured by Horta et al. (2021).

=== arXiv:2410.07055v3  [2024-10-09]
TITLE  : Transients by Black Hole Formation from Red Supergiants: Impact of Dense Circumstellar Matter
AUTHORS: Daichi Tsuna, Xiaoshan Huang, Jim Fuller, Anthony L. Piro
ABS    : Failed supernovae (SNe), which are likely the main channel for forming stellar-mass black holes, are predicted to accompany mass ejections much weaker than typical core-collapse SNe. We conduct a grid of one-dimensional radiation hydrodynamical simulations to explore the emission of failed SNe from red supergiant progenitors, leveraging recent understanding of the weak explosion and the dense circumstellar matter (CSM) surrounding these stars. We find from these simulations and semi-analytical modeling that diffusion in the CSM prolongs the early emission powered by shock breakout/cooling. The early emission has peak luminosities of $\sim 10^7$-$10^8~L_\odot$ in optical and UV, and durations of days to weeks. The presence of dense CSM aids detection of the early bright peak from these events via near-future wide-field surveys such as Rubin Observatory, ULTRASAT and UVEX.

=== arXiv:2410.06335v1  [2024-10-08]
TITLE  : Constraints on Remnant Planetary Systems as a Function of Main-Sequence Mass with HST/COS
AUTHORS: Lou Baya Ould Rouis, J. J. Hermes, Boris T. Gänsicke, Snehalata Sahu, Detlev Koester, P. -E. Tremblay, Dimitri Veras, Jay Farihi
ABS    : As the descendants of stars with masses less than 8 M$_{\odot}$ on the main sequence, white dwarfs provide a unique way to constrain planetary occurrence around intermediate-mass stars (spectral types BAF) that are otherwise difficult to measure with radial-velocity or transit surveys. We update the analysis of more than 250 ultraviolet spectra of hot ($13{,}000$ K $&lt; T_{\mathrm{eff}} &lt;$ $30{,}000$ K), young (less than $800$ Myr) white dwarfs collected by the Hubble Space Telescope, which reveals that more than 40% of all white dwarfs show photospheric silicon and sometimes carbon, signpost for the presence of remnant planetary systems. However, the fraction of white dwarfs with metals significantly decreases for massive white dwarfs (M$_{\rm WD}~&gt;$ 0.8 M$_{\odot}$), descendants of stars with masses greater than 3.5 M$_{\odot}$ on the main sequence, as just $11^{+6}_{-4}$% exhibit metal pollution. In contrast, $44\pm6$% of a subset of white dwarfs (M$\rm _{WD}~&lt;$ 0.7 M$_{\odot}$) unbiased by the effects of radiative levitation are actively accreting planetary debris. While the population of massive white dwarfs is expected to be influenced by the outcome of binary evolution, we do not find merger remnants to broadly affect our sample. We connect our measured occurrence rates of metal pollution on massive white dwarfs to empirical constraints into planetary formation and survival around stars with masses greater than 3.5 M$_{\odot}$ on the main sequence.

=== arXiv:2410.03589v2  [2024-10-04]
TITLE  : Variability of Central Stars of Planetary Nebulae with the Zwicky Transient Facility. I. Methods, Short-Timescale Variables, Binary Candidates, and the Unusual Nucleus of WeSb 1
AUTHORS: Soumyadeep Bhattacharjee, S. R. Kulkarni, Albert K. H. Kong, M. S. Tam, Howard E. Bond, Kareem El-Badry, Ilaria Caiazzo, Nicholas Chornay
ABS    : Over the past several decades, time-series photometry of CSPNe has yielded significant results including, but not limited to, discoveries of nearly 100 binary systems, insights into pulsations and winds in young white dwarfs, and studies of stars undergoing very late thermal pulses. We have undertaken a systematic study of optical photometric variability of cataloged CSPNe, using the light curves from the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF). By applying appropriate variability metrics, we arrive at a list of 94 highly variable CSPN candidates. Based on the timescales of the light-curve activity, we classify the variables broadly into short- and long-timescale variables. In this first paper in this series, we focus on the former, which is the majority class comprising 83 objects. We report periods for six sources for the first time, and recover several known periodic variables. Among the aperiodic sources, most exhibit a jitter around a median flux with a stable amplitude, and a few show outbursts. We draw attention to WeSb 1, which shows a different kind of variability: prominent deep and aperiodic dips, resembling transits from a dust/debris disk. We find strong evidence for a binary nature of WeSb 1 (possibly an F-type subgiant companion). The compactness of the emission lines and inferred high electron densities make WeSb 1 a candidate for either an EGB 6-type planetary nucleus, or a symbiotic system inside an evolved planetary nebula, both of which are rare objects. To demonstrate further promise with ZTF, we report three additional newly identified periodic sources that do not appear in the list of highly variable sources. Finally, we also introduce a two-dimensional metric space defined by the von Neumann statistics and Pearson Skew and demonstrate its effectiveness in identifying unique variables of astrophysical interest, like WeSb 1.

=== arXiv:2409.16354v1  [2024-09-24]
TITLE  : Forming planetary systems that contain only minor planets
AUTHORS: Dimitri Veras, Shigeru Ida
ABS    : Estimates of the frequency of planetary systems in the Milky Way are observationally limited by the low-mass planet regime. Nevertheless, substantial evidence for systems with undetectably low planetary masses now exist in the form of main-sequence stars which host debris discs, as well as metal-polluted white dwarfs. Further, low-mass sections of star formation regions impose upper bounds on protoplanetary disc masses, limiting the capacity for terrestrial or larger planets to form. Here, we use planetary population synthesis calculations to investigate the conditions that allow planetary systems to form only minor planets and smaller detritus. We simulate the accretional, collisional and migratory growth of $10^{17}$ kg embryonic seeds and then quantify which configurations with *entirely* sub-Earth-mass bodies ($\lesssim 10^{24}$ kg) survive. We find that substantial regions of the initial parameter space allow for sub-terrestrial configurations to form, with the success rate most closely tied to the initial dust mass. Total dust mass budgets of up to $10^2 M_{\oplus}$ within 10 au can be insufficiently high to form terrestrial or giant planets, resulting in systems with only minor planets. Consequently, the prevalence of planetary systems throughout the Milky Way might be higher than what is typically assumed, and minor planet-only systems may help inform the currently uncertain correspondence between planet-hosting white dwarfs and metal-polluted white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:2409.15499v1  [2024-09-23]
TITLE  : A Sub-Millisecond Fourier and Wavelet Based Model to Extract Variable Candidates from the NEOWISE Single-Exposure Database
AUTHORS: Matthew Paz
ABS    : This paper presents VARnet, a capable signal processing model for rapid astronomical timeseries analysis. VARnet leverages wavelet decomposition, a novel method of Fourier feature extraction via the Finite-Embedding Fourier Transform (FEFT), and deep learning to detect faint signals in light curves, utilizing the strengths of modern GPUs to achieve sub-millisecond single-source runtime. We apply VARnet to the NEOWISE Single-Exposure Database, which holds nearly 200 billion apparitions over 10.5 years of infrared sources on the entire sky. This paper devises a pipeline in order to extract variable candidates from the NEOWISE data, serving as a proof of concept for both the efficacy of VARnet and methods for an upcoming variability survey over the entirety of the NEOWISE dataset. We implement models and simulations to synthesize unique light curves to train VARnet. In this case, the model achieves an F1 score of $0.91$ over a 4-class classification scheme on a validation set of real variable sources present in the infrared. With $\sim2000$ points per light curve on a GPU with 22GB of VRAM, VARnet produces a per-source processing time of $&lt;53μs$. We confirm that our VARnet is sensitive and precise to both known and previously undiscovered variable sources. These methods prove promising for a complete future survey of variability with WISE, and effectively showcase the power of the VARnet model architecture.

=== arXiv:2409.13640v1  [2024-09-20]
TITLE  : Evidence of a Forming Nucleus in the Fourcade-Figueroa Galaxy
AUTHORS: Horacio Dottori, Ruben J. Diaz
ABS    : We analyze data from the IRAS, WISE, and Planck satellites, revealing an unresolved dust condensation at the center of the Fourcade-Figueroa galaxy (ESO270-G017), which may correspond to a forming nucleus. We model the condensation's continuum spectrum in the spectral range from 3 to 1300 microns using the DUSTY code. The best-fit model, based on the Chi-square test, indicates that the condensation is a shell with an outer temperature of T_out ~ 12 K and an inner boundary temperature of T_i ~ 500 K. The shell's outer radius is r_o = 86.2 pc, and the inner cavity radius is r_i = 0.082 pc. The condensation produces an extinction A_V = 50 mag and its luminosity is L_c = 1.08E34 W, which would correspond to a burst of massive star formation approximately similar to the central 5 pc of R136 in the LMC and NGC3603, the ionizing cluster of a giant Carina arm HII region. The comparison with Normal, Luminous, and Ultra-Luminous Infrared Galaxies leads us to consider this obscured nucleus as the nearest and weakest object of this category.

=== arXiv:2409.11447v1  [2024-09-17]
TITLE  : Did WISE detect Dyson Spheres/Structures around Gaia-2MASS-selected stars?
AUTHORS: Andrew W. Blain
ABS    : Soon after the release of the WISE all-sky catalogue of 500 million mid-infrared (IR) objects, suggestions were made that it could be used to search for extrasolar devices constructed by an advanced civilization to convert a significant fraction of their host star's luminosity into useful work: "technostructures", "megastructures" or "Dyson spheres/structures", hereafter DSMs, whose inevitable waste heat would be seen by WISE at mid-IR wavelengths. However, a trawl of several million potentially-habitable Gaia-detected stars for mid-IR-excess signatures is fraught with danger, due to both noise from such a large sample and, more importantly, confusion with the emission from dusty background galaxies. In light of a recent claim of seven potential DSMs in MNRAS, a brief rebuttal appeared on arXiv. Further to this response, the relevance of WISE-detected galaxies is discussed in more detail, leading to a seemingly tight limit on the number and lifetime of DSMs, and indeed intelligent worlds, in the ~600-pc-radius region patrolled by Gaia. However, the detectability of DSMs is questioned: a DSM might extinguish its star at optical/near-IR wavelengths, and thus either not appear or appear anomalously faint in a stellar catalogue. Moreover, a civilization advanced enough to construct a DSM is likely to be advanced enough to use countermeasures to mask its presence from us.

=== arXiv:2409.06342v1  [2024-09-10]
TITLE  : Formation and evolution of a protoplanetary disk: combining observations, simulations and cosmochemical constraints
AUTHORS: Alessandro Morbidelli, Yves Marrocchi, Adnan Ali Ahmad, Asmita Bhandare, Sebastien Charnoz, Benoit Commercon, Cornellis P. Dullemond, Tristan Guillot
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 691, A147 (2024)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202451388
ABS    : We present a plausible and coherent view of the evolution of the protosolar disk that is consistent with the cosmochemical constraints and compatible with observations of other protoplanetary disks and sophisticated numerical simulations. The evidence that high-temperature condensates, CAIs and AOAs, formed near the protosun before being transported to the outer disk can be explained by either an early phase of vigorous radial spreading of the disk, or fast transport of these condensates from the vicinity of the protosun towards large disk radii via the protostellar outflow. The assumption that the material accreted towards the end of the infall phase was isotopically distinct allows us to explain the observed dichotomy in nucleosynthetic isotopic anomalies of meteorites and leads to intriguing predictions on the isotopic composition of refractory elements in comets. When the infall of material waned, the disk started to evolve as an accretion disk. Initially, dust drifted inwards, shrinking the radius of the dust component to ~ 45 au, probably about 1/2 of the width of the gas component. Then structures must have emerged, producing a series of pressure maxima in the disk which trapped the dust on My timescales. This allowed planetesimals to form at radically distinct times without changing significantly of isotopic properties. There was no late accretion of material onto the disk via streamers. The disk disappeared in ~5 Myr, as indicated by paleomagnetic data in meteorites. In conclusion, the evolution of the protosolar disk seems to have been quite typical in terms of size, lifetime, and dust behavior, suggesting that the peculiarities of the Solar system with respect to extrasolar planetary system probably originate from the chaotic nature of planet formation and not at the level of the parental disk.

=== arXiv:2409.01777v1  [2024-09-03]
TITLE  : Diffuse interstellar bands as dust indicators: the contribution from 3D maps
AUTHORS: R. Lallement, J. L. Vergely, N. L. J. Cox
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 691, A41 (2024)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202451657
ABS    : We used 3D maps of 862nm DIB equivalent width (EW) and extinction, DIB catalogues, and measured parameters of dust extinction law and dust emission to study relationships between DIB and extinction level, total-to-selective extinction ratio Rv, dust emission spectral index beta. We revisited the link between several DIBs and the 220nm absorption bump. The ratio, DIBn862, between the 862nm DIB carrier density and the extinction density is increasing in low density clouds, confirming with local values the line-of-sight data. A fitted power law ranks this DIB in the high increase range among the 20 bands measured toward SDSS targets. Using map-integrated 862nm DIB EWs and extinctions along the paths to APOGEE targets with proxies R'v for Rv, we found that DIBn862 increases with R'v for low to moderate extinctions (Av&lt;2-3 mag). Based on stars outside the thin disk, DIBn862 is found to be globally anti-correlated with the Planck opacity spectral index beta. In the light of a recent result on the variability of the carbon/silicate ratio in dust grains as a source of the Rv-beta anti-correlation, it suggests that DIBn862 increases with this ratio, in agreement with the carbonaceous nature of carriers and recent evidences for a spatial correlation between DIBn862 and carbon-rich ejecta of AGBs. At higher Av, both trends disappear. We found that two factors explain the absence of clear results on the link between the UV absorption bump height and DIBs: the correlation disappears when we move from sigma- to zeta-type DIBs and/or from single-cloud lines of sight to paths crossing multiple clouds distant from each other. We show examples of simple models of the bump height based on DIBs. We found an anti-correlation between DIBn and the bump width, similarly disappearing from sigma- to zeta-type DIBs. This suggests that a fraction of the bump is generated outside the dense molecular clouds.

=== arXiv:2409.01673v2  [2024-09-03]
TITLE  : Attenuation of marine seismic interference noise employing a customized U-Net
AUTHORS: Jing Sun, Sigmund Slang, Thomas Elboth, Thomas Larsen Greiner, Steven McDonald, Leiv-J Gelius
JOURNAL: Geophysical Prospecting, 2020, vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 845-871
DOI    : 10.1111/1365-2478.12893
ABS    : Marine seismic interference noise occurs when energy from nearby marine seismic source vessels is recorded during a seismic survey. Such noise tends to be well preserved over large distances and cause coherent artifacts in the recorded data. Over the years, the industry has developed various denoising techniques for seismic interference removal, but although well performing they are still time-consuming in use. Machine-learning based processing represents an alternative approach, which may significantly improve the computational efficiency. In case of conventional images, autoencoders are frequently employed for denoising purposes. However, due to the special characteristics of seismic data as well as the noise, autoencoders failed in the case of marine seismic interference noise. We therefore propose the use of a customized U-Net design with element-wise summation as part of the skip-connection blocks to handle the vanishing gradient problem and to ensure information fusion between high- and low-level features. To secure a realistic study, only seismic field data were employed, including 25000 training examples. The customized U-Net was found to perform well leaving only minor residuals, except for the case when seismic interference noise comes from the side. We further demonstrate that such noise can be treated by slightly increasing the depth of our network. Although our customized U-Net does not outperform a standard commercial algorithm in quality, it can (after proper training) read and process one single shot gather in approximately 0.02s. This is significantly faster than any existing industry denoising algorithm. In addition, the proposed network processes shot gathers in a sequential order, which is an advantage compared with industry algorithms that typically require a multi-shot input to break the coherency of the noise.

=== arXiv:2408.16813v1  [2024-08-29]
TITLE  : The MIRI Exoplanets Orbiting White Dwarfs (MEOW) Survey: Mid-Infrared Excess Reveals a Giant Planet Candidate around a Nearby White Dwarf
AUTHORS: Mary Anne Limbach, Andrew Vanderburg, Alexander Venner, Simon Blouin, Kevin B. Stevenson, Ryan J. MacDonald, Sydney Jenkins, Rachel Bowens-Rubin
ABS    : The MIRI Exoplanets Orbiting White dwarfs (MEOW) Survey is a cycle 2 JWST program to search for exoplanets around dozens of nearby white dwarfs via infrared excess and direct imaging. In this paper, we present the detection of mid-infrared excess at 18 and 21 microns towards the bright (V = 11.4) metal-polluted white dwarf WD 0310-688. The source of the IR excess is almost certainly within the system; the probability of background contamination is $&lt;0.1\%$. While the IR excess could be due to an unprecedentedly small and cold debris disk, it is best explained by a $3.0^{+5.5}_{-1.9}$ M$_{\rm Jup}$ cold (248$^{+84}_{-61}$ K) giant planet orbiting the white dwarf within the forbidden zone (the region where planets are expected to be destroyed during the star's red giant phase). We constrain the source of the IR excess to an orbital separation of 0.1-2 AU, marking the first discovery of a white dwarf planet candidate within this range of separations. WD 0310-688 is a young remnant of an A or late B-type star, and at just 10.4 pc it is now the closest white dwarf with a known planet candidate. Future JWST observations could distinguish the two scenarios by either detecting or ruling out spectral features indicative of a planet atmosphere.

=== arXiv:2408.12639v3  [2024-08-22]
TITLE  : The JWST/NIRISS Deep Spectroscopic Survey for Young Brown Dwarfs and Free-Floating Planets
AUTHORS: Adam B. Langeveld, Aleks Scholz, Koraljka Mužić, Ray Jayawardhana, Daniel Capela, Loïc Albert, René Doyon, Laura Flagg
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/ad6f0c
ABS    : The discovery and characterization of free-floating planetary-mass objects (FFPMOs) is fundamental to our understanding of star and planet formation. Here we report results from an extremely deep spectroscopic survey of the young star cluster NGC1333 using NIRISS WFSS on the James Webb Space Telescope. The survey is photometrically complete to K~21, and includes useful spectra for objects as faint as K~20.5. The observations cover 19 known brown dwarfs, for most of which we confirm spectral types using NIRISS spectra. We discover six new candidates with L-dwarf spectral types that are plausible planetary-mass members of NGC1333, with estimated masses between 5-15 MJup. One, at ~5 MJup, shows clear infrared excess emission and is a good candidate to be the lowest mass object known to have a disk. We do not find any objects later than mid-L spectral type (M &lt; ~4 MJup). The paucity of Jupiter-mass objects, despite the survey's unprecedented sensitivity, suggests that our observations reach the lowest mass objects formed like stars in NGC1333. Our findings put the fraction of FFPMOs in NGC1333 at ~10% of the number of cluster members, significantly more than expected from the typical log-normal stellar mass function. We also search for wide binaries in our images and report a young brown dwarf with a planetary-mass companion.

=== arXiv:2408.11692v2  [2024-08-21]
TITLE  : A JWST MIRI MRS View of the $η$ Tel Debris Disk and its Brown Dwarf Companion
AUTHORS: Yiwei Chai, Christine H. Chen, Kadin Worthen, Alexis Li, Antranik Sefilian, William Balmer, Dean C. Hines, David R. Law
ABS    : We report JWST MIRI MRS observations of the $β$ Pictoris moving group member, $η$ Telescopii ($η$ Tel) A and its brown dwarf binary companion, $η$ Tel B. Following PSF subtraction, we recover the spatially resolved flux from the debris disk around $η$ Tel A, along with the position of the companion exterior to the disk. We present a new 5-26 $μ$m epoch of spectroscopy for the disk, in which we discover a 20 $μ$m silicate feature. We also present the first ever 11-21 $μ$m spectrum of $η$ Tel B, which indicates a bare photosphere. We derive a new epoch of relative astrometry for the companion, extending the baseline of measurements to 25 years, and find that its current location is consistent with the apocentre of an eccentric, long-period orbit. The companion's orbit is close enough to the disk that it should significantly perturb the planetesimals within it, resulting in a detectable mid-IR pericentre glow and near-alignment with the companion. Contrary to expectations, however, we find that the disk appears to be axisymmetric and potentially misaligned with the companion in the MIRI MRS data. We posit that this may be due to the presence of an additional, yet-undetected 0.7-30 $M_J$ planet orbiting interior to the disk with a semi-major axis of 3-19 au.

=== arXiv:2408.11215v1  [2024-08-20]
TITLE  : Aggregate Cloud Particle Effects in Exoplanet Atmospheres
AUTHORS: Sanaz Vahidinia, Sarah E. Moran, Mark S. Marley, Jeff N. Cuzzi
ABS    : Aerosol opacity has emerged as a critical factor controlling transmission and emission spectra. We provide a simple guideline for the effects of aerosol morphology on opacity and residence time in the atmosphere, as it pertains to transit observations, particularly those with flat spectra due to high altitude aerosols. This framework can be used for understanding complex cloud and haze particle properties before getting into detailed microphysical modeling. We consider high altitude aerosols to be composed of large fluffy particles that can have large residence times in the atmosphere and influence the deposition of stellar flux and/or the emergence of thermal emission in a different way than compact droplet particles, as generally modeled to date for extrasolar planetary atmospheres. We demonstrate the important influence of aggregate particle porosity and composition on the extent of the wavelength independent regime. We also consider how such fluffy particles reach such high altitudes and conclude that the most likely scenario is their local production at high altitudes via UV bombardment and subsequent blanketing of the atmosphere, rather than some mechanism of lofting or transport from the lower atmosphere.

=== arXiv:2408.04467v1  [2024-08-08]
TITLE  : The challenge of detecting remote spectroscopic signatures from radionuclides
AUTHORS: Jacob Haqq-Misra, Vincent Kofman, Ravi K. Kopparapu
JOURNAL: ApJ (2024) 973: 161
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ad6d5f
ABS    : The characterization of exoplanetary atmospheres through transit spectra is becoming increasingly feasible, and technology for direct detection remains ongoing. The possibility of detecting spectral features could enable quantitative constraints on atmospheric composition or even serve as a potential biosignature, with the sensitivity of the instrument and observation time as key limiting factors. This paper discusses the possibility that future remote observations could detect the presence of radioactive elements in the atmospheres of exoplanets. Such radionuclides could arise from cosmogenic or geologic sources, as well as from industrial sources, all of which occur on Earth. The detection of radionuclides in an exoplanetary atmosphere could reveal important properties about the planet's geology or space environment, and potentially could serve as a technosignature. However, many radionuclides, including those from industrial sources, attach to aerosol or other particles that cannot be remotely characterized. Limited experimental and theoretical spectral data exist for long-lived radionuclides, but the sensitivity required to detect the spectral features of some known radionuclides would be at least several orders of magnitude greater than required to detect the spectral features of molecular oxygen. Present-day remote spectroscopic observing mission concepts at ultraviolet to mid-infrared wavelengths are not sensitive to discern the presence of radionuclides in exoplanetary atmospheres. Interplanetary fly-by or probe missions may be more likely to provide such data in the future.

=== arXiv:2408.01411v1  [2024-08-02]
TITLE  : Spectroscopic survey of faint planetary-nebula nuclei VI. Seventeen hydrogen-rich central stars
AUTHORS: Nicole Reindl, Howard E. Bond, Klaus Werner, Gregory R. Zeimann
ABS    : We present an analysis of 17 H-rich central stars of planetary nebulae (PNe) observed in our spectroscopic survey of nuclei of faint Galactic PNe carried out at the 10-m Hobby-Eberly Telescope. Our sample includes ten O(H) stars, four DAO white dwarfs (WDs), two DA WDs, and one sdOB star. The spectra were analyzed by means of NLTE model atmospheres, allowing us to derive the effective temperatures, surface gravities, and He abundances of the central stars. Sixteen of them were analyzed for the first time, increasing the number of hot H-rich central stars with parameters obtained through NLTE atmospheric modeling by approximately 20%. We highlight a rare hot DA WD central star, Abell 24, which has a $T_\mathrm{eff}$ likely in excess of 100kK, as well as the unusually high gravity mass of $0.70 \pm 0.05 \mathrm{M}_\odot$ for the sdOB star Pa 3, which is significantly higher than the canonical extreme horizontal-branch star mass of $\approx 0.48\,\mathrm{M}_{\odot}$. By investigating Zwicky Transient Facility light curves, which were available for our 15 northern objects, we found none of them show a periodic photometric variability larger than a few hundredths of a magnitude. This could indicate that our sample mainly represents the hottest phase during the canonical evolution of a single star when transitioning from an asymptotic giant branch star into a WD. We also examined the spectral energy distributions, detecting an infrared excess in six of the objects, which could be due to a late-type companion or to hot ($\approx 10^3$ K) and\or cool ($\approx 100$ K) dust. We confirm previous findings that spectroscopic distances are generally higher than found through Gaia astrometry, a discrepancy that deserves to be investigated systematically.

=== arXiv:2407.21743v1  [2024-07-31]
TITLE  : The frequency of transiting planetary systems around polluted white dwarfs
AUTHORS: Akshay Robert, Jay Farihi, Vincent Van Eylen, Amornrat Aungwerojwit, Boris T. Gänsicke, Seth Redfield, Vikram S. Dhillon, Thomas R. Marsh
ABS    : This paper investigates the frequency of transiting planetary systems around metal-polluted white dwarfs using high-cadence photometry from ULTRACAM and ULTRASPEC on the ground, and space-based observations with TESS. Within a sample of 313 metal-polluted white dwarfs with available TESS light curves, two systems known to have irregular transits are blindly recovered by box-least-squares and Lomb-Scargle analyses, with no new detections, yielding a transit fraction of 0.8 (-0.4, +0.6) per cent. Planet detection sensitivities are determined using simulated transit injection and recovery for all light curves, producing upper limit occurrences over radii from dwarf to Kronian planets, with periods from 1 h to 27 d. The dearth of short-period, transiting planets orbiting polluted white dwarfs is consistent with engulfment during the giant phases of stellar evolution, and modestly constrains dynamical re-injection of planets to the shortest orbital periods. Based on simple predictions of transit probability, where (R + Rp)/a ~ 0.01, the findings here are nominally consistent with a model where 100 per cent of polluted white dwarfs have circumstellar debris near the Roche limit; however, the small sample size precludes statistical confidence in this result. Single transits are also ruled out in all light curves using a search for correlated outliers, providing weak constraints on the role of Oort-like comet clouds in white dwarf pollution.

=== arXiv:2407.17196v1  [2024-07-24]
TITLE  : Metal accretion scars may be common on magnetic, polluted white dwarfs
AUTHORS: S. Bagnulo, J. D. Landstreet, J. Farihi, C. P. Folsom, M. A. Hollands, L. Fossati
ABS    : More than 30% of white dwarfs exhibit atmospheric metals, which are understood to be from recent or ongoing accretion of circumstellar debris. In cool white dwarfs, surface motions should rapidly homogenise photospheric abundances, and the accreted heavy elements should diffuse inward on a timescale much longer than that for surface mixing. The recent discovery of a metal scar on WD0816-310 implies its magnetic field has impeded surface mixing of metals near the visible magnetic pole. Here, we report the discovery of a second magnetic, metal-polluted white dwarf, WD2138-332, which exhibits periodic variability in longitudinal field, metal line strength, and broadband photometry. All three variable quantities have the same period, and show remarkable correlations: the published light curves have a brightness minimum exactly when the longitudinal field and line strength have a maximum, and a maximum when the longitudinal field and line strength have a minimum. The simplest interpretation of the line strength variability is that there is an enhanced metal concentration around one pole of the magnetic field; however, the variable line-blanketing cannot account for the observed multi-band light curves. More theoretical work is required to understand the efficiency of horizontal mixing of the accreted metal atoms, and the origin of photometric variability. Because both magnetic, metal-polluted white dwarfs that have been monitored to date show that metal line strengths vary in phase with the longitudinal field, we suggest that metal scars around magnetic poles may be a common feature of metal-polluted white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:2407.06035v2  [2024-07-08]
TITLE  : Argon in beta Pictoris -- entrapment and release of volatile in disks
AUTHORS: Yanqin Wu, Kadin Worthen, Alexis Brandeker, Christine Chen
ABS    : Chemical compositions of planets reveal much about their formation environments. Such information is well sought-after in studies of Solar System bodies and extra-solar ones. Here, we investigate the composition of planetesimals in the beta Pictoris debris disk, by way of its secondary gas disk. We are stimulated by the recent JWST detection of an ArII emission line, and aim to reproduce extensive measurements from the past four decades. Our photo-ionization model reveals that the gas has to be heavily enriched in C, N, O, and Ar (but not S and P), by a uniform factor of about 100 relative to other metals. Such an abundance pattern is both reminiscent of, and different from, that of Jupiter's atmosphere. The fact that Ar, the most volatile and therefore the hardest to capture into solids, is equally enriched as C, N, and O suggests that the planetesimals were formed in a very cold region (T &lt; 20- 35K), possibly with the help of entrapment if water ice is over-abundant. In the debris disk phase, these volatile are preferentially out-gassed from the dust grains, likely via photo-desorption. The debris grains must be `dirty' aggregates of icy and refractory clusters. Lastly, the observed strength of the ArII line can only be explained if the star beta Pic (a young A6V star) has sizable chromospheric and coronal emissions, on par with those from the modern Sun. In summary, observations of the beta Pic gas disk rewind the clock to reveal the formation environment of planetesimals.

=== arXiv:2407.05508v1  [2024-07-07]
TITLE  : Mid-Infrared Variability in Nearby Galaxies from the MaNGA Sample
AUTHORS: Aashay Pai, Michael R. Blanton, John Moustakas
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ad89b8
ABS    : We use mid-infrared variability in galaxies to search for active galactic nuclei (AGN) in the local universe. We use a sample of 10,220 galaxies from the Mapping Nearby Galaxies at APO (MaNGA) survey, part of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS-IV). For each galaxy, we examine its mid-infrared variability in the $W2$ $[4.6μm]$ band over thirteen years using data from the Wide Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) All-Sky and Near Earth Objects WISE (NEOWISE) missions. We demonstrate that we can detect variability signatures as small as about $7\%$ in the root-mean-square variation of $W2$ flux for the majority of cases. Using other AGN signatures of the variable galaxies, such as optical narrow lines, optical broad lines, and WISE $W1-W2$ colors, we show that $\sim 75\%$ of the variables show these additional AGN signatures, indicating that the bulk of these cases are likely to be AGN. We also identify seven galaxies that have light-curves characteristic of tidal disruption events. We present here a publicly available catalog of the light-curve variability in $W2$ of these galaxies.

=== arXiv:2407.04661v1  [2024-07-05]
TITLE  : MIRI MRS Observations of Beta Pictoris II. The Spectroscopic Case for a Recent Giant Collision
AUTHORS: Christine H. Chen, Cicero X. Lu, Kadin Worthen, David R. Law, B. A. Sargent, Amaya Moro-Martin, G. C. Sloan, Carey M. Lisse
ABS    : Modeling observations of the archetypal debris disk around $β$ Pic, obtained in 2023 January with the MIRI MRS on board JWST, reveals significant differences compared with that obtained with the IRS on board Spitzer. The bright 5 - 15 $μ$m continuum excess modeled using a $\sim$600 K black body has disappeared. The previously prominent 18 and 23 $μ$m crystalline forsterite emission features, arising from cold dust ($\sim$100 K) in the Rayleigh limit, have disappeared and been replaced by very weak features arising from the hotter 500 K dust population. Finally, the shape of the 10 $μ$m silicate feature has changed, consistent with a shift in the temperature of the warm dust population from $\sim$300 K to $\sim$500 K and an increase in the crystalline fraction of the warm, silicate dust. Stellar radiation pressure may have blown both the hot and the cold crystalline dust particles observed in the Spitzer spectra out of the planetary system during the intervening 20 years between the Spitzer and JWST observations. These results indicate that the $β$ Pic system has a dynamic circumstellar environment, and that periods of enhanced collisions can create large clouds of dust that sweep through the planetary system.

=== arXiv:2407.03445v1  [2024-07-03]
TITLE  : Submillimeter and Mid-Infrared Variability of Young Stellar Objects in the M17SWex Intermediate-Mass Star-Forming Region
AUTHORS: Geumsook Park, Doug Johnstone, Carlos Contreras Pena, Jeong-Eun Lee, Sheng-Yuan Liu, Gregory Herczeg, Steve Mairs, Zhiwei Chen
ABS    : We present a comprehensive analysis of young stellar object (YSO) variability within the M17 Southwest Extension (M17 SWex), using 3.5 years of monitoring data from the JCMT Transient Survey at sub-millimeter (sub-mm) and 9 years from the NEOWISE mission at mid-infrared (mid-IR). Our study encompasses observations of 147 bright sub-mm peaks identified within our deep JCMT co-added map as well as 156 YSOs in NEOWISE W1 and 179 in W2 that were previously identified in Spitzer surveys. We find three robust sub-mm variables: two are candidate YSOs and one is a likely extragalactic source. At mid-IR wavelengths, our analysis reveals secular and stochastic variability in 47 YSOs, with the highest fraction of secular variability occurring at the earliest evolutionary stage. This is similar to what has previously been observed for low-mass YSO variability within the Gould Belt. However, we observe less overall variability in M17SWex at both the sub-mm and mid-IR. We suspect that this lower fraction is due to the greater distance to M17 SWex. Our findings showcase the utility of multi-wavelength observations to better capture the complex variability phenomena inherent to star formation processes and demonstrate the importance of years-long monitoring of a diverse selection of star-forming environments.

=== arXiv:2406.18646v1  [2024-06-26]
TITLE  : Using 3.4-$μ$m Variability towards White Dwarfs as a Signpost of Remnant Planetary Systems
AUTHORS: Joseph A. Guidry, J. J. Hermes, Kishalay De, Lou Baya Ould Rouis, Brison B. Ewing, B. C. Kaiser
ABS    : Roughly 2% of white dwarfs harbor planetary debris disks detectable via infrared excesses, but only a few percent of these disks show a gaseous component, distinguished by their double-peaked emission at the near-infrared calcium triplet. Previous studies found most debris disks around white dwarfs are variable at 3.4 and 4.5 $μ$m, but they analyzed only a few of the now 21 published disks showing calcium emission. To test if most published calcium emission disks exhibit large-amplitude stochastic variability in the near-infrared, we use light curves generated from the unWISE images at 3.4 $μ$m that are corrected for proper motion to characterize the near-infrared variability of these disks against samples of disks without calcium emission, highly variable cataclysmic variables, and 3215 isolated white dwarfs. We find most calcium emission disks are extremely variable: 6/11 with sufficient signal-to-noise show high-amplitude variability in their 3.4-$μ$m light curves. These results lend further credence to the notion that disks showing gaseous debris in emission are the most collisionally active. Under the assumption that 3.4-$μ$m variability is characteristic of white dwarfs with dusty debris disks, we generate a catalog of 104 high-confidence near-infrared variable white dwarfs, 84 of which are published as variable for the first time. We do near-infrared spectroscopic follow-up of seven new candidate 3.4-$μ$m variables, confirming at least one new remnant planetary system, and posit that empirical near-infrared variability can be a discovery engine for debris disks showing gaseous emission.

=== arXiv:2406.17866v1  [2024-06-25]
TITLE  : Correlated mid-infrared and X-ray outbursts in black hole X-ray binaries: A new route to discovery in infrared surveys
AUTHORS: Chris John, Kishalay De, Matteo Lucchini, Ehud Behar, Erin Kara, Morgan MacLeod, Christos Panagiotou, Jingyi Wang
ABS    : The mid-infrared (MIR; $λ\simeq3 - 10μ$m) bands offer a unique window into understanding accretion and its interplay with jet formation in Galactic black hole X-ray binaries (BHXRBs). Although extremely difficult to observe from the ground, the NEOWISE time domain survey offers an excellent data set to study MIR variability when combined with contemporaneous X-ray data from the MAXI all-sky survey over a $\approx15$ yr baseline. Using a new forced photometry pipeline for NEOWISE data, we present the first systematic study of BHXRB MIR variability in outburst. Analyzing a sample of 16 sources detected in NEOWISE, we show variability trends in the X-ray hardness and MIR spectral index wherein i) the MIR bands are typically dominated by jet emission during the hard states, constraining the electron power spectrum index to $p \approx 1-4$ in the optically thin regime and indicating emitting regions of a few tens of gravitational radii when evolving towards a flat spectrum, ii) the MIR luminosity ($L_{IR}$) scales as $L_{IR}\propto L_X^{0.82\pm0.12}$ with the $2-10$ keV X-ray luminosity ($L_X$) in the hard state, consistent with its origin in a jet, and iii) the thermal disk emission dominates the soft state as the jet switches off and dramatically suppresses ($\gtrsim 10\times$) the MIR emission into a inverted spectrum ($α\approx -1$, where $F_ν\proptoν^{-α}$). We highlight a population of `mini' BHXRB outbursts detected in NEOWISE (including two previously unreported episodes in MAXI J1828-249) but missed in MAXI due to their faint fluxes or source confusion, exhibiting MIR spectral indices suggestive of thermal emission from a large outer disk. We highlight that upcoming IR surveys and the Rubin observatory will be powerful discovery engines for the distinctively large amplitude and long-lived outbursts of BHXRBs, as an independent discovery route to X-ray monitors.

=== arXiv:2406.17259v2  [2024-06-25]
TITLE  : Yuti: A General-purpose Transit Simulator for Arbitrary Shaped Objects Orbiting Stars
AUTHORS: Ushasi Bhowmick, Vikram Khaire
JOURNAL: The Astronomical Journal 168 (2024)
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/ad7d8d
ABS    : We present a versatile transit simulator (Yuti) aimed at generating light curves for arbitrarily shaped objects transiting stars. Utilizing a Monte Carlo algorithm, it accurately models the stellar flux blocked by these objects, producing precise light curves. The simulator adeptly handles realistic background stars, integrating effects such as tidal distortions and limb darkening, alongside the rotational dynamics of transiting objects of arbitrary geometries. We showcase its wide-ranging utility through successful simulations of light curves for single- and multiplanet systems, tidally distorted planets, eclipsing binaries, and exocomets. Additionally, our simulator can simulate light curves for hypothetical alien megastructures of any conceivable shape, providing avenues to identify interesting candidates for follow-up studies. We demonstrate applications of Yuti in modeling a Dyson swarm in construction, Dyson rings, and Dyson disks, discussing how tidally locked Dyson disks can be distinguished from planetary light curves.

=== arXiv:2405.16465v1  [2024-05-26]
TITLE  : An Optical Daytime Astronomy Pathfinder for the Huntsman Telescope
AUTHORS: Sarah Elizabeth Caddy, Lee Robert Spitler, Simon Charles Ellis
DOI    : 10.1017/pasa.2024.43
ABS    : Observing stars and satellites in optical wavelengths during the day (optical daytime astronomy) has begun a resurgence of interest. The recent dramatic dimming event of Betelgeuse has spurred interest in continuous monitoring of the brightest variable stars, even when an object is only visible during the day due to their proximity to the Sun. In addition, an exponential increase in the number of satellites being launched into low Earth orbit in recent years has driven an interest in optical daytime astronomy for the detection and monitoring of satellites in space situational awareness (SSA) networks. In this paper we explore the use of the Huntsman Telescope as an optical daytime astronomy facility, by conducting an exploratory survey using a pathfinder instrument. We find that an absolute photometric accuracy between 1 - 10% can be achieved during the day, with a detection limit of V band 4.6 mag at midday in sloan g and r wavelengths. In addition we characterise the daytime sky brightness, colour and observing conditions in order to achieve the most reliable and highest signal-to-noise observations within the limitations of the bright sky background. We undertake a 7 month survey of the brightness of Betelgeuse during the day and demonstrate that our results are in agreement with measurements from other observatories. Finally we present our preliminary results that demonstrate obtaining absolute photometric measurements of the International Space Station during the day.

=== arXiv:2405.14921v1  [2024-05-23]
TITLE  : Background Contamination of the Project Hephaistos Dyson Spheres Candidates
AUTHORS: Tongtian Ren, Michael A. Garrett, Andrew P. V. Siemion
ABS    : Project Hephaistos recently identified seven M-dwarfs as possible Dyson Spheres (DS) candidates. We have cross-matched three of these candidates (A, B \&amp; G) with radio sources detected in various all-sky surveys. The radio sources are offset from the Gaia stellar positions by $\sim 4.9$, $\sim 0.4$ and $\sim 5.0$ arcseconds for candidates A, B, and G respectively. We propose that DOGs (Dust obscured galaxies) lying close to the line-of-sight of these M-dwarf stars significantly contribute to the measured WISE mid-IR flux densities in the WISE W3 and W4 wavebands. These three stars have therefore been misidentified as DS candidates. We also note that with an areal sky density of $9 \times 10^{-6}$ per square arcsecond, Hot DOGs can probably account for the contamination of all 7 DS candidates drawn from an original sample of 5 million stars.

=== arXiv:2405.13486v1  [2024-05-22]
TITLE  : A distinct halo population revealed from 3D non-LTE magnesium abundances
AUTHORS: T. Matsuno, A. M. Amarsi, M. Carlos, P. E. Nissen
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 688, A72 (2024)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202450057
ABS    : Magnesium is one of the important elements in stellar physics as an electron donor and in Galactic Archaeology as a discriminator of different stellar populations. However, previous studies of Mg I and Mg II lines in metal-poor benchmark stars have flagged problems with magnesium abundances inferred from one-dimensional (1D), hydrostatic models of stellar atmospheres, both with or without the local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE) approximation. We here present 3D non-LTE calculations for magnesium in FG-type dwarfs, and provide corrections for 1D LTE abundances. The 3D non-LTE corrections reduce the ionisation imbalances in the benchmark metal-poor stars HD84937 and HD140283 from $-0.16$ dex and $-0.27$ dex in 1D LTE, to just $-0.02$ dex and $-0.09$ dex respectively. We then applied our abundance corrections to 1D LTE literature results for stars in the thin disc, thick disc, $α$-rich halo, and $α$-poor halo. We find that the 3D non-LTE results show a richer substructure in [Mg/Fe]-[Fe/H] in the $α$-poor halo, revealing two subpopulations at the metal-rich end. These two subpopulations are also separated in kinematics, supporting the astrophysical origin of the separation. While the more magnesium-poor subpopulation is likely to be debris from a massive accreted galaxy, Gaia-Enceladus, the other subpopulation may be related to a previous identified group of stars, called Eos. The presence of additional separation in [Mg/Fe] suggests that previous Mg abundance measurements may have been limited in the precision by the 1D and LTE approximations, highlighting the importance of 3D non-LTE modelling.

=== arXiv:2405.11149v2  [2024-05-18]
TITLE  : Artificial Greenhouse Gases as Exoplanet Technosignatures
AUTHORS: Edward W. Schwieterman, Thomas J. Fauchez, Jacob Haqq-Misra, Ravi K. Kopparapu, Daniel Angerhausen, Daria Pidhorodetska, Michaela Leung, Evan L. Sneed
JOURNAL: ApJ, 969, 20 (2024)
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ad4ce8
ABS    : Atmospheric pollutants such as CFCs and NO$_{2}$ have been proposed as potential remotely detectable atmospheric technosignature gases. Here we investigate the potential for artificial greenhouse gases including CF$_{4}$, C$_{2}$F$_{6}$, C$_{3}$F$_{8}$, SF$_{6}$, and NF$_{3}$ to generate detectable atmospheric signatures. In contrast to passive incidental byproducts of industrial processes, artificial greenhouse gases would represent an intentional effort to change the climate of a planet with long-lived, low toxicity gases and would possess low false positive potential. An extraterrestrial civilization may be motivated to undertake such an effort to arrest a predicted snowball state on their home world or to terraform an otherwise uninhabitable terrestrial planet within their system. Because artificial greenhouse gases strongly absorb in the thermal mid-infrared window of temperate atmospheres, a terraformed planet will logically possess strong absorption features from these gases at mid-IR wavelengths ($\sim$8-12 $μ$m), possibly accompanied by diagnostic features in the near-IR. As a proof of concept, we calculate the needed observation time to detect 1 [10](100) ppm of C$_{2}$F$_{6}$/C$_{3}$F$_{8}$/SF$_{6}$ on TRAPPIST-1f with JWST MIRI/LRS and NIRSpec. We find that a combination of 1[10](100) ppm each of C$_{2}$F$_{6}$, C$_{3}$F$_{8}$, and SF$_{6}$ can be detected with an S/N $\geq$ 5 in as few as 25[10](5) transits with MIRI/LRS. We further explore mid-infrared direct-imaging scenarios with the LIFE mission concept and find these gases are more detectable than standard biosignatures at these concentrations. Consequently, artificial greenhouse gases can be readily detected (or excluded) during normal planetary characterization observations with no additional overhead.

=== arXiv:2405.02927v1  [2024-05-05]
TITLE  : Project Hephaistos - II. Dyson sphere candidates from Gaia DR3, 2MASS, and WISE
AUTHORS: Matías Suazo, Erik Zackrisson, Priyatam K. Mahto, Fabian Lundell, Carl Nettelblad, Andreas J. Korn, Jason T. Wright, Suman Majumdar
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stae1186
ABS    : The search for extraterrestrial intelligence is currently being pursued using multiple techniques and in different wavelength bands. Dyson spheres, megastructures that could be constructed by advanced civilizations to harness the radiation energy of their host stars, represent a potential technosignature, that in principle may be hiding in public data already collected as part of large astronomical surveys. In this study, we present a comprehensive search for partial Dyson spheres by analyzing optical and infrared observations from Gaia, 2MASS, and WISE. We develop a pipeline that employs multiple filters to identify potential candidates and reject interlopers in a sample of five million objects, which incorporates a convolutional neural network to help identify confusion in WISE data. Finally, the pipeline identifies 7 candidates deserving of further analysis. All of these objects are M-dwarfs, for which astrophysical phenomena cannot easily account for the observed infrared excess emission.

=== arXiv:2405.00493v1  [2024-05-01]
TITLE  : A study of Galactic Plane Planck Galactic Cold Clumps observed by SCOPE and the JCMT Plane Survey
AUTHORS: D. J. Eden, Tie Liu, T. J. T. Moore, J. Di Francesco, G. Fuller, Kee-Tae Kim, Di Li, S. -Y. Liu
ABS    : We have investigated the physical properties of Planck Galactic Cold Clumps (PGCCs) located in the Galactic Plane, using the JCMT Plane Survey (JPS) and the SCUBA-2 Continuum Observations of Pre-protostellar Evolution (SCOPE) survey. By utilising a suite of molecular-line surveys, velocities and distances were assigned to the compact sources within the PGCCs, placing them in a Galactic context. The properties of these compact sources show no large-scale variations with Galactic environment. Investigating the star-forming content of the sample, we find that the luminosity-to-mass ratio (L/M) is an order of magnitude lower than in other Galactic studies, indicating that these objects are hosting lower levels of star formation. Finally, by comparing ATLASGAL sources that are associated or are not associated with PGCCs, we find that those associated with PGCCs are typically colder, denser, and have a lower L/M ratio, hinting that PGCCs are a distinct population of Galactic Plane sources.

=== arXiv:2404.15425v1  [2024-04-23]
TITLE  : The chemistry of extra-solar materials from white dwarf planetary systems
AUTHORS: Siyi Xu, Laura K. Rogers, Simon Blouin
ABS    : White dwarf planetary systems provide a unique way to measure the bulk composition of exoplanetary material. Extrasolar asteroids/comets/moons which have survived the evolution of their host star can end up in the atmosphere of the white dwarf. Asteroids and boulders appear to be the most common pollutants, where we use the term "asteroids" to refer to the parent body that is polluting the atmosphere. The presence of the planetary material is detected via absorption lines of heavy elements. White dwarfs with these absorption features are called "polluted" white dwarfs. Polluted white dwarfs were expected to be rare objects because white dwarfs have high surface gravities, therefore, these heavy elements will settle out of the white dwarf's atmospheres in a short amount of time (Paquette et al. 1986). However, high-resolution spectroscopic surveys found that 25-50% of white dwarfs are polluted (Zuckerman et al. 2003, 2010; Koester et al. 2014). The mechanism responsible for making a polluted white dwarf must be common and efficient. There is strong theoretical and observational evidence that white dwarfs are accreting from planetary material. There are different mechanisms that can deliver exoplanetary material into the Roche lobe of the white dwarf. Debris disks, transits from disintegrating bodies, and intact planets have all been detected around white dwarfs (e.g., Jura et al. 2007; Vanderburg et al. 2015, 2020). This chapter will describe how the chemical autopsies are conducted, and what is learnt about exoplanetary material from polluted white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:2404.12429v2  [2024-04-18]
TITLE  : Effective light-induced Hamiltonian for atoms with large nuclear spin
AUTHORS: Domantas Burba, Hubert Dunikowski, Martin Robert-de-Saint-Vincent, Emilia Witkowska, Gediminas Juzeliūnas
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. Research 6, 033293 (2024)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevResearch.6.033293
ABS    : Ultra-cold fermionic atoms, having two valence electrons, exhibit a distinctive internal state structure, wherein the nuclear spin becomes decoupled from the electronic degrees of freedom in the ground electronic state. Consequently, the nuclear spin states are well isolated from the environment, rendering these atomic systems an opportune platform for quantum computation and quantum simulations. Coupling with off-resonance light is an essential tool to selectively and coherently manipulate the nuclear spin states. In this paper, we present a systematic derivation of the effective Hamiltonian for the nuclear spin states of ultra-cold fermionic atoms due to such an off-resonance light. We obtain compact expressions for the scalar, vector and tensor light shifts taking into account both linear and quadratic contributions to the hyperfine splitting. The analysis has been carried out using the Green operator approach and solving the corresponding Dyson equation. Finally, we analyze different scenarios of light configurations which lead to the vector- and tensor-light shifts, as well as the pure spin-orbit coupling for the nuclear spin.

=== arXiv:2404.07086v1  [2024-04-10]
TITLE  : Mid-Infrared Spectrum of the Disk around the Forming Companion GQ Lup B Revealed by JWST/MIRI
AUTHORS: Gabriele Cugno, Polychronis Patapis, Andrea Banzatti, Michael Meyer, Felix A. Dannert, Tomas Stolker, Ryan J. MacDonald, Klaus M. Pontoppidan
ABS    : GQ Lup B is a forming brown dwarf companion ($M\sim10-30~M_J$) showing evidence for an infrared excess associated with a disk surronding the companion itself. Here we present mid-infrared (MIR) observations of GQ Lup B with the Medium Resolution Spectrograph (MRS) on JWST, spanning $4.8-11.7~μ$m. We remove the stellar contamination using reference differential imaging based on principal component analysis (PCA), demonstrating that the MRS can perform high-contrast science. Our observations provide a sensitive probe of the disk surrounding GQ Lup B. We find no sign of a silicate feature, similar to other disk surrounding very low mass objects, which likely implies significant grain growth ($a_{\mathrm{min}}\gtrsim5~μ$m), and potentially dust settling. Additionally, we find that if the emission is dominated by an inner wall, the disk around the companion might have an inner cavity larger than the one set by sublimation. Conversely, if our data probe the emission from a thin flat disk, we find the disk to be very compact. More observations are required to confirm this finding and assess the vertical structure of the disk. This approach paves the path to the future study of circumplanetary disks and their physical properties. Our results demonstrate that MIR spectroscopic observations can reveal the physical characteristics of disks around forming companions, providing unique insights into the formation of giant planets, brown dwarfs and their satellites.

=== arXiv:2404.05488v2  [2024-04-08]
TITLE  : PHL 5038AB: Is the brown dwarf causing pollution of its white dwarf host star?
AUTHORS: S. L. Casewell, J. Debes, T. J. Dupuy, P. Dufour, A. Bonsor, A. Rebassa-Mansergas, R. Murillo-Ojeda, J. R. French
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stae974
ABS    : We present new results on PHL 5038AB, a widely separated binary system composed of a white dwarf and a brown dwarf, refining the white and brown dwarf parameters and determining the binary separation to be $66^{+12}_{-24}$~AU. New spectra of the white dwarf show calcium absorption lines suggesting the hydrogen-rich atmosphere is weakly polluted, inferring the presence of planetesimals in the system, which we determine are in an S-type orbit around the white dwarf in orbits closer than 17-32 AU. We do not detect any infrared excess that would indicate the presence of a disc, suggesting all dust present has either been totally accreted or is optically thin. In this system, we suggest the metal pollution in the white dwarf atmosphere can be directly attributed to the presence of the brown dwarf companion disrupting the orbits of planetesimals within the system.

=== arXiv:2404.04422v1  [2024-04-05]
TITLE  : Long-term variability in debris transiting white dwarfs
AUTHORS: Amornrat Aungwerojwit, Boris T. Gaensicke, Vikram S. Dhillon, Andrew Drake, Keith Inight, Thomas G. Kaye, T. R. Marsh, Ed Mullen
ABS    : Combining archival photometric observations from multiple large-area surveys spanning the past 17 years, we detect long-term variability in the light curves of ZTFJ032833.52-121945.27 (ZTFJ0328-1219), ZTFJ092311.41+423634.16 (ZTFJ0923+4236) and WD1145+017, all known to exhibit transits from planetary debris. ZTFJ0328-1219 showed an overall fading in brightness from 2011 through to 2015, with a maximum dimming of ~0.3 mag, and still remains ~0.1 mag fainter compared to 2006. We complement the analysis of the long-term behaviour of these systems with high-speed photometry. In the case of ZTFJ0923+4236 and WD1145+017, the time-series photometry exhibits vast variations in the level of transit activity, both in terms of numbers of transits, as well as their shapes and depths, and these variations correlate with the overall brightness of the systems. Inspecting the current known sample of white dwarfs with transiting debris, we estimate that similar photometric signatures may be detectable in one in a few hundred of all white dwarfs. Accounting for the highly aligned geometry required to detect transits, our estimates imply that a substantial fraction of all white dwarfs exhibiting photospheric metal pollution from accreted debris host close-in planetesimals that are currently undergoing disintegration.

=== arXiv:2404.04296v1  [2024-04-04]
TITLE  : Tidal Disruption of Planetesimals from an Eccentric Debris Disk Following a White Dwarf Natal Kick
AUTHORS: Tatsuya Akiba, Selah McIntyre, Ann-Marie Madigan
ABS    : The surfaces of many white dwarfs are polluted by metals, implying a recent accretion event. The tidal disruption of planetesimals is a viable source of white dwarf pollution and offers a unique window into the composition of exoplanet systems. The question of how planetary material enters the tidal disruption radius of the white dwarf is currently unresolved. Using a series of $N$-body simulations, we explore the response of the surrounding planetesimal debris disk as the white dwarf receives a natal kick caused by anisotropic mass loss on the asymptotic giant branch. We find that the kick can form an apse-aligned, eccentric debris disk in the range 30 to 240 AU which corresponds to the orbits of Neptune, the Kuiper Belt, and the scattered disk in our solar system. In addition, many planetesimals beyond 240 AU flip to counter-rotating orbits. Assuming an isotropic distribution of kicks, we predict that approximately 80% of white dwarf debris disks should exhibit significant apsidal alignment and fraction of counter-rotating orbits. The eccentric disk is able to efficiently and continuously torque planetesimals onto radial, star-grazing orbits. We show that the kick causes both an initial burst in tidal disruption events as well as an extended period of 100 Myr where tidal disruption rates are consistent with observed mass accretion rates on polluted white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:2403.18290v1  [2024-03-27]
TITLE  : Infrared properties of carbon stars in our Galaxy
AUTHORS: Kyung-Won Suh
ABS    : In this study, we explore the characteristics of carbon stars within our Galaxy through a comprehensive analysis of observational data spanning visual and infrared (IR) bands. Leveraging datasets from IRAS, ISO, Akari, MSX, 2MASS, WISE, Gaia DR3, AAVSO, and the SIMBAD object database, we conduct a detailed comparison between the observational data and theoretical models. To facilitate this comparison, we introduce various IR two-color diagrams (2CDs), IR color-magnitude diagrams (CMDs), and spectral energy distributions (SEDs). We find that the CMDs, which utilize the latest distance and extinction data from Gaia DR3 for a substantial number of carbon stars, are very useful to distinguish carbon-rich asymptotic giant branch (CAGB) stars from extrinsic carbon stars that are not in the AGB phase. To enhance the accuracy of our analysis, we employ theoretical radiative transfer models for dust shells around CAGB stars. These theoretical dust shell models demonstrate a commendable ability to approximate the observations of CAGB stars across various SEDs, 2CDs, and CMDs. We present the infrared properties of known pulsating variables and explore the infrared variability of the sample stars by analyzing WISE photometric data spanning the last 14 yr. Additionally, we present a novel catalog of CAGB stars, offering enhanced reliability and a wealth of additional information.

=== arXiv:2403.16744v2  [2024-03-25]
TITLE  : Dimerizing hard spherocylinders in porous media
AUTHORS: V. I. Shmotolokha, M. F. Holovko
JOURNAL: Condensed Matter Physics, 2024, Vol. 27, No. 1, 13607
DOI    : 10.5488/CMP.27.13607
ABS    : This research focuses on the unique phase behavior of non-spherical patchy colloids in porous environments. Based on the theory of scaled particle (SPT), methods have been refined and applied to analyze the thermodynamic properties of non-spherical patchy particles in a disordered porous medium. Utilizing the associative theory of liquids in conjunction with SPT, we investigated the impact of associative interactions and connections between the functional nodes of particles on the formation of the nematic phase. Calculations of orientational and spatial distributions were conducted, which helped to understand the phase behavior of particles during the transition from isotropic to nematic phase under the spatial constraints imposed by the disordered matrix of the porous medium.

=== arXiv:2403.15513v1  [2024-03-22]
TITLE  : A 500 pc volume-limited sample of hot subluminous stars I. Space density, scale height, and population properties
AUTHORS: H. Dawson, S. Geier, U. Heber, I. Pelisoli, M. Dorsch, V. Schaffenroth, N. Reindl, R. Culpan
ABS    : We present the first volume-limited sample of spectroscopically confirmed hot subluminous stars out to 500 pc, defined using the accurate parallax measurements from the {\em Gaia} space mission data release 3 (DR3). The sample comprises a total of 397 members, with 305 ($\sim 77\%$) identified as hot subdwarf stars, including 83 newly discovered systems. Of these, we observe that 178 ($\sim58\%$) are hydrogen-rich sdBs, 65 are sdOBs ($\sim 21\%$), 32 are sdOs ($\sim 11\%$), and 30 are He-sdO/Bs ($\sim 10\%$). Among them, 48 ($\sim 16\%$) exhibit an infrared excess in their spectral energy distribution fits, suggesting a composite binary system. The hot subdwarf population is estimated to be 90\% complete, assuming that most missing systems are these composite binaries located within the main sequence (MS) in the \emph{Gaia} colour-magnitude diagram (CMD). The remaining sources in the sample include cataclysmic variables (CVs), blue horizontal branch stars (BHBs), hot white dwarfs (WDs), and MS stars. We derived the mid-plane density $ρ_{0}$ and scale height $\mathrm{h}_{z}$ for the non-composite hot subdwarf star population using a hyperbolic sechant profile (sech$^2$). The best-fit values are $ρ_{0}\,=\,5.17\pm 0.33 \times10^{-7}$ stars/pc$^{3}$ and $\mathrm{h}_{z} = 281 \pm 62$ pc. When accounting for the composite-colour hot subdwarfs and their estimated completeness, the mid-plane density increases to $ρ_{0}\,=\,6.15^ {+1.16}_{-0.53} \times10^{-7}$ stars/pc$^{3}$. This corrected space density is an order of magnitude lower than predicted by population synthesis studies, supporting previous observational estimates.

=== arXiv:2403.14278v1  [2024-03-21]
TITLE  : Discovery of the magnetic cataclysmic variable XMM J152737.4-205305.9 with a deep eclipse-like feature
AUTHORS: Samet Ok, Axel Schwope, David A. H. Buckley, Jaco Brink
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 686, A175 (2024)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202449511
ABS    : In this study, we report a discovery from XMM-Newton, which involves the identification and subsequent examination of a newly discovered polar-type cataclysmic variable named XMM J152737.4-205305.9. The discovery was made by matching the XMM-Newton data archive with the cataclysmic variable candidate catalog provided by Gaia Data Release 3. The utilization of X-ray photometry has led to the identification of two distinct dips that exhibit a recurring pattern with a precise period of 112.4(1) minutes in two XMM-Newton observations that are one year apart. The data obtained from the photometry of Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF) and ATLAS surveys consistently indicate the presence of the different mass accretion states of up to 2 mag. Following the optical data, the \textit{SRG}(Spectrum Roentgen Gamma)/eROSITA All Sky Survey observed the system in two different X-ray levels which may imply different accretion states. Following these observations, the low-resolution spectrum obtained using SALT spectroscopy exposes the prominent hydrogen Balmer and helium emission lines, strongly supporting that the system belongs to the category of polar-type magnetic cataclysmic variable. The XMM-Newton observations, conducted under various conditions of X-ray levels, reveal a consistent pattern of a deep dip-like feature with a width of $\approx 9.1$ min. This feature implies the presence of an eclipse in both observations. According to Gaia data, the object is located at a distance of $1156^{+720}_{-339}$,pc, and its X-ray luminosity lies within the $L_{\rm X}$= (3-6)$\times10^{31}$ \lergs range.

=== arXiv:2403.09970v1  [2024-03-15]
TITLE  : The Dynamic, Chimeric Inner Disk of PDS 70
AUTHORS: Eric Gaidos, Thanawuth Thanathibodee, Andrew Hoffman, Joel Ong, Jason Hinkle, Benjamin J. Shappee, Andrea Banzatti
ABS    : Transition disks, with inner regions depleted in dust and gas, could represent later stages of protoplanetary disk evolution when newly-formed planets are emerging. The PDS 70 system has attracted particular interest because of the presence of two giant planets at tens of au orbits within the inner disk cavity, at least one of which is itself accreting. However, the region around PDS 70 most relevant to understanding the planet populations revealed by exoplanet surveys of middle-aged stars is the inner disk, which is the dominant source of the system's excess infrared emission but only marginally resolved by ALMA. Here we present and analyze time-series optical and infrared photometry and spectroscopy that reveal the inner disk to be dynamic on timescales of days to years, with occultation of sub-micron dust dimming the star at optical wavelengths and 3-5 $μ$m emission varying due to changes in disk structure. Remarkably, the infrared emission from the innermost region (nearly) disappears for ~1 year. We model the spectral energy distribution of the system and its time variation with a flattened warm (T &lt;~ 600K) disk and a hotter (1200K) dust that could represent an inner rim or wall. The high dust-to-gas ratio of the inner disk relative to material accreting from the outer disk, means that the former could be a chimera consisting of depleted disk gas that is subsequently enriched with dust and volatiles produced by collisions and evaporation of planetesimals in the inner zone.

=== arXiv:2403.09094v1  [2024-03-14]
TITLE  : Digitization of Astronomical Photographic Plate of China and Astrometric Measurement of Single-exposure Plates
AUTHORS: Zheng-Jun Shang, Yong Yu, Liang-Liang Wang, Mei-Ting Yang, Jing Yang, Shi-Yin Shen, Min Liu, Quan-Feng Xu
ABS    : From the mid-19th century to the end of the 20th century, photographic plates served as the primary detectors for astronomical observations. Astronomical photographic observations in China began in 1901, and over a century, a total of approximately 30,000 astronomical photographic plates have been captured. These historical plates play an irreplaceable role in conducting long-term, time-domain astronomical research. To preserve and explore these valuable original astronomical observational data, Shanghai Astronomical Observatory has organized the transportation of plates taken at night from various stations across the country to the Sheshan Plate Archive for centralized preservation. For the first time, plate information statistics was performed. On this basis, the plates were cleaned and digitally scanned, and finally digitized images were acquired for 29,314 plates. In this study, using Gaia DR2 as the reference star catalog, astrometric processing has been carried out successfully on 15,696 single-exposure plates, including object extraction, stellar identification, and plate model computation. As a result, for long focal length telescopes, such as the 40cm double-tube refractor telescope and the 1.56m reflector telescope at the Shanghai Astronomical Observatory and the 1m reflector telescope at the Yunnan Astronomical Observatory, the astrometric accuracy obtained for their plates is approximately 0.1" to 0.3". The distribution of astrometric accuracy for medium and short focal length telescopes ranges from 0.3" to 1.0". The relevant data of this batch of plates, including digitized images and stellar catalog of the plates are archived and released by the National Astronomical Data Center. Users can access and download plate data based on keywords such as station, telescope, observation year, and observed celestial coordinates.

=== arXiv:2402.16526v1  [2024-02-26]
TITLE  : Discovery of magnetically guided metal accretion onto a polluted white dwarf
AUTHORS: S. Bagnulo, J. Farihi, J. D. Landstreet, C. Folsom
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8213/ad2619
ABS    : Dynamically active planetary systems orbit a significant fraction of white dwarf stars. These stars often exhibit surface metals accreted from debris disks, which are detected through infrared excess or transiting structures. However, the full journey of a planetesimal from star-grazing orbit to final dissolution in the host star is poorly understood. Here, we report the discovery that the cool metal polluted star WD0816-310 has cannibalized heavy elements from a planetary body similar in size to Vesta, and where accretion and horizontal mixing processes have clearly been controlled by the stellar magnetic field. Our observations unveil periodic and synchronized variations in metal line strength and magnetic field intensity, implying a correlation between the local surface density of metals and the magnetic field structure. Specifically, the data point to a likely persistent concentration of metals near a magnetic pole. These findings demonstrate that magnetic fields may play a fundamental role in the final stages of exoplanetary bodies that are recycled into their white dwarf hosts.

=== arXiv:2402.05479v1  [2024-02-08]
TITLE  : A comparison of the effects of different methodologies on the statistics learning profiles of prospective primary education teachers from a gender perspective
AUTHORS: J. Anasagasti, A. Berciano, A. Izagirre
JOURNAL: Journal on Mathematics Education, 2023, 14(4), 741-756
DOI    : 10.22342/jme.v14i4.pp741-756
ABS    : Over the last decades,it has been shown that teaching and learning statistics is complex, regardless of the teaching methodology. This research presents the different learning profiles identified in a group of future Primary Education (PE) teachers during the study of the Statistics blockdepending on the methodology used and gender, where the sample consists of 132 students in the third year of the PE undergraduate degree in theUniversity of the Basque Country(Universidad del País Vasco/Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea, UPV/EHU). To determine the profiles, a cluster analysis technique has been used, where the main variables to determine them are, on the one hand, their statistical competence development and, on the other hand, the evolutionof their attitude towards statistics. In order to better understand the nature of the profiles obtained, the type of teaching methodology used to work on the Statistics block has been taken into account. This comparison is based on the fact that the sample is divided into two groups: one has worked with a Project Based Learning (PBL) methodology,while the other has worked with a methodology in which theoretical explanations and typically decontextualized exercises predominate. Among the results obtained,three differentiated profiles areobserved, highlighting the proportion of students with an advantageous profile in the group where PBL is included.With regard to gender, the results show that women's attitudes towardstatistics evolvedmore positively than men's after the sessions devoted to statistics in the PBL group.

=== arXiv:2402.04230v3  [2024-02-06]
TITLE  : Medium Resolution 0.97-5.3 micron spectra of Very Young Benchmark Brown Dwarfs with NIRSpec onboard the James Webb Space Telescope
AUTHORS: Elena Manjavacas, Pascal Tremblin, Stephan Birkmann, Jeff Valenti, Catarina Alves de Oliveira, Tracy L. Beck, G. Giardino, N. Luetzgendorf
ABS    : Spectra of young benchmark brown dwarfs with well-known ages are vital to characterize other brown dwarfs, for which ages are in general not known. These spectra are also crucial to test atmospheric models which have the potential to provide detailed information about the atmospheres of these objects. However, to optimally test atmospheric models, medium-resolution, long-wavelength coverage spectra with well-understood uncertainties are ideal, such as the spectra provided by the NIRSpec instrument onboard the James Webb Space Telescope. In this paper, we present the medium-resolution JWST/NIRSpec spectra of two young brown dwarfs, TWA 28 (M9.0) and TWA 27A (M9.0), and one planetary-mass object, TWA 27B (L6.0), members of the TW Hydrae Association (~10 Myr). We show the richness of the atomic lines and molecular bands present in the spectra. All objects show signs of a circumstellar disk, via near-infrared excess and/or via emission lines. We matched a set of cloudless atmospheric spectra (ATMO), and cloudy atmospheric spectra (BT-Settl) to our NIRSpec spectra, and analyzed which wavelength ranges and spectral features both models reproduce best. Both models derive consistent parameters for the three sources, and predict the existence of CH4 at 3.35 microns in TWA 27B. Nonetheless, in contrast to other slightly older objects with similar spectral type, like PSO 318.5-22 and VHS 1256b, this feature is not present in the spectrum of TWA 27B. The lack of the CH4 feature might suggest that the L/T transition of very young dwarfs starts at later spectral types than for older brown dwarfs.

=== arXiv:2401.09128v1  [2024-01-17]
TITLE  : Deciding technosignature search strategies: Multi-criteria fuzzy logic to find extraterrestrial intelligence
AUTHORS: Juan Miguel Sánchez-Lozano, Eloy Peña-Asensio, Hector Socas-Navarro
DOI    : 10.3390/aerospace11010088
ABS    : This study presents the implementation of Multi-Criteria Decision-Making (MCDM) methodologies, particularly the fuzzy Technique for Order of Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution (TOPSIS), in prioritizing technosignatures (TSs) for the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI). By incorporating expert opinions and weighted criteria based on the established Axes of Merit, our analysis offers insights into the relative importance of various TSs. Notably, radio and optical communications are emphasized, in contrast to dark side illumination and starshades in transit. We introduce a new axis, Scale Sensitivity, designed to assess the variability of TS metrics. A sensitivity analysis confirms the robustness of our approach. Our findings, especially the highlighted significance of artifacts orbiting Earth, the Moon, or the Sun, indicate a need to broaden evaluative criteria within SETI research. This suggests an enhancement of the Axes of Merit, with a focus on addressing the plausibility of TSs. As the quest to resolve the profound question of our solitude in the cosmos continues, SETI efforts would benefit from exploring innovative prioritization methodologies that effectively quantify TS search strategies.

=== arXiv:2312.16367v1  [2023-12-27]
TITLE  : An Episode of Occultation Events in Gaia21bcv
AUTHORS: Klaus W. Hodapp, Eric Gaidos, Matthew A. Kenworthy, Michael Tucker, Benjamin J. Shappee, Anna V. Payne, Aaron Do
ABS    : A previously unremarkable star near the Canis Major OB1/R1 association underwent an episode of multiple deep brightness minima. Light curves based on archival Gaia, ZTF, NEOWISE data and additional observations from LCO and UKIRT show that the star was not variable prior to 2019 Aug 18 (MJD 58700), and on that date started showing brightness dips of up to 3 magnitudes in the Gaia G and ZTF r bandpasses. After MJD 59500, ~800 days after the onset of these dipping events, the star returned to its previous brightness, and no significant dipping events have been recorded since. Compared to the stable phase, NEOWISE infrared photometry in the W1 and W2 bands indicates a generally redder color, and both decreases and increases in brightness at different times during the dipping episode. The spectrum of Gaia21bcv taken after the end of the dipping episode shows several neutral and ionized metal absorption lines, including Li, indicating a spectral type of ~ K5. Variable emission from [OI] was observed. The H alpha absorption in Gaia21bcv is too faint and irregular for this spectral type, indicating that the line is partly filled in by variable emission, a signature of weak episodic accretion. Gaia21bcv lies above the zero-age main sequence, but is much fainter than typical R CrB stars. We interpret the light curve of Gaia21bcv as being similar to the occultation events in Epsilon Aurigae, i.e., occultation by a disk around a companion object orbiting the primary star.

=== arXiv:2312.12289v3  [2023-12-19]
TITLE  : Nonperturbative study of quantum many-body correlation effects in neutron stars: Equation of state
AUTHORS: Hao-Fu Zhu, Xufen Wu, Guo-Zhu Liu
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. C 110, 035810 (2024)
ABS    : Although neutron stars have been studied for decades, their internal structure remains enigmatic, mainly due to large uncertainties in the equation of state. In neutron stars, the nucleons are strongly interacting by exchanging mesons, which can lead to significant quantum many-body correlation effects. Mean-field calculations failed to capture these effects. Here, we develop a nonperturbative quantum field-theoretic approach to handle strongly correlated dense nuclear matter within the framework of quantum hadrodynamics. We show that the many-body effects can be incorporated in the Dyson-Schwinger equation of the nucleon propagator. Based on a linear $σ$-$ω$-$ρ$ model, we successfully reproduce six empirical observable quantities of saturation nuclear matter by tuning six parameters. After including the many-body effects into the equation of state of realistic neutron star matter, we obtain a mass-radius relation that is comparable with recent astrophysical observations of neutron stars.

=== arXiv:2312.07903v1  [2023-12-13]
TITLE  : The Breakthrough Listen Search for Intelligent Life: Detection and Characterization of Anomalous Transits in Kepler Lightcurves
AUTHORS: Anna Zuckerman, James Davenport, Steve Croft, Andrew Siemion, Imke de Pater
ABS    : Never before has the detection and characterization of exoplanets via transit photometry been as promising and feasible as it is now, due to the increasing breadth and sensitivity of time domain optical surveys. Past works have made use of phase-folded stellar lightcurves in order to study the properties of exoplanet transits, because this provides the highest signal that a transit is present at a given period and ephemeris. Characterizing transits on an individual, rather than phase-folded, basis is much more challenging due to the often low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of lightcurves, missing data, and low sampling rates. However, by phase-folding a lightcurve we implicitly assume that all transits have the same expected properties, and lose all information about the nature and variability of the transits. We miss the natural variability in transit shapes, or even the deliberate or inadvertent modification of transit signals by an extraterrestrial civilization (for example, via laser emission or orbiting megastructures). In this work, we develop an algorithm to search stellar lightcurves for individual anomalous (in timing or depth) transits, and we report the results of that search for 218 confirmed transiting exoplanet systems from Kepler.

=== arXiv:2312.05753v1  [2023-12-10]
TITLE  : Mid-Infrared Variability of Young Stellar Objects on Timescales of Days to Years
AUTHORS: Sieun Lee, Jeong-Eun Lee, Carlos Contreras Peña, Doug Johnstone, Gregory Herczeg, Seonjae Lee
ABS    : Variability in the brightness of Young Stellar Objects (YSOs) is a common phenomenon that can be caused by changes in various factors, including accretion, extinction, disk morphology, interactions between the disk and the stellar photosphere, and the rotation of hot or cold magnetic spots on the stellar photosphere. Analyzing the variability on different timescales gives insight into the mechanisms driving the brightness changes in YSOs. We investigate the variability of YSOs on both long and short timescales using two mid-infrared datasets: the NEOWISE 7.5-year W2 (4.6$μ$m) data and the YSOVAR 40-day Spitzer/IRAC2 (4.5$μ$m) data, respectively. We classify the variability types in each timescale following Park et al (2021). We find a higher detection rate of variable sources in the short-term (77.6%) compared to the long-term (43.0%) due to the higher sensitivity of the Spitzer observations. In addition, the higher cadence of the YSOVAR data results in the weeks-long short-term variability being mostly secular, while the years-long long-term variability explored with the coarsely sampled NEOWISE data is mostly stochastic. By cross-matching the two catalogs, we statistically analyze the variability types exhibited by YSOs across both timescales. The long-term variability amplitude is mostly three times (up to ten times) greater than the short-term variability. Furthermore, we evaluate variability on very short (1-2 days) timescales and recover a trend of the increasing amplitude of variability as the timescales increase. By comprehensively analyzing the variability of YSOs over various timescales, we contribute to a deeper understanding of the underlying mechanisms driving their variability.

=== arXiv:2312.01495v2  [2023-12-03]
TITLE  : On the Chromaticity of the (NEO)WISE Astrometry
AUTHORS: Bringfried Stecklum
DOI    : 10.3847/2515-5172/ad1247
ABS    : The Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE, Wright et al. 2010) and its follow-up Near-Earth Object (NEO) mission (NEOWISE, Mainzer et al. 2011) scan the mid-infrared sky twice a year. The spatial and temporal coverage of the resulting database is of utmost importance for variability studies, in particular of young stellar objects (YSOs) which have red $W1{-}W2$ colors. During such an effort, I noticed subarcsecond position offsets between subsequent visits. The offsets do not appear for targets with small $W1{-}W2$ colors, which points to a chromatic origin in the optics, caused by the spacecraft pointing alternating ``forward'' and ``backward'' from one visit to another. It amounts to 0\farcs1 for targets with $W1{-}W2\approx2$. Consideration of this chromatic offset will improve astrometry. This is of particular importance for NEOs that are generally red.

=== arXiv:2311.16788v1  [2023-11-28]
TITLE  : Spectral properties and observables in ultracold Fermi gases
AUTHORS: Eugen Dizer, Jan Horak, Jan M. Pawlowski
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevA.109.063311
ABS    : We calculate non-perturbative self-consistent fermionic and bosonic spectral functions of ultra-cold Fermi gases with the spectral functional approach. This approach allows for a direct real-time computation of non-perturbative correlation functions, and in the present work we use spectral Dyson-Schwinger equations. We focus on the normal phase of the spin-balanced Fermi gas and provide numerical results for the full fermionic and bosonic spectral functions. The spectral functions are then used for the determination of the equation of state, the Tan contact and ejection rf spectra at unitarity. These results are compared to experimental data, the self-consistent T-matrix approach and lattice results. Our approach offers a wide range of applications, including the ab initio calculation of transport and spectral properties of the superfluid phase in the BCS-BEC crossover.

=== arXiv:2311.12000v1  [2023-11-20]
TITLE  : Multiwavelength properties of the low-redshift isolated galaxies with active nuclei modelled with CIGALE
AUTHORS: O. Kompaniiets
JOURNAL: ISSN 1561-8889. Space Sciences and Technologies. 2023. I. 29. No 5
DOI    : 10.15407/knit2023.05.088
ABS    : Using the CIGALE software, we present the preliminary results of a multiwavelength analysis of eighteen low-redshift isolated galaxies with active nuclei (isolated AGNs). This sample was formed by cross-matching the 2MIG isolated AGNs sample with the SDSS DR9 catalog. The host galaxies of this sample have not undergone a merger for at least three billion years, making them a unique laboratory for studying interactions between various astrophysical processes without the complicating factors of merging with other galaxies or the effects of a denser environment. In addition, the study of isolated AGNs can provide valuable information about the evolution and activity of galaxies in the broader context of the distribution of large-scale structures of the Universe. First, we seek to understand how the environment affects the physical processes involved in the accretion of matter onto supermassive black holes in these galaxies. Secondly, to what extent do processes of star formation or degeneration of nuclei activity continue the evolution of these galaxies? Third, how does the localization of isolated AGNs in voids or filaments of a large-scale structure determine the properties of this environment at the low redshifts? Using observable fluxes from UV to the radio ranges from archival databases of space-born and ground-based observatories (GALEX, SDSS, 2MASS, Spitzer, Hershel, IRAS, WISE, VLA), we estimated the contribution from the emission of an active nucleus to the galaxy`s total emission, the stellar mass, and the star formation rate. The mass of the stellar component falls from $10^{10}$ $M_{Sun}$ and $10^{10}$ $M_{Sun}$. The star formation rate for most galaxies (except UGC10120) does not exceed 3 $M_{Sun}$ per year. The best SED fittings (with $χ^2$ &lt; 5) are obtained for the galaxies CGCG248-019, CGCG179-005, CGCG243-024, IC0009, MCG+09-25-022, UGC10244.

=== arXiv:2311.11376v1  [2023-11-19]
TITLE  : Post-Giant Impact Planetesimals Sustaining Extreme Debris Disks
AUTHORS: Lewis Watt, Zoë M. Leinhardt, Philip J. Carter
ABS    : Extreme debris disks can show short term behaviour through the evolution and clearing of small grains produced in giant impacts, and potentially a longer period of variability caused by a planetesimal population formed from giant impact ejecta. In this paper, we present results of numerical simulations to explain how a planetesimal populated disk can supply an observed extreme debris disk with small grains. We simulated a sample of giant impacts from which we form a planetesimal population. We then use the $N$-body code {\sc Rebound} to evolve the planetesimals spatially and collisionally. We adopt a simplistic collision criteria in which we define destructive collisions to be between planetesimals with a mutual impact velocity that exceeds two times the catastrophic disruption threshold, $V^*$. We find that for some configurations, a planetesimal populated disk can produce a substantial amount of dust to sustain an observable disk. The semi-major axis at which the giant impact occurs changes the mass added to the observed disk substantially while the orientation of the impact has less of an effect. We determine how the collision rate at the collision point changes over time and show that changes in semi-major axis and orientation only change the initial collision rate of the disk. Collision rates across all disks evolve at a similar rate.

=== arXiv:2310.19790v1  [2023-10-30]
TITLE  : Detection and Preliminary Characterisation of Polluted White Dwarfs from Gaia EDR3 and LAMOST
AUTHORS: Mariona Badenas-Agusti, Andrew Vanderburg, Simon Blouin, Patrick Dufour, Javier Viaña, Sara Seager, Sharon X. Wang
ABS    : We present a catalogue of 62 polluted white dwarfs observed by the 9th Low-Resolution Data Release of the Large Sky Area Multi-Object Fiber Spectroscopic Telescope (LAMOST LRS DR9v1; R$\approx$1,800) and the Early Data Release 3 (EDR3) of the Gaia Mission. Among these stellar remnants, 30 are new discoveries with previously unknown traces of calcium pollution. To generate our catalogue, we used a database of 4,324 unique Gaia EDR3 white dwarf candidates with LAMOST LRS DR9v1 observations, many of which have been spectroscopically confirmed by other telescopes. For these stars, we developed a quantitative method to detect calcium absorption in their spectra between 3,900-4,000$\mathring {\mathrm A}$, which we then validated through visual inspection and multiple literature cross-checks. Our catalogue provides the astrometric and photometric properties of the white dwarf candidates, incorporates supplementary data (e.g. Montreal White Dwarf Database, MWDD; PanSTARRS; the Hubble Space Telescope), and indicates the possibility of calcium pollution in their atmospheres. For our final sample of polluted white dwarfs, we also determine the main atmospheric properties of 23 sources with effective temperatures $T_{\rm eff}$$\leq$25,000K and no existing calcium abundances in the MWDD. Our analysis represents a first step towards measuring the full atmospheric composition of these stars and learning about the bulk properties of their accreted material. As we venture into the era of wide-field spectroscopic surveys, our work highlights the importance of combining large-scale databases for identifying and characterising new polluted white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:2310.16292v2  [2023-10-25]
TITLE  : Dyson-Schwinger equations towards cold-dense QCD matter with improved truncations
AUTHORS: Zhan Bai, Yu-Xin Liu
ABS    : We take the Dyson-Schwinger equation (DSE) approach of QCD to study the phase transition and the equation of state of cold dense matter. Besides the bare vertex and Gauss gluon model, we take into account an improved truncation scheme, the CLRQ vertex and infrared-constant gluon model. For the dynamical chiral symmetry breaking solution of the DSE, we require that the emergence of quark number density to be at the chemical potential for the nuclear liquid-gas phase transition to take place, by incorporating a chemical potential dependent modification factor to the gluon model. The result shows that our modified scheme can not only describe the phase transition of the cold dense matter well but also the deduced equation of state of the matter can describe the recent astronomical observations consistently.

=== arXiv:2310.12251v2  [2023-10-18]
TITLE  : Searching for Mass Concentrations with Precision Pulsar Timing
AUTHORS: John M. LoSecco
ABS    : This papers searches for evidence of mass concentrations along the path of radio pulses in the IPTA survey data release. Radio pulse travel times are influenced via gravitational fields along the path from the source to the observer. Transient time delays in transit are a useful measure of the matter distribution along the path. Many pulsars have very well understood timing solutions with predicable arrival times and can be used to sample the mass variation. Changes in the source, observer and mass concentration positions produce changes in arrival times which can be significant for precision pulsar times. Nine candidates are reported from this search. After red noise reduction the number of candidates drops to two. When the epoch at the encounter times are removed the candidates vanish. Delayed and early event candidate s are found at about the same rate. There is no clear evidence for a signal of gravitational delays from this search.

=== arXiv:2310.09355v3  [2023-10-13]
TITLE  : The first white dwarf debris disk observed by JWST
AUTHORS: Andrew Swan, Jay Farihi, Kate Y. L. Su, Steven J. Desch
ABS    : This letter reports the first JWST spectroscopy of a white dwarf debris disk, giving a preliminary assessment of the salient features, and recommendations for future observations. The polluted and dusty star WD 0145+234 experienced a major collisional event in its circumstellar disk in 2018, accompanied by an infrared outburst, and subsequently a gradual decrease in thermal emission. Time-series NIRSPEC observations demonstrate that the circumstellar disk is returning to a quiescent state with a T~1000 K infrared excess similar to the bulk of known dusty white dwarfs. MIRI spectroscopy reveals a 9-12 micron solid-state emission feature consistent with silicate minerals as observed in debris disks observed with Spitzer IRS. The strength and morphology of the silicate feature appear unchanged relative to the continuum in spectra taken over a year apart, consistent with steady-state collisional evolution of the circumstellar debris. A tentative emission feature around 7 microns may be due to carbonates, and if confirmed would indicate aqueous alteration in the parent body.

=== arXiv:2310.05027v2  [2023-10-08]
TITLE  : Rigid Clumps in the MercuryDPM Particle Dynamics Code
AUTHORS: Igor Ostanin, Vasileios Angelidakis, Timo Plath, Sahar Pourandi, Anthony Thornton, Thomas Weinhart
ABS    : Discrete particle simulations have become the standard in science and industrial applications exploring the properties of particulate systems. Most of such simulations rely on the concept of interacting spherical particles to describe the properties of particulates, although, the correct representation of the nonspherical particle shape is crucial for a number of applications. In this work we describe the implementation of clumps, i.e. assemblies of rigidly connected spherical particles, which can approximate given nonspherical shapes, within the \textit{MercuryDPM} particle dynamics code. \textit{MercuryDPM} contact detection algorithm is particularly efficient for polydisperse particle systems, which is essential for multilevel clumps approximating complex surfaces. We employ the existing open-source \texttt{CLUMP} library to generate clump particles. We detail the pre-processing tools providing necessary initial data, as well as the necessary adjustments of the algorithms of contact detection, collision/migration and numerical time integration. The capabilities of our implementation are illustrated for a variety of examples.

=== arXiv:2309.16969v1  [2023-09-29]
TITLE  : Sudden extreme obscuration of a Sun-like main-sequence star: evolution of the circumstellar dust around ASASSN-21qj
AUTHORS: Jonathan P. Marshall, Steve Ertel, Francisca Kemper, Carlos del Burgo, Gilles P. P. L. Otten, Peter Scicluna, Sascha T. Zeegers, Álvaro Ribas
JOURNAL: ApJ 954 140 (2023)
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ace629
ABS    : ASASSN-21qj is a distant Sun-like star that recently began an episode of deep dimming events after no prior recorded variability. Here we examine archival and newly obtained optical and near-infrared data of this star. The deep aperiodic dimming and absence of previous infrared excess are reminiscent of KIC 8462852 (``Boyajian's Star''). The observed occultations are consistent with a circumstellar cloud of sub-micron-sized dust grains composed of amorphous pyroxene, with a minimum mass of $1.50~\pm~0.04\times10^{-9}~M_{\oplus}$ derived from the deepest occultations, and a minimum grain size of $0.29^{+0.01}_{-0.18}~μ$m assuming a power law size distribution. We further identify the first evidence of near-infrared excess in this system from NEOWISE 3.4 and 4.6~$μ$m observations. The excess emission implies a total circumstellar dust mass of around $10^{-6} M_{\oplus}$, comparable to the extreme, variable discs associated with terrestrial planet formation around young stars. The quasiperiodic recurrence of deep dips and the inferred dust temperature (ranging from 1800 to 700~K across the span of observations) independently point to an orbital distance of $\simeq$0.2~au for the dust, supporting the occulting material and excess emission being causally linked. The origin of this extended, opaque cloud is surmised to be the breakup of one or more exocometary bodies.

=== arXiv:2309.16659v1  [2023-09-28]
TITLE  : The Eccentric Kozai-Lidov Mechanism as the Cause of Exocomet Transits of KIC 8462852
AUTHORS: Steven D. Young, Mark C. Wyatt
ABS    : KIC 8462852 is a star in the Kepler field that exhibits almost unique behaviour. The deep, irregular and aperiodic dips in its light curve have been interpreted as the breakup of a large exocomet on a highly eccentric orbit whose post-disruption material obscures the star. It is hypothesised that a nearby M-dwarf, recently confirmed to be bound to the system, could be exciting planetesimals in a source belt to high eccentricities if its orbit is highly misaligned with the belt: an effect known as the 'Eccentric Kozai-Lidov Mechanism'. To quantify how often this effect is expected to occur, this paper presents a Monte Carlo model of wide binary stars with embedded, misaligned planetesimal belts. These belts collisionally erode over time until they are excited to high eccentricities on secular timescales by a companion star if its orbit is sufficiently misaligned. The large planetesimals then produce an observable dimming signature in the light curve for a set period of time which may or may not overlap with similar events. The model finds that, for dimming events that persist for 100 yr, the most likely companion stars are located at $10^2 - 10^4$ au, the most likely belts are at $10^2-10^3$ au and the system age is most likely to be $10^2 - 10^3$ Myr. However, the probability of observing one or more stars exhibiting this phenomenon in the Kepler field is $1.3 \times 10^{-3}$, such that it is unlikely this mechanism is driving the observations of KIC 8462852.

=== arXiv:2309.14469v1  [2023-09-25]
TITLE  : The Ax-Kochen-Ershov Theorem
AUTHORS: Christian d'Elbée
ABS    : These are the notes of a course for the summer school Model Theory in Bilbao hosted by the Basque Center for Applied Mathematics (BCAM) and the Universidad del País Vasco/Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea in September 2023. The goal of this course is to prove the Ax-Kochen-Ershov (AKE) theorem. This classical result in model theory was proven by Ax and Kochen and independently by Ershov in 1965-1966. The AKE theorem is considered as the starting point of the model theory of valued fields and witnessed numerous refinements and extensions. To a certain measure, motivic integration can be considered as such. The AKE theorem is not only an important result in model theory, it yields a striking application to $p$-adic arithmetics. Artin conjectured that all $p$-adic fields are $C_2$ (every homogeneous polynomial of degree $d$ and in $&gt;d^2$ variable has a non trivial zero). A consequence of the AKE theorem is that the $p$-adics are asymptotically $C_2$. The conjecture of Artin has been disproved by Terjanian in 1966, yielding that the solution given by the AKE theorem is in a sense optimal. The proof presented here is due to Pas but the general strategy stays faithful to the original paper of Ax and Kochen, which consist in the study of the asymptotic first-order theory of the $p$-adics.

=== arXiv:2309.09591v3  [2023-09-18]
TITLE  : Analysis of full-disc H alpha observations: Carrington maps and filament properties in 1909-2022
AUTHORS: Theodosios Chatzistergos, Ilaria Ermolli, Dipankar Banerjee, Teresa Barata, Ioannis Chouinavas, Mariachiara Falco, Ricardo Gafeira, Fabrizio Giorgi
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 680, A15 (2023)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202347536
ABS    : Full disc observations of the Sun in the H$α$ line provide information about the solar chromosphere and in particular about the filaments, which are dark and elongated features that lie along magnetic field polarity inversion lines. This makes them important for studies of solar magnetism. Since full disc H$α$ observations have been performed at various sites since 1800s, with regular photographic data having started in the beginning of the 20th century, they are an invaluable source of information on past solar magnetism. In this work we aimed at deriving accurate information about filaments from historical and modern full disc H$α$ observations. We have consistently processed observations from 15 H$α$ archives spanning 1909-2022. Our data processing includes photometric calibration of the data stored on photographic plates. We have constructed also Carrington maps from the calibrated H$α$ images. We find that filament areas are affected by the bandwidth of the observation. Thus, cross-calibration of the filament areas derived from different archives is needed. We have produced a composite of filament areas from individual archives by scaling all of them to the Meudon series. Our composite butterfly diagram shows very distinctly the common features of filament evolution, that is the poleward migration as well as a decrease in the mean latitude of filaments as the cycle progresses. We also find that during activity maxima, filaments on average cover about 1% of the solar surface. We see only a weak change in the amplitude of cycles in filament areas, in contrast to sunspot and plage areas. Analysis of H$α$ data for archives with contemporaneous Ca II K observations allowed us to identify and verify archive inconsistencies, which will also have implications for reconstructions of past solar magnetism and irradiance from Ca II K data.

=== arXiv:2309.06564v2  [2023-09-12]
TITLE  : Application of the Thermodynamics of Radiation to Dyson Spheres as Work Extractors and Computational Engines, and their Observational Consequences
AUTHORS: Jason T. Wright
ABS    : I apply the thermodynamics of radiation to Dyson spheres as machines that do work or computation, and examine their observational consequences. I identify four properties of Dyson spheres that complicate typical analyses: globally, they may do no work in the usual sense; they use radiation as the source and sink of energy; they accept radiation from a limited range of solid angle; and they conserve energy flux globally. I consider three kinds of activities: computation at the Landauer limit; dissipative activities, in which the energy of a sphere's activities cascades into waste heat, as for a biosphere; and "traditional" work that leaves the sphere, such as radio emission. I apply the Landsberg formalism to derive efficiency limits in all 3 cases, and show that optical circulators provide an "existence proof" that greatly simplifies the problem and allows the Landsberg limit to be plausibly approached. I find that for computation and traditional work, there is little to no advantage to nesting shells (as in a "Matrioshka Brain"); that the optimal use of mass is generally to make very small and hot Dyson spheres; that for "complete" Dyson spheres we expect optical depths of several; and that in all cases the Landsberg limit corresponds to a form of the Carnot limit. I explore how these conclusions might change in the face of complications such as the sphere having practical efficiencies below the Landsberg limit (using the endoreversible limit as an example); no use of optical circulators; and swarms of materials instead of shells.

=== arXiv:2309.06562v4  [2023-09-08]
TITLE  : Making Habitable Worlds: Planets Versus Megastructures
AUTHORS: Raghav Narasimha, Margarita Safonova, C. Sivaram
JOURNAL: Proceedings of the IAU Symposium No. 387 (2025), Toward Discovery of Life beyond Earth and Its Impact, eds. H. Landt, M. Dominik &amp; C. Oliver, Cambridge University Press
DOI    : 10.1017/S174392132400187X
ABS    : In 2016, a star KIC 8462852 caught the world's attention due to a paper by citizen scientists who noticed its seemingly unexplainable brightness variations. The forward theory was offered - KIC 8462852 is surrounded by a Dyson sphere, a megastructure made by an alien civilization to collect all energy output from their star. Finally, in 2018, its light curve showed chromaticity more characteristic of the dust (from comets or asteroids) rather than of something made from solid material, but the world was woken up to the idea of megastructures. But, in Dyson's time, only Solar System planets were known; it took more than 20 years to realize that nature has no problem making planets and does it with a flair -- the total number of planets in the Galaxy is estimated to be in billions. With such abundance of planets, there would be no need to destroy the entire planetary system to make one sphere. Instead, a civilization can expand to a system that has planet(s) in the habitable zone (HZ), or a planet can be moved into it. Alternatively, a free-floating planet (FFP) can be captured and moved into the HZ. These shifts can be performed at a constant low-thrust acceleration using high power directional lasers, resulting in a gradual spiral transfer from one orbit to another. We propose here to search for ETI by looking for high-power laser technosignatures and consider merits of such signatures. We suggest to specifically pay attention to the multiple planetary systems that have Strange Exoplanetary Architectures (SEA) - unusual planetary arrangements that cannot be explained by current planetary formation theories, because these could be the result of ETI moving planets intentionally to suit their needs.

=== arXiv:2309.03248v1  [2023-09-06]
TITLE  : Nonspherical oscillations of an encapsulated microbubble with interface energy under the acoustic field
AUTHORS: Nehal Dash, Ganesh Tamadapu
DOI    : 10.1121/10.0025390
ABS    : The practical applications of gas-filled encapsulated microbubbles involve inherent nonspherical oscillations under acoustic fields. The gas-encapsulation and encapsulation-liquid interfaces significantly affect the mechanics of the bubbles, especially of smaller radii, and their consideration is vital for mimicking the experimental setting. In this paper, we apply the interface energy model [N. Dash and G. Tamadapu, J. Fluid Mech. 932, A26 (2022)] to examine the nonspherical oscillations of an encapsulated microbubble with a radius of $2$$μ$m and $5$$μ$m under an acoustic field. Using the Lagrangian energy formulation, the coupled dynamical governing equations for spherical and nonspherical modes are derived, incorporating the effects of interface energy at the interfaces, shell elasticity, and viscosity. Through a perturbation analysis based on the Krylov-Bogoliubov method of averaging, a set of first-order differential (slow-time) equations is obtained to conduct steady-state and conditional-stability analysis. The stability analysis helped in determining the excitation pressure and frequency of the acoustic field required for smaller radii bubbles to exhibit finite amplitude shape oscillations. Direct numerical simulations of the governing equations revealed that the parametrically forced even mode ($n=2$) excites even modes, while the odd modes ($n=3$) excite both even and odd modes. For smaller radii bubbles, we observe shape mode oscillations of finite non-zero amplitudes only in the presence of interface parameters. The initial size-dependent interface parameter and shell viscoelastic parameters are identified as the key parameters that play a critical role in exhibiting finite shape mode oscillations of the bubble.

=== arXiv:2308.15518v1  [2023-08-29]
TITLE  : Data-Driven Approaches to Searches for the Technosignatures of Advanced Civilizations
AUTHORS: T. Joseph W. Lazio, S. G. Djorgovski, Andrew Howard, Curt Cutler, Sofia Z. Sheikh, Stefano Cavuoti, Denise Herzing, Kiri Wagstaff
DOI    : 10.26206/gvmj-sn65
ABS    : Humanity has wondered whether we are alone for millennia. The discovery of life elsewhere in the Universe, particularly intelligent life, would have profound effects, comparable to those of recognizing that the Earth is not the center of the Universe and that humans evolved from previous species. There has been rapid growth in the fields of extrasolar planets and data-driven astronomy. In a relatively short interval, we have seen a change from knowing of no extrasolar planets to now knowing more potentially habitable extrasolar planets than there are planets in the Solar System. In approximately the same interval, astronomy has transitioned to a field in which sky surveys can generate 1 PB or more of data. The Data-Driven Approaches to Searches for the Technosignatures of Advanced Civilizations_ study at the W. M. Keck Institute for Space Studies was intended to revisit searches for evidence of alien technologies in light of these developments. Data-driven searches, being able to process volumes of data much greater than a human could, and in a reproducible manner, can identify *anomalies* that could be clues to the presence of technosignatures. A key outcome of this workshop was that technosignature searches should be conducted in a manner consistent with Freeman Dyson's "First Law of SETI Investigations," namely "every search for alien civilizations should be planned to give interesting results even when no aliens are discovered." This approach to technosignatures is commensurate with NASA's approach to biosignatures in that no single observation or measurement can be taken as providing full certainty for the detection of life. Areas of particular promise identified during the workshop were (*) Data Mining of Large Sky Surveys, (*) All-Sky Survey at Far-Infrared Wavelengths, (*) Surveys with Radio Astronomical Interferometers, and (*) Artifacts in the Solar System.

=== arXiv:2308.14804v1  [2023-08-28]
TITLE  : Earth as a Transiting Exoplanet: A Validation of Transmission Spectroscopy and Atmospheric Retrieval Methodologies for Terrestrial Exoplanets
AUTHORS: Jacob Lustig-Yaeger, Victoria S. Meadows, David Crisp, Michael R. Line, Tyler D. Robinson
ABS    : The James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) will enable the search for and characterization of terrestrial exoplanet atmospheres in the habitable zone via transmission spectroscopy. However, relatively little work has been done to use solar system data, where ground truth is known, to validate spectroscopic retrieval codes intended for exoplanet studies, particularly in the limit of high resolution and high signal-to-noise (S/N). In this work, we perform such a validation by analyzing a high S/N empirical transmission spectrum of Earth using a new terrestrial exoplanet atmospheric retrieval model with heritage in Solar System remote sensing and gaseous exoplanet retrievals. We fit the Earth's 2-14 um transmission spectrum in low resolution (R=250 at 5 um) and high resolution (R=100,000 at 5 um) under a variety of assumptions about the 1D vertical atmospheric structure. In the limit of noiseless transmission spectra, we find excellent agreement between model and data (deviations &lt; 10%) that enable the robust detection of H2O, CO2, O3, CH4, N2, N2O, NO2, HNO3, CFC-11, and CFC-12 thereby providing compelling support for the detection of habitability, biosignature, and technosignature gases in the atmosphere of the planet using an exoplanet-analog transmission spectrum. Our retrievals at high spectral resolution show a marked sensitivity to the thermal structure of the atmosphere, trace gas abundances, density-dependent effects, such as collision-induced absorption and refraction, and even hint at 3D spatial effects. However, we used synthetic observations of TRAPPIST-1e to verify that the use of simple 1D vertically homogeneous atmospheric models will likely suffice for JWST observations of terrestrial exoplanets transiting M dwarfs.

=== arXiv:2308.13185v1  [2023-08-25]
TITLE  : The mid-infrared variability of the SDSS optical quasars
AUTHORS: Hongtao Wang, Yong Shi
DOI    : 10.1088/1674-4527/20/2/21
ABS    : Based on the Seventh Data Release (DR7) quasar catalog from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, we investigate the variability of optical quasars in W1, W2, W3 and W4 bands of the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) and the Near-Earth Object Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (NEOWISE). Adopting the structure function method, we calculate the structure function ($\rmδt$=1 yr) which shows no obvious correlations with the bolometric luminosity, the black hole mass and the Eddington ratio. The ensemble structure functions in W1 and W2 bands show that the SF slopes are steeper than those in previous studies which may be caused by different cadence and observational epoch number. We further investigate the relation of variability amplitude $σ_m$ between mid-infrared band and optical band, but no obvious correlation is found. No correlation is found between W1-W2 and g-r color. We think the mid-infrared emission of quasars may be smoothed out by the extended dust distribution, thus leading to no obvious correlation. For the radio-loud quasar sub-sample, we further analyze the relation between the variability amplitude in the mid-infrared band and the radio luminosity at 6 cm, but no obvious correlations are found, which indicate the mid-infrared emission contributed from the synchrotron radiation of the relativistic jet is very weak.

=== arXiv:2307.11207v1  [2023-07-20]
TITLE  : Mass-accretion, spectral, and photometric properties of T Tauri stars in Taurus based on TESS and LAMOST
AUTHORS: Chia-Lung Lin, Wing-Huen Ip, Yao Hsiao, Tzu-Hueng Chang, Yi-han Song, A-Li Luo
JOURNAL: The Astronomical Journal, Volume 166, Number 3, year 2023
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/ace322
ABS    : We present the analysis of 16 classical T Taur stars using LAMOST and TESS data, investigating spectral properties, photometric variations, and mass-accretion rates. All 16 stars exhibit emissions in H$α$ lines, from which the average mass-accretion rate of $1.76\times10^{-9}~M_{\odot}yr^{-1}$ is derived. Two of the stars, DL Tau and Haro 6-13, show mass-accretion bursts simultaneously in TESS, ASAS-SN, and/or ZTF survey. Based on these observations, we find that the mass-accretion rates of DL Tau and Haro 6-13 reach their maximums of $2.5 \times 10^{-8}~M_{\odot}yr^{-1}$ and $2 \times 10^{-10}~M_{\odot}yr^{-1}$ during the TESS observation, respectively. We detect thirteen flares among these stars. The flare frequency distribution shows that the CTTSs' flare activity is not only dominated by strong flares with high energy but much more active than those of solar-type and young low-mass stars. By comparing the variability classes reported in the literature, we find that the transition timescale between different classes of variability in CTTSs, such as from Stochastic (S) to Bursting (B) or from quasi-periodic symmetric (QPS) to quasi-periodic dipping (QPD), may range from 1.6 to 4 years. We observe no significant correlation between inclination and mass-accretion rates derived from the emission indicators. This suggests that inner disk properties may be more important than that of outer disk. Finally, we find a relatively significant positive correlation between the asymmetric metric "M" and the cold disk inclination compared to the literature. A weak negative correlation between the periodicity metric "Q" value and inclination has been also found.

=== arXiv:2306.14332v1  [2023-06-25]
TITLE  : Failed supernovae as a natural explanation for the binary black hole mass distribution
AUTHORS: Paul Disberg, Gijs Nelemans
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 676, A31 (2023)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202245693
ABS    : The more gravitational wave sources are detected, the better the mass distribution of binary black holes (BBHs) becomes known. This stellar graveyard shows several features, including an apparent mass gap which makes the distribution bimodal. The observed chirp mass distribution, in turn, appears to be trimodal. We aim to investigate to which extend we can explain the observed mass distribution with stellar evolution, specifically with the hypothesis that the mass gap is caused by the difference between successful and failed supernovae (SNe). We pose a hypothetical remnant function, based on literature of stellar evolution simulations, which relates initial mass to remnant mass, includes a black hole island and produces a bimodal remnant distribution. Moreover, we look at observed type II SN rates in an attempt to detect the effect of failed SNe. Finally, using a simplified estimation of binary evolution, we determine the remnant distribution resulting from our remnant function and compare it to observation. We find that failed SNe lower type II SN rates by approximately 25%, but the inferred rate from SN surveys is not accurate enough to confirm this. Furthermore, our estimation based on the remnant function produces a mass distribution that matches the general shape of the observed distributions of individual as well as chirp masses. Based on our research, we conclude that the failed SNe mechanism and the presence of the black hole island are a natural hypothesis for explaining the individual BBH mass distribution and chirp mass distribution. However, for a more firm conclusion more detailed simulations are needed.

=== arXiv:2306.03118v1  [2023-06-05]
TITLE  : Real-Time Technosignature Strategies with SN 2023ixf
AUTHORS: James R. A. Davenport, Sofia Z. Sheikh, Wael Farah, Andy Nilipour, Bárbara Cabrales, Steve Croft, Alexander W. Pollak, Andrew P. V. Siemion
ABS    : Several technosignature techniques focus on historic events such as SN 1987A as the basis to search for coordinated signal broadcasts from extraterrestrial agents. The recently discovered SN 2023ixf in the spiral galaxy M101 is the nearest Type II supernova in over a decade, and will serve as an important benchmark event. Here we review the potential for SN 2023ixf to advance ongoing techonsignature searches, particularly signal-synchronization techniques such as the "SETI Ellipsoid". We find that more than 100 stars within 100 pc are already close to intersecting this SETI Ellipsoid, providing numerous targets for real-time monitoring within ~3$^\circ$ of SN 2023ixf. We are commencing a radio technosignature monitoring campaign of these targets with the Allen Telescope Array and the Green Bank Telescope.

=== arXiv:2305.18517v2  [2023-05-29]
TITLE  : Dark matter vorticity and velocity dispersion from truncated Dyson$\unicode{x2013}$Schwinger equations
AUTHORS: Alaric Erschfeld, Stefan Floerchinger
JOURNAL: JCAP 02 (2024) 053
DOI    : 10.1088/1475-7516/2024/02/053
ABS    : Large-scale structure formation is studied in a kinetic theory approach, extending the standard perfect pressureless fluid description for dark matter by including the velocity dispersion tensor as a dynamical degree of freedom. The evolution of power spectra for density, velocity and velocity dispersion degrees of freedom is investigated in a non-perturbative approximation scheme based on the Dyson$\unicode{x2013}$Schwinger equation. In particular, the generation of vorticity and velocity dispersion is studied and predictions for the corresponding power spectra are made, which qualitatively agree well with results obtained from $N$-body simulations. It is found that velocity dispersion grows strongly due to non-linear effects and at late times its mean value seems to be largely independent of the initial conditions. By taking this into account, a rather realistic picture of non-linear large-scale structure formation can be obtained, albeit the numerical treatment remains challenging, especially for very cold dark matter models.

=== arXiv:2305.15733v2  [2023-05-25]
TITLE  : Black hole scalarizations induced by parity violations
AUTHORS: Hao-Jie Lin, Tao Zhu, Shao-Jun Zhang, Anzhong Wang
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. D 108, 044005 (2023)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevD.108.044005
ABS    : It is well-known that parity symmetry is broken in the weak interaction but conserved for Einstein's general relativity and Maxwell's electromagnetic theory. Nevertheless, parity symmetry could also be violated in the gravitational/electromagnetic sectors if a fundamental scalar field couples to the parity-violating gravitational/electromagnetic curvature terms. Such parity-violating terms, which flip signs under reversed spatial directions, can inevitably lead to a negative effective mass squared for the scalar field perturbations near nonspherically symmetric black holes and thus are expected to trigger tachyonic instability. As illustrative examples, we show that the scalar field coupled to gravitational/electromagnetic Chern-Simons terms near a Kerr-Newmann spacetime can develop tachyonic instabilities, leading to equilibrium scalar field configurations in certain parameter regions of black holes. This instability, which is an indication of the black hole scalarization process, can occur in a broad class of nonspherically symmetric black holes and parity-violating theories.

=== arXiv:2305.10364v1  [2023-05-17]
TITLE  : A catalog of collected debris disks: properties, classifications and correlations between disks and stars/planets
AUTHORS: Peng-cheng Cao, Qiong Liu, Neng-Hui Liao, Qian-cheng Yang, Dong Huang
DOI    : 10.1088/1674-4527/acd591
ABS    : We have collected a catalog of 1095 debris disks with properties and classification (resolved, planet, gas) information. From the catalog, we defined a less biased sample with 612 objects and presented the distributions of their stellar and disk properties to search for correlations between disks and stars. We found debris disks were widely distributed from B to M-type stars while planets were mostly found around solar-type stars, gases were easier to detect around early-type stars and resolved disks were mostly distributed from A to G- type stars. The fractional luminosity dropped off with stellar age and planets were mostly found around old stars while gas-detected disks were much younger. The dust temperature of both one-belt systems and cold components in two-belt systems increased with distance while decreasing with stellar age. In addition, we defined a less biased planet sample with 211 stars with debris disks but no planets and 35 stars with debris disks and planets and found the stars with debris disks and planets had higher metallicities than stars with debris disks but no planets. Among the 35 stars with debris disks and planets, we found the stars with disks and cool Jupiters were widely distributed with age from 10 Myr to 10 Gyr and metallicity from -1.56 to 0.28 while the other three groups tended to be old (&gt; 4Gyr) and metal-rich (&gt; -0.3). Besides, the eccentricities of cool Jupiters are distributed from 0 to 0.932 wider than the other three types of planets (&lt; 0.3).

=== arXiv:2304.09942v1  [2023-04-19]
TITLE  : NGTS clusters survey IV. Search for Dipper stars in the Orion Nebular Cluster
AUTHORS: Tyler Moulton, Simon T Hodgkin, Gareth D Smith, Joshua T Briegal, Edward Gillen, Jack S Acton, Matthew P Battley, Matthew R Burleigh
JOURNAL: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 521, Issue 2, May 2023
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stad364
ABS    : The dipper is a novel class of young stellar object associated with large drops in flux on the order of 10 to 50 per cent lasting for hours to days. Too significant to arise from intrinsic stellar variability, these flux drops are currently attributed to disk warps, accretion streams, and/or transiting circumstellar dust. Dippers have been previously studied in young star forming regions including the Orion Complex. Using Next Generation Transit Survey (NGTS) data, we identified variable stars from their lightcurves. We then applied a machine learning random forest classifier for the identification of new dipper stars in Orion using previous variable classifications as a training set. We discover 120 new dippers, of which 83 are known members of the Complex. We also investigated the occurrence rate of disks in our targets, again using a machine learning approach. We find that all dippers have disks, and most of these are full disks. We use dipper periodicity and model-derived stellar masses to identify the orbital distance to the inner disk edge for dipper objects, confirming that dipper stars exhibit strongly extended sublimation radii, adding weight to arguments that the inner disk edge is further out than predicted by simple models. Finally, we determine a dipper fraction (the fraction of stars with disks which are dippers) for known members of 27.8 plus minus 2.9 per cent. Our findings represent the largest population of dippers identified in a single cluster to date.

=== arXiv:2304.07695v1  [2023-04-16]
TITLE  : MASTER OT J055845.55+391533.4: SU UMa star with a dip and long rebrightening
AUTHORS: Taichi Kato, Hiroshi Itoh, Tonny Vanmunster, Seiichiro Kiyota, Katsuaki Kubodera, Pavol A. Dubovsky, Igor Kudzej, Tomas Medulka
ABS    : We analyzed Asteroid Terrestrial-impact Last Alert System (ATLAS), Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF) and All-Sky Automated Survey for Supernovae (ASAS-SN) data of MASTER OT J055845.55+391533.4 and found that this object repeats superoutburst with a dip in the middle of the outburst followed by long and sometimes oscillating rebrightening, just like a WZ Sge-type dwarf nova or an AM CVn-type object. The mean supercycle was 298(8) d, too short for a WZ Sge star, but with only a few normal outbursts. We also observed the 2023 February-March superoutburst and established the superhump period of 0.05509(2) d. This period appears to exclude the possibility of an AM CVn star. Although the 2023 observations could not detect superhumps after the dip, the 2014, 2016 and 2021 data seem to suggest that low-amplitude superhumps were present during the rebrightening phase. We note that a dip during a superoutburst is a feature common to the unusual SU UMa-type dwarf nova MASTER OT J172758.09+380021.5 during some of its superoutbursts. These objects may comprise a new class of rebrightening phenomenon in SU UMa-type dwarf novae.

=== arXiv:2304.05439v1  [2023-04-11]
TITLE  : Proceedings 14th Workshop on Programming Language Approaches to Concurrency and Communication-cEntric Software
AUTHORS: Ilaria Castellani, Alceste Scalas
JOURNAL: EPTCS 378, 2023
DOI    : 10.4204/EPTCS.378
ABS    : This volume contains the proceedings of PLACES 2023, the 14th edition of the Workshop on Programming Language Approaches to Concurrency and Communication-cEntric Software. The PLACES workshop series offers a forum for researchers from different fields to exchange new ideas about the challenges of modern and future programming, where concurrency and distribution are the norm rather than a marginal concern. PLACES 2023 was held on 22 April 2023 in Paris, France. The programme included keynote talks by Marieke Huisman and Vasco T. Vasconcelos, presentations of five research papers, and six talks about preliminary or already-published work that could foster interesting discussion during the workshop. These proceedings contain the five accepted research papers, the abstracts of the keynote talks, and a list of the other contributions.

=== arXiv:2304.02289v2  [2023-04-05]
TITLE  : The Lense-Thirring effect on the Galilean moons of Jupiter
AUTHORS: Lorenzo Iorio
JOURNAL: Universe 2023, 9(7), 304
DOI    : 10.3390/universe9070304
ABS    : The perspectives of detecting the general relativistic gravitomagnetic Lense-Thirring effect on the orbits of the Galilean moons of Jupiter induced by the angular momentum ${\boldsymbol{S}}$ of the latter are preliminarily investigated. Numerical integrations over one century show that the expected gravitomagnetic signatures of the directly observable right ascension $α$ and declination $δ$ of the satellites are as large as tens of arcseconds for Io, while for Callisto they drop to the $\simeq 0.2\,\mathrm{arcseconds}$ level. Major competing effects due to the mismodeling in the zonal multipoles $J_\ell,\,\ell=2,\,3,\,4,\,\ldots$ of the Jovian non-spherically symmetric gravity field and in the Jupiter's spin axis ${\boldsymbol{\hat{k}}}$ should have a limited impact, especially in view of the future improvements in determining such parameters expected after the completion of the ongoing Juno mission in the next few years. On the other hand, the masses of the satellites, responsible of their mutual $N-$body perturbations, should be known better than now. Such a task should be accomplished with the future JUICE and Clipper missions to the Jovian system. Present-day accuracy in knowing the orbits of the Jovian Galilean satellites is of the order of 10 milliarcseconds, to be likely further improved thanks to the ongoing re-reduction of old photographic plates. This suggests that, in the next future, the Lense-Thirring effect in the main Jovian system of moons might be detectable with dedicated data reductions in which the gravitomagnetic field is explicitly modeled and solved-for.

=== arXiv:2303.16330v1  [2023-03-28]
TITLE  : Disk or Companion: Characterizing Excess Infrared Flux in Seven White Dwarf Systems with Near-Infrared Spectroscopy
AUTHORS: Dylan Owens, Siyi Xu, Elena Manjavacas, S. K. Leggett, S. L. Casewell, Erik Dennihy, Patrick Dufour, Beth L. Klein
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/accc25
ABS    : Excess infrared flux from white dwarf stars is likely to arise from a dusty debris disk or a cool companion. In this work, we present near-infrared spectroscopic observations with Keck/MOSFIRE, Gemini/GNIRS, and Gemini/Flamingos-2 of seven white dwarfs with infrared excesses identified in previous studies. We confirmed the presence of dust disks around four white dwarfs (Gaia J0611-6931, Gaia J0006+2858, Gaia J2100+2122, and WD 0145+234) as well as two new white dwarf brown dwarf pairs (Gaia J0052+4505 and Gaia J0603+4518). In three of the dust disk systems, we detected for the first time near-infrared metal emissions (Mg I, Fe I, and Si I) from a gaseous component of the disk. We developed a new Markov Chain Monte Carlo framework to constrain the geometric properties of each dust disk. In three systems, the dust disk and the gas disk appear to coincide spatially. For the two brown dwarf white dwarf pairs, we identified broad molecular absorption features typically seen in L dwarfs. The origin of the infrared excess around Gaia J0723+6301 remains a mystery. Our study underlines how near-infrared spectroscopy can be used to determine sources of infrared excess around white dwarfs, which has now been detected in hundreds of systems photometrically.

=== arXiv:2303.11544v1  [2023-03-21]
TITLE  : A Constraint on the Amount of Hydrogen from the CO Chemistry in Debris Disks
AUTHORS: Kazunari Iwasaki, Hiroshi Kobayashi, Aya E. Higuchi, Yuri Aikawa
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/acc524
ABS    : The faint CO gases in debris disks are easily dissolved into C by UV irradiation, while CO can be reformed via reactions with hydrogen. The abundance ratio of C/CO could thus be a probe of the amount of hydrogen in the debris disks. We conduct radiative transfer calculations with chemical reactions for debris disks. For a typical dust-to-gas mass ratio of debris disks, CO formation proceeds without the involvement of H$_2$ because a small amount of dust grains makes H$_2$ formation inefficient. We find that the CO to C number density ratio depends on a combination of $n_\mathrm{H}Z^{0.4}χ^{-1.1}$, where $n_\mathrm{H}$ is the hydrogen nucleus number density, $Z$ is the metallicity, and $χ$ is the FUV flux normalized by the Habing flux. Using an analytic formula for the CO number density, we give constraints on the amount of hydrogen and metallicity for debris disks. CO formation is accelerated by excited H$_2$ either when the dust-to-gas mass ratio is increased or the energy barrier of chemisorption of hydrogen on the dust surface is decreased. This acceleration of CO formation occurs only when the shielding effects of CO are insignificant. In shielded regions, the CO fractions are almost independent of the parameters of dust grains.

=== arXiv:2303.08390v1  [2023-03-15]
TITLE  : Photometric and Spectroscopic monitoring of YSOs in nearby star forming regions. I. Eruptive YSOs
AUTHORS: Carlos Contreras Peña, Gregory J. Herczeg, Mizna Ashraf, Jessy Jose, Ho-Gyu Lee, Doug Johnstone, Jeong-Eun Lee, Xing-yu Zhou
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stad820
ABS    : Mid-infrared (mid-IR) variability in young stellar objects (YSOs) is driven by several physical mechanisms, which produce a variety of amplitudes and light curve shapes. One of these mechanisms, variable disk accretion is predicted by models of episodic accretion to drive secular variability, including in the mid-IR. Because the largest accretion bursts are rare, adding new objects to the YSO eruptive variable class aids our understanding of the episodic accretion phenomenon and its possible impact on stellar and planetary formation. A previous analysis of 6.5 yr of NeoWISE light curves (3-5 $μ$m) of ~7000 nearby YSOs found an increase in the fraction of variability and variability amplitude for objects at younger stages of evolution. To help interpret these light curves, we have obtained low- and high-resolution near-IR spectra of 78 objects from this sample of YSOs. In this work, we present the analysis of nine nearby YSOs (d$&lt;$1 kpc) that show the characteristics of known classes of eruptive variable YSOs. We find one FUor-like source, one EX Lupi-type object, and six YSOs with mixed characteristics, or V1647 Ori-like objects. The varied characteristics observed in our sample are consistent with recent discoveries of eruptive YSOs. We discuss how a wide range in YSO outburst parameters (central mass, maximum accretion rate during outburst, evolutionary stage and/or instability leading to the outburst) may play a significant role in the observed spectro-photometric properties of YSO outbursts.

=== arXiv:2303.07086v1  [2023-03-13]
TITLE  : Non-radial oscillations and gravitational wave emission of hybrid neutron stars
AUTHORS: Zi-Yue Zheng, Ting-Ting Sun, Huan Chen, Jin-Biao Wei, G. F. Burgio, H. -J. Schulze
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevD.107.103048
ABS    : We investigate non-radial oscillations of pure and hybrid neutron stars, employing equations of state of nuclear matter from Brueckner-Hartree-Fock theory, and of quark matter from the Dyson-Schwinger quark model, performing a Gibbs construction for the mixed phase in hybrid stars. Characteristic differences between neutron-star and hybrid-star $g_1$-mode oscillation frequencies, damping times, and gravitational wave strains are pointed out. Prospects of observations are also discussed.

=== arXiv:2303.02147v3  [2023-03-03]
TITLE  : Exploring the diversity and similarity of radially anisotropic Milky Way-like stellar haloes: implications for disrupted dwarf galaxy searches
AUTHORS: Matthew D. A. Orkney, Chervin F. P. Laporte, Robert J. J. Grand, Facundo A. Gómez, Freeke van de Voort, Azadeh Fattahi, Federico Marinacci, Rüdiger Pakmor
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stad2361
ABS    : We investigate the properties of mergers comparable to the Gaia-Sausage-Enceladus (GSE) using cosmological hydrodynamical simulations of Milky Way-like galaxies. The merger progenitors span an order of magnitude in their peak stellar mass ($3\times10^8&lt;M_{\star}/\rm{M}_{\odot}&lt;4\times10^9$) and include both rotation and pressure-supported galaxies ($0.10&lt;D/T&lt;0.77$). In a minority of cases, the GSE-like debris is comprised of stars from more than one merger progenitor. However, there is a close similarity in their chemodynamical properties and the triaxial shapes of their debris, and so it is not always possible to distinguish them. The merger progenitors host a variety of luminous satellites ($0-8$ with $M_{\star}&gt;10^6\,\rm{M}_{\odot}$), but most of these do not follow the merger to low orbital energies. Between $0-1$ of these satellites may survive to $z=0$, but with no clear signatures of their past association. We show that the fraction of stars originating from GSE-like mergers is reduced for lower metallicities (reaching a minimum around $\text{[Fe/H]} = -2$), and also within $5\,$kpc of the galactic centre. Whilst these central regions are dominated by in-situ stars, the ex-situ fraction trends towards a 100 per cent asymptote when considering the most metal-poor stars ($\text{[Fe/H]}\ll-2.5$). Considering this, its near proximity, and its small volume on the sky, the Galactic centre lends itself as a prime environment in the search for the stars from the earliest galaxies, whilst avoiding contamination from GSE stars.

=== arXiv:2302.10961v1  [2023-02-21]
TITLE  : Imaging of exocomets with infrared interferometry
AUTHORS: Markus Janson, Jayshil Patel, Simon C. Ringqvist, Cicero Lu, Isabel Rebollido, Tim Lichtenberg, Alexis Brandeker, Daniel Angerhausen
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 671, A114 (2023)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202245402
ABS    : Active comets have been detected in several exoplanetary systems, although so far only indirectly, when the dust or gas in the extended coma has transited in front of the stellar disk. The large optical surface and relatively high temperature of an active cometary coma also makes it suitable to study with direct imaging, but the angular separation is generally too small to be reachable with present-day facilities. However, future imaging facilities with the ability to detect terrestrial planets in the habitable zones of nearby systems will also be sensitive to exocomets in such systems. Here we examine several aspects of exocomet imaging, particularly in the context of the Large Interferometer for Exoplanets (LIFE), which is a proposed space mission for infrared imaging and spectroscopy through nulling interferometry. We study what capabilities LIFE would have for acquiring imaging and spectroscopy of exocomets, based on simulations of the LIFE performance as well as statistical properties of exocomets that have recently been deduced from transit surveys. We find that for systems with extreme cometary activities such as beta Pictoris, sufficiently bright comets may be so abundant that they overcrowd the LIFE inner field of view. More nearby and moderately active systems such as epsilon Eridani or Fomalhaut may turn out to be optimal targets. If the exocomets have strong silicate emission features, such as in comet Hale-Bopp, it may become possible to study the mineralogy of individual exocometary bodies. We also discuss the possibility of exocomets as false positives for planets, with recent deep imaging of alpha Centauri as one hypothetical example. Such contaminants could be common, primarily among young debris disk stars, but should be rare among the main sequence population. We discuss strategies to mitigate the risk of any such false positives.

=== arXiv:2302.01850v1  [2023-02-03]
TITLE  : Searching for the nature of stars with debris disks and planets
AUTHORS: R. de la Reza, C. Chavero, S. Roca-Fàbrega, F. Llorente de Andrés, P. Cruz, C. Cifuentes
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 671, A136 (2023)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202245222
ABS    : The nature of the few known solar-mass stars simultaneously containing debris disks and planets remains an open question. A number of works have shown that this property appears to be independent of planetary masses as well as of stellar age, but possible correlations with stellar kinematics and metallicity have not been investigated. In this paper, we show that the majority of known stars containing both debris disks and planets belong to the metal-enriched Galactic thin disk. The few exceptions are stars that seem to be born in the star formation peak occurring in times of thick disk formation (i.e., HD 10700, HD 20794, and HD 40307), that is, between 11 and 8 Gyr. The mass of the dusty disk of these three old stars measured at 70 $μ$m is very small - in fact, it is lower than that of the Kuiper belt of our Solar system by several orders of magnitude. These results are not surprising, as they remain within the values expected for the stellar disk evolution of such primitive stars. In parallel, we found another six thick-disk stars containing only debris disks or planets. These results enable us to establish a correlation between stellar metallicity and the mass of the dust disk modulated by the different formation epochs of the thick and thin Galactic disks.

=== arXiv:2301.10591v1  [2023-01-25]
TITLE  : Interstellar Extinction in Galactic Cirri in SDSS Stripe 82
AUTHORS: G. A. Gontcharov, A. V. Mosenkov, S. S. Savchenko, V. B. Il'in, A. A. Marchuk, A. A. Smirnov, P. A. Usachev, D. M. Polyakov
JOURNAL: Astronomy Letters, 2022, 48, pp. 503-516
DOI    : 10.1134/S1063773722090031
ABS    : We have applied the method of star counts with Wolf diagrams to determine the interstellar extinction in five Galactic cirri in Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) Stripe 82. For this purpose, we have used the photometry of stars in the GALEX NUV filter and the photometry of red dwarfs in five SDSS bands and four SkyMapper Southern Sky Survey DR2 bands. We have identified the cirri as sky regions with an enhanced infrared emission from the Schlegel+1998 map. The extinction in them has been calculated relative to the nearby comparison regions with a reduced emission. The results for different filters agree well, giving the range of distances and the extinction law for each cirrus. The distances in the range 140--415 pc found are consistent with the 3D reddening maps. In the range between the $B$ and $V$ filters the extinctions found are consistent with the estimates from Schlegel+1998 for the Cardelli+1989 extinction law with $R_\mathrm{V}=3.1$. However, the extinctions found for all of the filters are best described not by the Cardelli+1989 extinction law with some $R_\mathrm{V}=3.1$, but by the inverse proportionality of the extinction and wavelength with its own coefficient for each cirrus. In one of the cirri our results suggest a very slight decrease in extinction with wavelength, i.e., a large contribution of gray extinction. In the remaining cirri a manifestation of gray extinction is not ruled out either. This is consistent with the previous measurements of the extinction law far from the Galactic midplane.

=== arXiv:2301.09988v1  [2023-01-22]
TITLE  : Distant foreground and the Hubble constant tension
AUTHORS: Vladimir Yershov
JOURNAL: Proc. of the 56th Rencontres de Moriond - 2022 "Cosmology", La Thuile, Italy, E.A.J. Dumarchez and J. Trân Thanh Vân (eds.), ARISF Publ., 2022, 237-240
DOI    : 10.58027/3q8k-ew90
ABS    : It is possible to explain the discrepancy (tension) between the local measurement of the cosmological parameter $H_0$ (the Hubble constant) and its value derived from the Planck-mission measurements of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) by considering contamination of the CMB by emission from some medium surrounding distant extragalactic sources (a distant foreground), such as extremely cold coarse-grain (grey) dust. As any other foreground, it would alter the CMB power spectrum and contribute to the dispersion of CMB temperature fluctuations. By generating random samples of CMB with different dispersions, we have checked that the increased dispersion leads to a smaller estimated value of $H_0$, the rest of the cosmological model parameters remaining fixed. This might explain the reduced value of the {\it Planck}-derived parameter $H_0$ with respect to the local measurements. The cold grey dust for some time has been suspected to populate intergalactic space and it is known to be almost undetectable, except for the effect of dimming remote extragalactic sources.

=== arXiv:2301.06819v1  [2023-01-17]
TITLE  : Massive pre-main-sequence stars in M17 -- Modelling hydrogen and dust in MYSO disks
AUTHORS: Frank Backs, J. Poorta, Ch. Rab, A. R. Derkink, A. de Koter, L. Kaper, M. C. Ramírez-Tannus, I. Kamp
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 671, A13 (2023)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202244817
ABS    : The young massive-star-forming region M17 contains optically visible massive pre-main-sequence stars that are surrounded by circumstellar disks. Such disks are expected to disappear when these stars reach the main sequence. The physical and dynamical structure of these remnant disks are poorly constrained, especially the inner regions where accretion, photo-evaporation, and companion formation and migration may be ongoing. We aim to constrain the physical properties of the inner parts of the circumstellar disks of massive young stellar objects B243 (6 Msun) and B331 (12 Msun), two systems for which the central star has been detected and characterized previously despite strong dust extinction. Two-dimensional radiation thermo-chemical modelling with ProDiMo of double-peaked hydrogen lines of the Paschen and Brackett series observed with X-shooter was used to probe the properties of the inner disks. Additionally, the dust structure was studied by fitting the optical and near-infrared spectral energy distribution. B243 features a hot gaseous inner disk with dust at the sublimation radius at 3 AU. The disk appears truncated at roughly 6.5 AU; a cool outer disk of gas and dust may be present, but it cannot be detected with our data. B331 also has a hot gaseous inner disk. A gap separates the inner disk from a colder dusty outer disk starting at up to 100 AU. In both sources the inner disk extends to almost the stellar surface. Chemistry is essential for the ionization of hydrogen in these disks. The lack of a gap between the central objects and these disks suggests that they accrete through boundary-layer accretion. This would exclude the stars having a strong magnetic field. Their structures suggest that both disks are transitional in nature, that is to say they are in the process of being cleared, either through boundary-layer accretion, photo-evaporation, or through companion activity.

=== arXiv:2301.05614v1  [2023-01-13]
TITLE  : Wrapping dynamics and full uptake conditions for nonspherical active nanoparticles
AUTHORS: Ke Xiao, Rui Ma, Chen-Xu Wu
ABS    : The cellular uptake of self-propelled nanoparticles (NPs) or viruses, usually nonspherical, by cell membrane is crucial in many biological processes. In this study, using Onsager variational principle, we obtain a general wrapping equation for nonspherical self-propelled nanoparticles. Two analytical critical conditions are theoretically derived, one for the continuous full uptake of prolate particles and the other for snapthrough full wrapping of oblate particles. They capture considerably well the full uptake critical boundaries in the phase diagrams constructed in terms of active force, aspect ratio, adhesion energy density, and membrane tension based on numerical calculations. It is found that enhancing activity (active force), reducing effective dynamic viscosity, increasing adhesion energy density, and decreasing membrane tension, can significantly improve the wrapping efficiency for the self-propelled particles. These results elucidate some of the previous specific investigations conclusively and may offer novel possibilities for designing an effective active NP-based vehicle for controlled drug delivery.

=== arXiv:2301.02768v2  [2023-01-07]
TITLE  : Hadron-quark phase transition in neutron star by combining the relativistic Brueckner-Hartree-Fock theory and Dyson-Schwinger equation approach
AUTHORS: Pianpian Qin, Zhan Bai, Sibo Wang, Chencan Wang, Si-xue Qin
JOURNAL: Phys.Rev.D 107, 103009 (2023)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevD.107.103009
ABS    : Starting from the relativistic Brueckner-Hartree-Fock theory for nuclear matter and the Dyson-Schwinger equation approach for quark matter, the possible hadron-quark phase transition in the interior of a neutron star is explored. The first-order phase transition and crossover are studied by performing the Maxwell construction and three-window construction respectively. The mass-radius relation and the tidal deformability of the hybrid star are calculated and compared to the joint mass-radius observation of a neutron star and the constraints from gravitational wave detection. For the Maxwell construction, no stable quark core is found in the interior of a neutron star. For the three-window construction, the parameters of the smooth interpolation function are chosen in such a way to keep the thermodynamic stability and lead to a moderate crossover density region. To support a two-solar-mass neutron star under the three-window construction, the effective width of medium screening effects in quark matter should be around $0.35$ GeV.

=== arXiv:2301.02072v3  [2023-01-05]
TITLE  : A Simple Derivation of the Gertsenshtein Effect
AUTHORS: Andrea Palessandro, Tony Rothman
JOURNAL: Phys. Dark Univ. 40 (2023) 101187
DOI    : 10.1016/j.dark.2023.101187
ABS    : As shown by Gertsenshtein in 1961, an external magnetic field can catalyze the mixing of graviton and photon states in a manner analogous to neutrino-flavor oscillations. We first present a straightforward derivation of the mechanism by a method based on unpublished notes of Freeman Dyson. We next extend his method to include boundary conditions and retrieve the results of Boccaletti et al. from 1970. We point out that, although the coupling between the graviton and photon states is extremely weak, the large magnetic fields around neutron stars $\sim 10^{14}$ G make the Gertsenshtein effect a plausible source of gravitons. We also point out that axion-photon mixing, a subject of active current research, is essentially the same process as the Gertsenshtein effect, and so the general mechanism may be of broad astrophysical and cosmological interest.

=== arXiv:2301.01957v1  [2023-01-05]
TITLE  : A practicable estimation of opening angle of dust torus in Type-1.9 AGN with double-peaked broad H$α$
AUTHORS: XueGuang Zhang
ABS    : In this manuscript, an independent method is proposed to estimate opening angle of dust torus in AGN, through unique properties of Type-1.9 AGN with double-peaked broad H$α$ (Type-1.9 DPAGN) coming from central accretion disk. Type-1.9 AGN without broad H$β$ can be expected by the commonly accepted unified model of AGN, considering central BLRs seriously obscured by dust torus with its upper boundary in the line of sight. For the unique Type-1.9 DPAGN, accretion disk originations of double-peaked broad H$α$ can be applied to determine the inclination angle of the central accretion disk, which is well accepted as substitute of the half opening angle of the central dust torus. Then, among low redshift Type-1.9 DPAGN in SDSS, SDSS J1607+3319 at redshift 0.063 is collected, and the half opening angle of the central dust torus is determined to be around 46$\pm$4\degr, after considering disfavoured BBH system to explain the double-peaked broad H$α$ through long-term none variabilities and disfavoured local physical conditions to explain disappearance of broad H$β$ through virial BH mass properties. The results indicate that more detailed studying on dust torus of AGN can be appropriately done through Type-1.9 DPAGN in the near future.

=== arXiv:2301.00705v1  [2023-01-02]
TITLE  : White Dwarfs with Infrared Excess from LAMOST Data Release 5
AUTHORS: Lin Wang, Xiaoxia Zhang, Junfeng Wang, Zhi-Xiang Zhang, Taotao Fang, Wei-Min Gu, Jincheng Guo, Xiaochuan Jiang
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/acaf5a
ABS    : Infrared excess is an important probe of sub-stellar companions and/or debris disks around white dwarfs (WDs). Such systems are still rare for in-depth understanding of their formation and long-term evolution. One of the largest spectroscopic surveys carried out by the Large sky Area Multi-Object fiber Spectroscopic Telescope (LAMOST) recently released more than $3000$ WDs, a significant fraction of which have not undergone excess search. Here we present cross-correlation of LAMOST DR5 WD catalog with the Pan-STARRS, SDSS, UKIDSS, 2MASS, and {\it WISE}. By performing SED (spectral energy distribution) fitting for 846 WDs with $WISE$ detections, we identify 50 candidates with infrared excess, including 7 candidate WD+M dwarf binaries, 31 candidate WD+brown dwarf (BD) binaries and 12 candidate WD+dust disk systems. 8 of the dust disk systems are our new identifications. Utilizing a systematic survey with accurate stellar parameters derived from spectral fitting, our work is an important addition to previous searches for infrared excess from SDSS and {\it Gaia} WDs, and provides a significant ($\gtrsim8\%$) complement to current database of WDs with candidate BD companions and dust disks. The frequencies of WD+BD binaries and WD+dust disk systems are constrained to be $\lesssim3.7\%$ and $\sim1.4\%$, respectively. The properties of candidate dust disk systems are discussed. All of our candidates require follow-up observations for confirmation owing to limited spatial resolution of {\it WISE}.

=== arXiv:2212.14248v1  [2022-12-29]
TITLE  : Mid-infrared spectra of the shocked Murchison CM chondrite: Comparison with astronomical observations of dust in debris disks
AUTHORS: A. Morlok, C. Koike, N. Tomioka, I. Mann, K. Tomoeka
JOURNAL: Icarus (2010), Volume 207, Issue 1, p. 45-53
DOI    : 10.1016/j.icarus.2009.11.018
ABS    : We present laboratory mid-infrared transmission/absorption spectra obtained from matrix of the hydrated Murchison CM meteorite experimentally shocked at peak pressures of 10 to 49 GPa, and compare them to astronomical observations of circumstellar dust in different stages of the formation of planetary systems. The laboratory spectra of the Murchison samples exhibit characteristic changes in the infrared features. A weakly shocked sample (shocked at 10 GPa) shows almost no changes from the unshocked sample dominated by hydrous silicate (serpentine). Moderately shocked samples (21 to 34 GPa) have typical serpentine features gradually replaced by bands of amorphous material and olivine with increasing shock pressure. A strongly shocked sample (36 GPa) shows major changes due to decomposition of the serpentine and due to devolatilization. A shock melted sample (49 GPa) shows features of olivine recrystallized from melted material. The spectra of highly shocked Murchison samples (36 and 49 GPa) are similar to those of dust in the debris disks of HD113766 and HD69830, and the transitional disk of HD100546. The moderately shocked samples (21 to 34 GPa) exhibit spectra similar to those of dust in the debris disks of Beta Pictoris and BD+20307, and the transitional disk of GM Aur. An average of the spectra of all Murchison samples (0 to 49 GPa) has a similarity to the spectrum of the older protoplanetary disk of SU Auriga. In the gas-rich transitional and protoplanetary disks, the abundances of amorphous silicates and gases have widely been considered to be a primary property. However, our study suggests that impact processing may play a significant role in generating secondary amorphous silicates and gases in those disks. Infrared spectra of the shocked Murchison samples are also suggesting that the comets also contain shocked Murchison-like material.

=== arXiv:2212.13959v1  [2022-12-28]
TITLE  : Mid-infrared spectra of differentiated meteorites (achondrites): Comparison with astronomical observations of dust in protoplanetary and debris disks
AUTHORS: A. Morlok, C. Koike, K. Tomeoka, A. B. Mason, C. M. Lisse, M. Anand, M. M. Grady
JOURNAL: Icarus (2012), Volume 219, Issue 1, p. 48-56
DOI    : 10.1016/j.icarus.2012.02.018
ABS    : Mid-infrared (5 micron to 25 micron) transmission/absorption spectra of differentiated meteorites (achondrites) were measured to permit comparison with astronomical observations of dust in different stages of evolution of young stellar objects. In contrast to primitive chondrites, achondrites underwent heavy metamorphism and/or extensive melting and represent more advanced stages of planetesimal evolution. Spectra were obtained from primitive achondrites (acapulcoite, winonaite, ureilite, and brachinite) and differentiated achondrites (eucrite, diogenite, aubrite, and mesosiderite silicates). The ureilite and brachinite show spectra dominated by olivine features, and the diogenite and aubrite by pyroxene features. The acapulcoite, winonaite, eucrite, and mesosiderite silicates exhibit more complex spectra, reflecting their multi-phase bulk mineralogy. Mixtures of spectra of the primitive achondrites and differentiated achondrites in various proportions show good similarities to the spectra of the few Myr old protoplanetary disks HD104237A and V410 Anon 13. A spectrum of the differentiated mesosiderite silicates is similar to the spectra of the mature debris disks HD172555 and HD165014. A mixture of spectra of the primitive ureilite and brachinite is similar to the spectrum of the debris disk HD113766. The results raise the possibility that materials produced in the early stage of planetesimal differentiation occur in the protoplanetary and debris disks.

=== arXiv:2212.12176v1  [2022-12-23]
TITLE  : Detection of Solar Filaments using Suncharts from Kodaikanal Solar Observatory Archive Employing a Clustering Approach
AUTHORS: Aditya Priyadarshi, Manjunath Hegde, Bibhuti Kumar Jha, Subhamoy Chatterjee, Sudip Mandal, Mayukh Chowdhury, Dipankar Banerjee
JOURNAL: The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 943, Number 2, 2023
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/acaefb
ABS    : With over 100 years of solar observations, the Kodaikanal Solar Observatory (KoSO) is a one-of-a-kind solar data repository in the world. Among its many data catalogues, the `suncharts' at KoSO are of particular interest. These Suncharts (1904-2020) are coloured drawings of different solar features, such as sunspots, plages, filaments, and prominences, made on papers with a Stonyhurst latitude-longitude grid etched on them. In this paper, we analyze this unique data by first digitizing each suncharts using an industry-standard scanner and saving those digital images in high-resolution `.tif' format. We then examine the Cycle~19 and Cycle~20 data (two of the strongest cycles of the last century) with the aim of detecting filaments. To this end, we employed `k-means clustering' method and obtained different filament parameters such as position, tilt angle, length, and area. Our results show that filament length (and area) increases with latitude and the pole-ward migration is clearly dominated by a particular tilt sign. Lastly, we cross-verified our findings with results from KoSO digitized photographic plate database for the overlapping time period and obtained a good agreement between them. This work, acting as a proof-of-the-concept, will kick-start new efforts to effectively use the entire hand-drawn series of multi-feature, full-disk solar data and enable researchers to extract new sciences, such as the generation of pseudo magnetograms for the last 100 years.

=== arXiv:2212.05137v1  [2022-12-09]
TITLE  : A Green Bank Telescope search for narrowband technosignatures between 1.1-1.9 GHz during 12 Kepler planetary transits
AUTHORS: Sofia Z. Sheikh, Shubham Kanodia, Emily Lubar, William P. Bowman, Caleb I. Cañas, Christian Gilbertson, Mariah G. MacDonald, Jason Wright
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/aca907
ABS    : A growing avenue for determining the prevalence of life beyond Earth is to search for "technosignatures" from extraterrestrial intelligences/agents. Technosignatures require significant energy to be visible across interstellar space and thus intentional signals might be concentrated in frequency, in time, or in space, to be found in mutually obvious places. Therefore, it could be advantageous to search for technosignatures in parts of parameter space that are mutually-derivable to an observer on Earth and a distant transmitter. In this work, we used the L-band (1.1-1.9 GHz) receiver on the Robert C. Byrd Green Bank Telescope (GBT) to perform the first technosignature search pre-synchronized with exoplanet transits, covering 12 Kepler systems. We used the Breakthrough Listen turboSETI pipeline to flag narrowband hits ($\sim$3 Hz) using a maximum drift rate of $\pm$614.4 Hz/s and a signal-to-noise threshold of 5 - the pipeline returned $\sim 3.4 \times 10^5$ apparently-localized features. Visual inspection by a team of citizen scientists ruled out 99.6% of them. Further analysis found 2 signals-of-interest that warrant follow-up, but no technosignatures. If the signals-of-interest are not re-detected in future work, it will imply that the 12 targets in the search are not producing transit-aligned signals from 1.1-1.9 GHz with transmitter powers $&gt;$60 times that of the former Arecibo radar. This search debuts a range of innovative technosignature techniques: citizen science vetting of potential signals-of-interest, a sensitivity-aware search out to extremely high drift rates, a more flexible method of analyzing on-off cadences, and an extremely low signal-to-noise threshold.

=== arXiv:2212.03919v1  [2022-12-07]
TITLE  : Gaia22eor: Symbiotic star V2756 Sgr detected in a deep eclipse
AUTHORS: Jaroslav Merc, Hamish Barker, Rudolf Gális
JOURNAL: Res. Notes AAS 2022 6 253
DOI    : 10.3847/2515-5172/aca6ee
ABS    : V2756 Sgr is a long-known S-type symbiotic binary that was recently detected in $\sim$ 1 mag eclipse-like fading by the Gaia satellite. This behavior was reported as a Gaia Science Alert under the designation Gaia22eor. V2756 Sgr has not been reported as an eclipsing symbiotic system. In this contribution, we have investigated the recent light curves of this target obtained by Gaia and ASAS-SN survey and supplemented these data by the photometry from the ASAS survey and DASCH archive. In addition, low-resolution BP/RP spectra from Gaia were examined. Based on the presented analysis, we conclude that the observed fading is indeed an eclipse of the hot component of V2756 Sgr by the cool giant. The data also allowed us to refine the orbital period to 725 $\pm$ 3 days.

=== arXiv:2211.14945v2  [2022-11-27]
TITLE  : CSS1603+19: a low-mass polar near the cataclysmic variable period minimum
AUTHORS: Yiqi Liu, Hsiang-Chih Hwang, Nadia L. Zakamska, John R. Thorstensen
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stad1156
ABS    : CSS1603+19 is a cataclysmic variable (CV) with an orbital period of 81.96 min, near the minimal period of cataclysmic variables. It is unusual in having a strong mid-infrared excess inconsistent with thermal emission from a brown dwarf companion. Here we present time-resolved multi-wavelength observations of this system. WISE photometry indicates that the mid-infrared excess displays a one-magnitude eclipsing-like variability during the orbit. We obtained near-infrared and optical spectroscopy using Gemini, MDM and APO telescopes. Near-infrared spectra show possible cyclotron features indicating that the white dwarf has a magnetic field of about 5MG. Optical and near-infrared spectra display double-peaked emission lines, with both components showing strong radial velocity variations during the orbital period and with the broad component leading the narrow component stably by about 0.2 of the orbital phase. We construct a physical model informed by existing observations of the system and determine that one component likely originates from the accretion column onto the magnetized white dwarf in synchronous rotation with the orbital motion and the other from the Roche overflow point. This allows us to constrain the masses of the binary components to be $M_1&gt;0.24 M_{\odot}$ for the white dwarf accretor and $M_2=0.0644\pm0.0074 M_\odot$ for the donor. We classify the system as an AM Herculis star, or a polar. It has likely completed its stint on the period gap, but has not yet gone through the period bounce.

=== arXiv:2211.09160v1  [2022-11-16]
TITLE  : From Galactic Chemical Evolution to Cosmic Supernova Rates Synchronized with Core-Collapse Supernovae Limited to the Narrow Progenitor Mass Range
AUTHORS: Takuji Tsujimoto
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stac3351
ABS    : Massive ($\geq$8 $M_\odot$) stars perish via one of two fates: core-collapse supernovae (CCSNe), which release synthesized heavy elements, or failed supernovae, thereby forming black holes. In the conventional Galactic chemical evolution (GCE) scheme, a substantial portion of massive stars, e.g., all stars in the mass range of 8-100 $M_{\odot},$ are assumed to enrich the Galaxy with their nucleosynthetic products. However, this hypothesis conflicts with the observations, namely, few CCSNe whose progenitor stars are more massive than $\sim$18 $M_{\odot}.$ Here, we show that the chemical characteristics shaped by local thin disk stars are compatible with the predictions by enrichment via CCSNe limited to less massive progenitors in the new paradigm of Galactic dynamics that allows stars to migrate from the inner disk. This renewed GCE model predicts that the bursting star formation events$-$which are considered to take place in the Galactic bulge as well as in the thick disk$-$generate more numerous low-mass CCSNe than those expected from the locally determined canonical initial mass function. This finding suggests a high rate of CCSNe in early-type galaxies, which reflects a unique cosmic history of the CCSN rate. With considerable contributions from these galaxies to the cosmic star formation rates in the early Universe, we predict a more steeply increasing slope of the CCSN rate with increasing redshift than that in proportion to cosmic star formation. This predicted redshift evolution agrees well with the measured rates for 0 $\lesssim$ z $\lesssim$ 0.8; however, its predicted CCSN rate for higher-$z$ calls for more precise data from future surveys.

=== arXiv:2211.05114v1  [2022-11-09]
TITLE  : Asynchronous accretion can mimic diverse white dwarf pollutants I: core and mantle fragments
AUTHORS: Marc G. Brouwers, Amy Bonsor, Uri Malamud
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stac3316
ABS    : Polluted white dwarfs serve as astrophysical mass spectrometers - their photospheric abundances are used to infer the composition of planetary objects that accrete onto them. We show that due to asymmetries in the accretion process, the composition of the material falling onto a star may vary with time during the accretion of a single planetary body. Consequently, the instantaneous photospheric abundances of white dwarfs do not necessarily reflect the bulk composition of their pollutants, especially when their diffusion timescales are short. In particular, we predict that when an asteroid with an iron core tidally disrupts around a white dwarf, a larger share of its mantle is ejected, and that the core/mantle fraction of the accreting material varies with time during the event. Crucially, this implies that the core fraction of differentiated pollutants cannot be determined for white dwarfs with short diffusion timescales, which sample only brief episodes of longer accretion processes. The observed population of polluted white dwarfs backs up the proposed theory. More white dwarfs have accreted material with high Fe/Ca than low Fe/Ca relative to stellar abundance ratios, indicating the ejection of mantle material. Additionally, we find tentative evidence that the accretion rate of iron decreases more rapidly than that of magnesium or calcium, hinting at variability of the accreted composition. Further corroboration of the proposed theory will come from the up-coming analysis of large samples of young white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:2211.05113v1  [2022-11-09]
TITLE  : Asynchronous accretion can mimic diverse white dwarf pollutants II: water content
AUTHORS: Marc G. Brouwers, Andrew M. Buchan, Amy Bonsor, Uri Malamud, Elliot Lynch Laura Rogers, Detlev Koester
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stac3317
ABS    : Volatiles, notably water, are key to the habitability of rocky planets. The presence of water in planetary material can be inferred from the atmospheric oxygen abundances of polluted white dwarfs, but this interpretation is often complex. We study the accretion process, and find that ices may sublimate and accrete before more refractory minerals reach the star. As a result, a white dwarf's relative photospheric abundances may vary with time during a single accretion event, and do not necessarily reflect the bulk composition of a pollutant. We offer two testable predictions for this hypothesis: 1. cooler stars will more often be inferred to have accreted wet pollutants, and 2. there will be rare occurrences of accretion events with inferred volatile levels far exceeding those of pristine comets. To observationally test these predictions, we statistically constrain the water content of white dwarf pollutants. We find that in the current sample, only three stars show statistically significant evidence of water at the 2$σ$ level, due to large typical uncertainties in atmospheric abundances and accretion states. In the future, an expanded sample of polluted white dwarfs with hydrogen-dominated atmospheres will allow for the corroboration of our theoretical predictions. Our work also shows the importance of interpreting pollutant compositions statistically, and emphasizes the requirement to reduce uncertainties on measured abundances to allow for statistically significant constraints on their water content.

=== arXiv:2211.00118v1  [2022-10-31]
TITLE  : The Geometry of the G29-38 White Dwarf Dust Disk from Radiative Transfer Modeling
AUTHORS: Nicholas P. Ballering, Colette I. Levens, Kate Y. L. Su, L. Ilsedore Cleeves
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac9a4a
ABS    : Many white dwarfs host disks of dust produced by disintegrating planetesimals and revealed by infrared excesses. The disk around G29-38 was the first to be discovered and is now well-observed, yet we lack a cohesive picture of its geometry and dust properties. Here we model the G29-38 disk for the first time using radiative transfer calculations that account for radial and vertical temperature and optical depth gradients. We arrive at a set of models that can match the available infrared measurements well, although they overpredict the width of the 10 $μm$ silicate feature. The resulting set of models has a disk inner edge located at 92-100 $R_\text{WD}$ (where $R_\text{WD}$ is the white dwarf radius). This is farther from the star than inferred by previous modeling efforts due to the presence of a directly illuminated front edge to the disk. The radial width of the disk is narrow ($\leq$10 $R_\text{WD}$); such a feature could be explained by inefficient spreading or the proximity of the tidal disruption radius to the sublimation radius. The models have a half-opening angle of $\geq$1.4$^\circ$. Such structure would be in strong contradiction with the commonly employed flat-disk model analogous to the rings of Saturn, and in line with the vertical structure of main-sequence debris disks. Our results are consistent with the idea that disks are collisionally active and continuously fed with new material, rather than evolving passively after the disintegration of a single planetesimal.

=== arXiv:2210.11856v1  [2022-10-21]
TITLE  : Mid-infrared time-domain study of recent dust production events in the extreme debris disc of TYC 4209-1322-1
AUTHORS: A. Moór, P. Ábrahám, Á. Kóspál, K. Y. L. Su, G. H. Rieke, G. Cataldi, A. Bódi, Zs. Bognár
JOURNAL: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 516, Issue 4, November 2022, Pages 5684-5701
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stac2595
ABS    : Extreme debris discs are characterized by unusually strong mid-infrared excess emission, which often proves to be variable. The warm dust in these discs is of transient nature and is likely related to a recent giant collision occurring close to the star in the terrestrial region. Here we present the results of a 877 days long, gap-free photometric monitoring performed by the Spitzer Space Telescope of the recently discovered extreme debris disc around TYC 4209-1322-1. By combining these observations with other time-domain optical and mid-infrared data, we explore the disc variability of the last four decades with particular emphasis on the last 12 yr. During the latter interval the disc showed substantial changes, the most significant was the brightening and subsequent fading between 2014 and 2018 as outlined in WISE data. The Spitzer light curves outline the fading phase and a subsequent new brightening of the disc after 2018, revealing an additional flux modulation with a period of ~39 days on top of the long-term trend. We found that all these variations can be interpreted as the outcome of a giant collision that happened at an orbital radius of ~0.3 au sometime in 2014. Our analysis implies that a collision on a similar scale could have taken place around 2010, too. The fact that the disc was already peculiarly dust rich 40 yr ago, as implied by IRAS data, suggests that these dust production events belong to a chain of large impacts triggered by an earlier even more catastrophic collision.

=== arXiv:2210.07736v1  [2022-10-14]
TITLE  : High-harmonic generation in liquids with few-cycle pulses: effect of laser-pulse duration on the cut-off energy
AUTHORS: Angana Mondal, Benedikt Waser, Tadas Balciunas, Ofer Neufeld, Zhong Yin, Nicolas Tancogne-Dejean, Angel Rubio, Hans Jakob Wörner
DOI    : 10.1364/OE.496686
ABS    : High-harmonic generation (HHG) in liquids is opening new opportunities for attosecond light sources and attosecond time-resolved studies of dynamics in the liquid phase. In gas-phase HHG, few-cycle pulses are routinely used to create isolated attosecond pulses and to extend the cut-off energy. Here, we study the properties of HHG in liquids, including water and several alcohols, by continuously tuning the pulse duration of a mid-infrared driver from the multi- to the sub-two-cycle regime. Similar to the gas phase, we observe the transition from discrete odd-order harmonics to continuous extreme-ultraviolet emission. However, the cut-off energy is shown to be entirely independent of the pulse duration. This observation is confirmed by ab-initio simulations of HHG in large clusters. Our results support the notion that the cut-off energy is a fundamental property of the liquid, independent of the driving-pulse properties. Combined with the recently reported wavelength-independence of the cutoff, these results confirm the direct sensitivity of HHG to the mean-free paths of slow electrons in liquids. Our results additionally imply that few-cycle mid-infrared laser pulses are suitable drivers for generating isolated attosecond pulses from liquids.

=== arXiv:2210.06922v1  [2022-10-13]
TITLE  : Extending the Sunspot Area Series from Kodaikanal Solar Observatory
AUTHORS: Bibhuti Kumar Jha, Manjunath Hegde, Aditya Priyadarshi, Sudip Mandal, B Ravindra, Dipankar Banerjee
DOI    : 10.3389/fspas.2022.1019751
ABS    : Kodaikanal Solar Observatory (KoSO) possesses one of world's longest and homogeneous records of sunspot observations that span more than a century (1904-2017). Interestingly, these observations (originally recorded in photographic plates/films) were taken with the same setup over this entire time period which makes this data unique and best suitable for long-term solar variability studies. A large part of this data, between 1921-2011, were digitized earlier and a catalog containing the detected sunspot parameters (e.g., area and location) was published in Mandal et al.(2017). In this article, we extend the earlier catalog by including new sets of data between 1904-1921 and 2011-2017. To this end, we digitize and calibrate these new datasets which include resolving the issue of random image orientation. We fix this by comparing the KoSO images with co-temporal data from Royal Greenwich Observatory. Following that, a semi-automated sunspot detection and automated umbra detection algorithm are implemented onto these calibrated images to detect sunspots and umbra. Additionally, during this catalog updation, we also filled data gaps in the existing KoSO sunspot catalog (1921-2011) by virtue of re-calibrating the 'rouge' plates. This updated sunspot area series covering nearly 115 years (1904-2017) are being made available to the community and will be a unique source to study the long term variability of the Sun

=== arXiv:2209.14327v2  [2022-09-28]
TITLE  : unTimely: a Full-sky, Time-Domain unWISE Catalog
AUTHORS: A. M. Meisner, D. Caselden, E. F. Schlafly, F. Kiwy
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/aca2ab
ABS    : We present the unTimely Catalog, a deep time-domain catalog of detections based on Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) and NEOWISE observations spanning the 2010 through 2020 time period. Detections are extracted from 'time-resolved unWISE coadds', which stack together each biannual sky pass of WISE imaging to create a set of ~16 all-sky maps (per band), each much deeper and cleaner than individual WISE exposures. unTimely incorporates the W1 (3.4 micron) and W2 (4.6 micron) channels, meaning that our data set effectively consists of ~32 full-sky unWISE catalogs. We run the crowdsource crowded-field point source photometry pipeline (Schlafly et al. 2018) on each epochal coadd independently, with low detection thresholds: S/N = 4.0 (2.5) in W1 (W2). In total, we tabulate and publicly release 23.5 billion (19.9 billion) detections at W1 (W2). unTimely is ~1.3 mag deeper than the WISE/NEOWISE Single Exposure Source Tables near the ecliptic, with further enhanced depth toward higher ecliptic latitudes. The unTimely Catalog is primarily designed to enable novel searches for faint, fast-moving objects, such as Y dwarfs and/or late-type (T/Y) subdwarfs in the Milky Way's thick disk or halo. unTimely will also facilitate other time-domain science applications, such as all-sky studies of quasar variability at mid-infrared wavelengths over a decade-long time baseline.

=== arXiv:2209.05679v1  [2022-09-13]
TITLE  : The Puzzle of Meteoritic Minerals Heideite and Brezinaite; Are they Iron-based Superconductors? Are they Technosignatures?
AUTHORS: B. P. Embaid
ABS    : Transition metal sulfides (Fe, V)3S4 and (Fe, Ti)3S4, with the monoclinic Cr3S4 type structure have been studied for a long time, itinerant magnetism in form of Spin density waves (SDW) have been found in these systems with different features as evidenced by 57Fe Mossbauer Spectroscopy, there is an intricate relationship between the proportion of Fe, V and Ti atoms, the degree of commensurability of the SDW and the magnetic transition temperature. These sulfides have no natural occurrence on Earth and some of these phases were detected as minerals in meteorites; the mineral Heideite in the Bustee and Kaidun meteorites, with minor proportion of Cr atoms leading to the general formula (Fe, Cr)1+x (Ti, Fe)2S4, and the mineral Brezinaite in the Tucson meteorite, with minor proportion of Fe atoms and traces of V, Ti and Mn atoms, leading to the formula (Cr2.65Fe0.20V0.09Ti0.06Mn0.04)3.04S4. In this critical review of the experimental literature, we discuss the issues that these meteoritic minerals are structurally sensitive to the method of synthesis, and so is their magnetic behavior, especially in the presence of minor and trace elements. This discussion could shed light on our knowledge in Solid State Physics and Planetary Science; these meteoritic minerals are promising candidates for iron-based superconductors because of three clues: they are layered structures, they undergo a transition to SDW with variable degree of commensurability and the minor and trace elements could act as dopants and hence suppress the SDW giving rise to superconductivity. On the other side, the genesis of these meteoritic minerals could require controlled and sophisticated process not easily found in nature. So, it is important to be open-minded and even provocative to consider the following question: Are these meteoritic minerals samples of Extraterrestrial Technosignatures?

=== arXiv:2209.03379v1  [2022-09-07]
TITLE  : A Population of Dipper Stars from the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite Mission
AUTHORS: Benjamin K. Capistrant, Melinda Soares-Furtado, Andrew Vanderburg, Marina Kounkel, Saul A. Rappaport, Mark Omohundro, Brian P. Powell, Robert Gagliano
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4365/ac9125
ABS    : Dipper stars are a classification of young stellar objects that exhibit dimming variability in their light curves, dropping in brightness by 10-50%, likely induced by occultations due to circumstellar disk material. This variability can be periodic, quasi-periodic, or aperiodic. Dipper stars have been discovered in young stellar associations via ground-based and space-based photometric surveys. We present the detection and characterization of the largest collection of dipper stars to date: 293 dipper stars, including 234 new dipper candidates. We have produced a catalog of these targets, which also includes young stellar variables that exhibit predominately bursting-like variability and symmetric variability (equal parts bursting and dipping). The total number of catalog sources is 414. These variable sources were found in a visual survey of TESS light curves, where dipping-like variability was observed. We found a typical age among our dipper sources of &lt;5 Myr, with the age distribution peaking at ~2 Myr, and a tail of the distribution extending to ages older than 20 Myr. Regardless of the age, our dipper candidates tend to exhibit infrared excess, which is indicative of the presence of disks. TESS is now observing the ecliptic plane, which is rich in young stellar associations, so we anticipate many more discoveries in the TESS dataset. A larger sample of dipper stars would enhance the census statistics of light curve morphologies and dipper ages.

=== arXiv:2208.09199v1  [2022-08-19]
TITLE  : Searching for nascent planetary nebulae: OHPNe candidates in the SPLASH survey
AUTHORS: Roldán A. Cala, José F. Gómez, Luis F. Miranda, Lucero Uscanga, Shari L. Breen, Joanne R. Dawson, Itziar de Gregorio-Monsalvo, Hiroshi Imai
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stac2341
ABS    : The evolution of asymptotic giant branch stars from the spherical symmetry into the diverse shapes of planetary nebulae (PNe) is a topic of intensive research. Young PNe provide a unique opportunity to characterize the onset of this transitional phase. In particular, OH maser-emitting PNe (OHPNe) are considered nascent PNe. In fact, only 6 OHPNe have been confirmed to date. In order to identify and characterize more OHPNe, we processed the unpublished continuum data of the interferometric follow-up of the Southern Parkes Large-Area Survey in Hydroxyl (SPLASH). We then matched the interferometric positions of OH maser and radio continuum emission, considering the latter as a possible tracer of free-free emission from photoionized gas, characteristic of PNe. We report 8 objects with a positive coincidence, 4 of which are classified as candidate OHPNe here for the first time (IRAS 16372-4808, IRAS 17494-2645, IRAS 18019-2216 and OH 341.6811+00.2634). Available evidence strongly indicates that they are evolved stars, while the comparison with confirmed OHPNe indicates that they are likely to be PNe. Their final confirmation as bona fide PNe, however, requires optical/infrared spectroscopy. The obtained spectral indices of the radio continuum emission (between $\simeq$ 0.4 - 1.3) are consistent with partially optically thick free-free emission from photoionized gas. Also, they cluster in the same region of a WISE colour-colour diagram as that of the confirmed OHPNe ($9.5 \lesssim [3.4]-[22] \lesssim 13.5$, and $4.0 \lesssim [4.6]-[12] \lesssim 7.0$), thus this diagram could help to identify more OHPNe candidates in the future.

=== arXiv:2208.01473v1  [2022-08-02]
TITLE  : Mid-Infrared and Maser Flux Variability Correlation in Massive Young Stellar Object G036.70+00.09
AUTHORS: Mizuho Uchiyama, Kohei Ichikawa, Koichiro Sugiyama, Yoshihiro Tanabe, Yoshinori Yonekura
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac866e
ABS    : We present the discovery of the simultaneous flux variation of a massive young stellar object (MYSO) G036.70+00.09 (G036.70) both in the maser emission and mid-infrared (MIR;$λ=3$--$5$~$μ$m) bands. Utilizing the ALLWISE and NEOWISE archival databases covering a long time span of approximately 10 years with a cadence of 6 months, we confirmed that G036.70 indicates a stochastic year-long MIR variability with no signs of the WISE band color change of W1 (3.4~$μ$m) $-$W2 (4.6~$μ$m). Cross-matching the MIR data set with the high-cadence 6.7~GHz class II methanol maser flux using a Hitachi 32-m radio telescope that discovered its periodicity in the methanol maser of 53.0--53.2 days, we also determine the flux correlations between the two bands at two different timescales, year-long and day-long, both of which have never been reported in MYSOs except when they are in a state of the accretion burst phase. The results of our study support the scenario that a class II methanol maser is pumped up by infrared emission from accreting disks of MYSOs. We also discuss the possible origins of MIR and maser variability. To explain the two observed phenomena, a stochastic year-long MIR variability with no signs of significant color change and maser-MIR variability correlation, change in mass accretion rate and line-of-sight extinction because of nonaxisymmetric dust density distribution in a rotating accretion disk are possible origins. Observations through spectroscopic monitoring of accretion-related emission lines are essential for determining the origin of the observed variability in G036.70.

=== arXiv:2208.01336v1  [2022-08-02]
TITLE  : The redshift evolution of extragalactic magnetic fields
AUTHORS: Valentin Pomakov, Shane O'Sullivan, Marcus Bruggen, Franco Vazza, Ettore Carretti, George Heald, Cathy Horellou, Timothy Shimwell
JOURNAL: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 515, Issue 1, September 2022, Pages 256 270
ABS    : Faraday rotation studies of distant radio sources can constrain the evolution and the origin of cosmic magnetism. We use data from the LOFAR Two Metre Sky Survey: Data Release 2 (LoTSS DR2) to study the dependence of the Faraday rotation measure (RM) on redshift. By focusing on radio sources that are close in terms of their projection on the sky, but physically unrelated (random pairs), we measure the RM difference, $Δ$RM, between the two sources. Thus, we isolate the extragalactic contribution to $Δ$RM from other contributions. We present a statistical analysis of the resulting sample of random pairs and find a median absolute RM difference |$Δ$RM| $ = (1.79 \pm 0.09)$ rad/m$^{2}$ , with |$Δ$RM| uncorrelated both with respect to the redshift difference of the pair and the redshift of the nearer source, and a median excess of random pairs over physical pairs of $(1.65 \pm 0.10)$ rad/m$^{2}$. We seek to reproduce this result with Monte Carlo simulations assuming a non vanishing seed cosmological magnetic field and a redshift evolution of the comoving magnetic field strength that varies as $1/(1 + z)^γ$. We find the best fitting results $B_0 \equiv B_{\rm comoving}(z = 0) \lesssim (2.0 \pm 0.2)$ nG and $γ\lesssim 4.5 \pm 0.2$ that we conservatively quote as upper limits due to an unmodelled but non vanishing contribution of local environments to the RM difference. A comparison with cosmological simulations shows our results to be incompatible with primordial magnetogenesis scenarios with uniform seed fields of order nG.

=== arXiv:2207.14695v1  [2022-07-29]
TITLE  : A search for period changes of eight short-period Type II Cepheids
AUTHORS: Alemiye M. Yacob, Leonid N. Berdnikov, Elena N. Pastukhova, Alexei Y. Kniazev, Patricia A. Whitelock
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stac2167
ABS    : In this study, we investigate the period changes of eight short-period Type II Cepheids of the BL Her subtype, i.e., with periods in the 1-4 day range. The $O-C$ diagrams for these stars are constructed using all suitable observational data from ground and space surveys. This spans a time interval of over one century and includes digitized photographic plates as well as photometry from the literature. The $O-C$ diagrams show parabolic evolutionary trends, which indicate the presence of both increasing and decreasing periods for these eight short period stars. These period changes are in good agreement with the recent theoretical evolutionary framework and stellar evolution models for BL Her stars. The pulsation stability test proposed by Lombard and Koen also suggests that the changes in the periods are real.

=== arXiv:2207.07022v3  [2022-07-14]
TITLE  : Two substellar survivor candidates; one found and one missing
AUTHORS: N. Walters, J. Farihi, T. R. Marsh, E. Breedt, P. W. Cauley, T. von Hippel, J. J. Hermes
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stac3603
ABS    : This study presents observations of two possible substellar survivors of post-main sequence engulfment, currently orbiting white dwarf stars. Infrared and optical spectroscopy of GD 1400 reveal a 9.98 h orbital period, where the benchmark brown dwarf has $M_2=68\pm8$ M$_{\rm Jup}$, $T_{\rm eff}\approx2100$ K, and a cooling age under 1 Gyr. A substellar mass in the lower range of allowed values is favoured by the gravitational redshift of the primary. Synthetic brown dwarf spectra are able to reproduce the observed CO bands, but lines below the bandhead are notably overpredicted. The known infrared excess towards PG 0010+281 is consistent with a substellar companion, yet no radial velocity or photometric variability is found despite extensive searches. Three independent stellar mass determinations all suggest enhanced mass loss associated with binary evolution, where the youngest total age for an isolated star is $7.5\pm2.5$ Gyr. A possible solution to this conundrum is the cannibalization of one or more giant planets, which enhanced mass loss post-main sequence, but were ultimately destroyed. PG 0010+281 is likely orbited by a debris disk that is comfortably exterior to the Roche limit, adding to the growing number of non-canonical disks orbiting white dwarfs. At present, only L-type (brown) dwarfs are known to survive direct engulfment during the post-main sequence, whereas T- and Y-type substellar companions persist at wide separations. These demographics indicate that roughly 50 M$_{\rm Jup}$ is required to robustly avoid post-main sequence annihilation, suggesting all closely-orbiting giant planets are consumed, which may contribute to mass loss and magnetic field generation in white dwarfs and their immediate progenitors.

=== arXiv:2206.05491v2  [2022-06-11]
TITLE  : The stellar halo in Local Group Hestia simulations III. Chemical abundance relations for accreted and in-situ stars
AUTHORS: Sergey Khoperskov, Ivan Minchev, Noam Libeskind, Vasily Belokurov, Matthias Steinmetz, Facundo A. Gomez, Robert J. J. Grand, Yehuda Hoffman
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 677, A91 (2023)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202244234
ABS    : Since the chemical abundances of stars are the fossil records of the physical conditions in galaxies, they provide the key information for recovering the assembly history of galaxies. In this work, we explore the chemo-chrono-kinematics of accreted and in-situ stars, by analyzing six M31/MW analogues from the HESTIA suite of cosmological hydrodynamics zoom-in simulations of the Local Group. We found that the merger debris are chemically distinct from the survived dwarf galaxies. The mergers debris have abundances expected for stars originating from dwarfs that had their star formation activity quenched at early times. Accreted stellar haloes, including individual debris, reveal abundance gradients in the ELz, where the most metal-rich stars have formed in the inner parts of the disrupted systems before the merger and mainly contribute to the central regions of the hosts. Therefore, we suggest that abundance measurements in the inner MW will allow constraining better the parameters of building blocks of the MW stellar halo. The MDFs of the individual debris show several peaks and the majority of debris have lower metallicity than the in-situ stars for Lz&gt;0, while non-rotating and retrograde accreted stars are similar to the in-situ. Prograde accreted stars show a prominent knee in the [Fe/H]-[Mg/Fe] plane while the retrograde stars typically deposit to a high-[Mg/Fe] sequence. We found that the metal-poor stars ([Fe/H]&lt;-1) of the HESTIA galaxies exhibit between zero to 80 km/s net rotation which is consistent with the Aurora population. At higher metallicities, we detect a sharp transition (spin-up) from the turbulent phase to a disk-like rotation. Mergers debris are similar in the [Fe/H]-[Mg/Fe] plane. However, combining a set of abundances allows to capture chemical patterns corresponding to different debris, which are the most prominent as a function of stellar age.

=== arXiv:2206.00907v1  [2022-06-02]
TITLE  : Discovering vanishing objects in POSS I red images using the Virtual Observatory
AUTHORS: E. Solano, B. Villarroel, C. Rodrigo
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stac1552
ABS    : In this paper we report a search for vanishing sources in POSS I red images using Virtual Observatory archives, tools and services. The search, conducted in the framework of the VASCO project, aims at finding POSS I (red) sources not present in recent catalogues like Pan-STARRS DR2 (limiting magnitude r=21.4) or Gaia EDR3 (limiting magnitude G=21). We found 298 165 sources visible only in POSS I plates, out of which 288 770 had a crossmatch within 5 arcsec in other archives (mainly in the infrared), 189 were classified as asteroids, 35 as variable objects, 3 592 as artefacts from the comparison to a second digitization (Supercosmos), and 180 as high proper motion objects without information on proper motion in Gaia EDR3. The remaining unidentified transients (5 399) as well as the 172 163 sources not detected in the optical but identified in the infrared regime are available from a Virtual Observatory compliant archive and can be of interest in searches for strong M-dwarf flares, high-redshift supernovae, asteroids, or other categories of unidentified red transients. No point sources were detected by both POSS-I and POSS-II before vanishing, setting the rate of failed supernovae in the Milky Way during 70 years to less than one in one billion.

=== arXiv:2205.15916v1  [2022-05-31]
TITLE  : LTD064402+245919, compact binary or subgiant with red star eclipsing binary?
AUTHORS: Jincheng Guo, Cheng Liu
ABS    : Recently, a single-line spectroscopic binary, LTD064402+245919, has been discovered by Yang et al. Using data from LAMOST and ZTF, the unseen companion is estimated to have a mass of 1-3 $M_{\odot}$, orbiting a subgiant with orbital period of 14.50 days, making it a good compact binary candidate without X-ray emission. However, new light curves from ZTF and ASAS-SN, have shown the depth of one dip increases towards a bluer wavelength, indicating LTD064402+245919 is more likely to be a subgiant with a red star. Using both Wilson-Devinney code and Phoebe, the derived $T_{eff}$ of secondary is about 3400 K, corresponding to a red M2/3 star. Additionally, the 20% error of parallax from Gaia is large. The mass of subgiant will be 1.28 $M_{\odot}$ instead of 2.77 $M_{\odot}$, if the refined distance of 5.0kpc is used. Nevertheless, new multi-colour photometry are warranted for the final confirmation of binary properties.

=== arXiv:2205.14542v1  [2022-05-28]
TITLE  : How long can LBVs sleep? A long-term photometric vaiability and spectral study of the Galactic candidate luminous blue variable MN112
AUTHORS: Olga Maryeva, Sergey Karpov, Alexei Kniazev, Vasilii Gvaramadze
JOURNAL: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 513, Issue 4, July 2022, Pages 5752-5765
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stac1249
ABS    : Luminous Blue Variables (LBVs) are massive stars that show strong spectral and photometric variability. The question of what evolutionary stages they represent and what exactly drives their instability is still open, and thus is it important to understand whether LBVs without significant ongoing activity exist, and for how long such dormant LBVs may ``sleep''. In this article we investigate the long-term variability properties of the LBV candidate MN112, by combining its optical and infrared spectral data covering 12 years with photometric data covering nearly a century acquired by both modern time-domain sky surveys and historical photographic plates. We analyze the spectra, derive physical properties of the star by modelling its atmosphere and use a new distance estimate from Gaia data release 3 (DR3) to determine the position of MN112 both inside the Galaxy and in the Hertzsprung--Russell diagram. Distance estimation increased in almost two times in comparison with Gaia DR2. Due to that MN112 moved in upper part of the diagram and according to our modeling it lies on evolutionary track for star with initial mass $M_*=70 M_\odot$ near Humphreys--Davidson limit. Given the absence of any significant variability we conclude that the star is a dormant LBV that has been inactive for at least a century now.

=== arXiv:2205.09138v1  [2022-05-18]
TITLE  : Trends in Silicates in the $β$ Pictoris Disk
AUTHORS: Cicero X. Lu, Christine H. Chen, B. A. Sargent, Dan M. Watson, Carey M. Lisse, Joel D. Green, Michael L. Sitko, Tushar Mittal
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac70d1
ABS    : While beta Pic is known to host silicates in ring-like structures, whether the properties of these silicate dust vary with stellocentric distance remains an open question. We re-analyze the beta Pictoris debris disk spectrum from the Spitzer Infrared Spectrograph (IRS) and a new IRTF/SpeX spectrum to investigate trends in Fe/Mg ratio, shape, and crystallinity in grains as a function of wavelength, a proxy for stellocentric distance. By analyzing a re-calibrated and re-extracted spectrum, we identify a new 18 micron forsterite emission feature and recover a 23 micron forsterite emission feature with a substantially larger line-to-continuum ratio than previously reported. We find that these prominent spectral features are primarily produced by small submicron-sized grains, which are continuously generated and replenished from planetesimal collisions in the disk and can elucidate their parent bodies' composition. We discover three trends about these small grains: as stellocentric distance increases, (1) small silicate grains become more crystalline (less amorphous), (2) they become more irregular in shape, and (3) for crystalline silicate grains, the Fe/Mg ratio decreases. Applying these trends to beta Pic's planetary architecture, we find that the dust population exterior to the orbits of beta Pic b and c differs substantially in crystallinity and shape. We also find a tentative 3-5 micron dust excess due to spatially unresolved hot dust emission close to the star. From our findings, we infer that the surfaces of large planetesimals are more Fe-rich and collisionally-processed closer to the star but more Fe-poor and primordial farther from the star.

=== arXiv:2205.07935v2  [2022-05-16]
TITLE  : Exomoons as sources of white dwarf pollution
AUTHORS: Isabella L Trierweiler, Alexandra E Doyle, Carl Melis, Kevin J Walsh, Edward D Young
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac86d5
ABS    : Polluted white dwarfs offer a unique way to study the bulk compositions of exoplanetary material, but it is not always clear if this material originates from comets, asteroids, moons, or planets. We combine N-body simulations with an analytical model to assess the prevalence of extrasolar moons as white dwarf (WD) polluters. Using a sample of observed polluted white dwarfs we find that the extrapolated parent body masses of the polluters are often more consistent with those of many solar system moons, rather than solar-like asteroids. We provide a framework for estimating the fraction of white dwarfs currently undergoing observable moon accretion based on results from simulated white dwarf planetary and moon systems. Focusing on a three-planet white dwarf system of Super-Earth to Neptune-mass bodies, we find that we could expect about one percent of such systems to be currently undergoing moon accretions as opposed to asteroid accretion.

=== arXiv:2204.06091v1  [2022-04-12]
TITLE  : Is there a background population of high-albedo objects in geosynchronous orbits around Earth?
AUTHORS: Beatriz Villarroel, Enrique Solano, Hichem Guergouri, Alina Streblyanska, Lars Mattsson, Rudolf E. Bär, Jamal Mimouni, Stefan Geier
ABS    : Old, digitized astronomical images taken before the human spacefaring age offer a unique view of the sky devoid of known artificial satellites. In this paper, we have carried out the first optical searches ever for non-terrestrial artifacts near the Earth following the method proposed in Villarroel et al. (2022). We use images contained in the First Palomar Sky Survey to search for simultaneous (during a plate exposure time) transients that in addition to being point-like, are aligned. We provide a shortlist of the most promising candidates of aligned transients, that must be examined with the help of a microscope to separate celestial sources from plate defects with coincidentally star-like brightness profiles. We further explore one possible, but not unique, interpretation in terms of fast reflections off high-albedo objects in geosynchronous orbits around Earth. If a future study rules out each multiple transient candidate, the estimated surface density becomes an upper limit of $&lt;10^{-9}$ objects km$^{-2}$ non-terrestrial artifacts in geosynchronous orbits around Earth. Finally, we conclude that observations and analysis of multiple, simultaneously appearing and vanishing light sources on the sky merit serious further attention, regardless of their origin.

=== arXiv:2203.10859v1  [2022-03-21]
TITLE  : Detection of periodic flares in 6.7 GHz methanol masers G45.804-0.356 and G49.043-1.079
AUTHORS: Mateusz Olech, Michał Durjasz, Marian Szymczak, Anna Bartkiewicz
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 661, A114 (2022)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202243108
ABS    : Context: Periodicity in 6.7 GHz methanol maser sources is a rare phenomenon that was discovered during long-term monitoring programmes. Understanding the underlying processes that lead to periodic variability might provide insights into the physical processes in high-mass star-forming regions. Aims: We aim to identify and describe new periodic methanol masers. Methods: The observations were obtained with the Torun 32m antenna. Time series analysis was conducted using well-proven statistical methods. Additionally, NEOWISE data were used to search for a correlation between infrared and maser fluxes. Results: We found two new periodic sources, G45.804-0.356 and G49.043-1.079, with periods of 416.9 and 469.3 days, respectively. For G49.043-1.079, infrared variability is simultaneous with methanol flares. Conclusions: A most likely cause of the periodicity in G49.043-1.079 is modulated accretion. For G45.804-0.356, the periodicity cannot be explained with the available data, and further research is needed.

=== arXiv:2203.08968v1  [2022-03-16]
TITLE  : Opportunities for Technosignature Science in the Astro2020 Report
AUTHORS: Jacob Haqq-Misra, Sofia Sheikh, Manasvi Lingam, Ravi Kopparapu, Adam Frank, Jason Wright, Eric Mamajek, Nick Siegler
ABS    : The Astro2020 report outlines numerous recommendations that could significantly advance technosignature science. Technosignatures refer to any observable manifestations of extraterrestrial technology, and the search for technosignatures is part of the continuum of the astrobiological search for biosignatures. The search for technosignatures is directly relevant to the "World and Suns in Context" theme and "Pathways to Habitable Worlds" program in the Astro2020 report. The relevance of technosignatures was explicitly mentioned in "E1 Report of the Panel on Exoplanets, Astrobiology, and the Solar System," which stated that "life's global impacts on a planet's atmosphere, surface, and temporal behavior may therefore manifest as potentially detectable exoplanet biosignatures, or technosignatures" and that potential technosignatures, much like biosignatures, must be carefully analyzed to mitigate false positives. The connection of technosignatures to this high-level theme and program can be emphasized, as the report makes clear the purpose is to address the question "Are we alone?" This question is also presented in the Explore Science 2020-2024 plan as a driver of NASA's mission. This white paper summarizes the potential technosignature opportunities within the recommendations of the Astro2020 report, should they be implemented by funding agencies. The objective of this paper is to demonstrate the relevance of technosignature science to a wide range of missions and urge the scientific community to include the search for technosignatures as part of the stated science justifications for the large and medium programs that include the Infrared/Optical/Ultraviolet space telescope, Extremely Large Telescopes, probe-class far-infrared and X-ray missions, and various facilities in radio astronomy.

=== arXiv:2203.06299v1  [2022-03-12]
TITLE  : Transverse Vector Decomposition Method for Analytical Inversion of Exoplanet Transit Spectra
AUTHORS: Konstantin T. Matchev, Katia Matcheva, Alexander Roman
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac82f3
ABS    : We develop a new method for analytical inversion of binned exoplanet transit spectra and for retrieval of planet parameters. The method has a geometrical interpretation and treats each observed spectrum as a single vector $\vec r$ in the multidimensional spectral space of observed bin values. We decompose the observed $\vec{r}$ into a wavelength-independent component $\vec{r}_\parallel$ corresponding to the spectral mean across all observed bins, and a transverse component $\vec{r}_\perp$ which is wavelength-dependent and contains the relevant information about the atmospheric chemistry. The method allows us to extract, without any prior assumptions or additional information, the relative mass (or volume) mixing ratios of the absorbers in the atmosphere, the scale height to stellar radius ratio, $H/R_S$, and the atmospheric temperature. The method is illustrated and validated with several examples of increasing complexity.

=== arXiv:2203.04425v1  [2022-03-08]
TITLE  : The Extended Tidal Tails of NGC 7089 (M2)
AUTHORS: Carl J. Grillmair
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac5bd7
ABS    : Using photometry and proper motions from Gaia Early Data Release 3, we detect a 45 degree-long trailing stellar debris stream associated with the old, metal-poor globular cluster NGC 7089. With a width on the order of 100 pc, the extended stream appears to be as dynamically cold as the coldest known streams found to date. There is some evidence for an extended leading tail extending between 28 and 37 degrees from the cluster, though the greater distance of this tail, combined with proper motions that are virtually indistinguishable from those of foreground stars, make the detection much less certain. The proper motion profile and the path on the sky of the trailing tail are not well matched using a simple Galactic potential comprised purely of a disk, bulge, and spherical halo. However, the addition of a moving, massive (M = 1.88 x 10^(11) solar masses) Large Magellanic Cloud brings the model predictions into much better agreement with the observables. We provide tables of the most highly ranked candidate stream stars for follow-up by ongoing and future spectroscopic surveys.

=== arXiv:2203.02513v2  [2022-03-04]
TITLE  : The Pristine survey XVIII: C-19: Tidal debris of a dark matter-dominated globular cluster?
AUTHORS: Raphaël Errani, Julio F. Navarro, Rodrigo Ibata, Nicolas Martin, Zhen Yuan, David S. Aguado, Piercarlo Bonifacio, Elisabetta Caffau
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stac1516
ABS    : The recently discovered C-19 stellar stream is a collection of kinematically associated metal-poor stars in the halo of the Milky Way lacking an obvious progenitor. The stream spans an arc of ~15 degrees in the sky, and orbit-fitting suggests an apocentric distance of ~20 kpc and a pericentre of ~10 kpc. The narrow metallicity dispersion of stars with available spectra, together with light element abundance variations, suggests a globular cluster (GC) origin. The observed metallicity ([Fe/H] ~ -3.4), however, is much lower than that of any known GC. In addition, the width and velocity dispersion of the stream are similar to those expected from disrupting dwarf galaxies, and substantially larger than the tidal debris of GCs able to disrupt on C-19's orbit. We propose here an unconventional model where the C-19 progenitor is a dark matter-dominated stellar system with GC-like abundance patterns. We use N-body simulations to show that the tidal disruption of a ~100 pc King-model stellar component embedded in a ~20 km/s cuspy cold dark matter halo yields debris consistent with C-19's observed width and velocity dispersion. The stellar component of the progenitor is fully disrupted, and is spread over two distinct streams; one corresponding to C-19 and another possibly hiding behind the Galactic plane. If such companion stream were found, it would suggest that dark matter-dominated dwarfs may also develop GC-like enrichment patterns, a finding that would inform our theoretical understanding of the formation of multiple populations in GCs and dwarf galaxies alike.

=== arXiv:2202.12903v1  [2022-02-25]
TITLE  : A white dwarf accreting planetary material determined from X-ray observations
AUTHORS: Tim Cunningham, Peter J. Wheatley, Pier-Emmanuel Tremblay, Boris T. Gaensicke, George W. King, Odette Toloza, Dimitri Veras
DOI    : 10.1038/s41586-021-04300-w
ABS    : The atmospheres of a large proportion of white dwarf stars are polluted by heavy elements that are expected to sink out of visible layers on short timescales. This has been interpreted as a signature of ongoing accretion of debris from asteroids, comets, and giant planets. This scenario is supported by the detection of debris discs and transits of planetary fragments around some white dwarfs. However, photospheric metals are only indirect evidence for ongoing accretion, and the inferred accretion rates and parent body compositions heavily depend on models of diffusion and mixing processes within the white dwarf atmosphere. Here we report a 4.4$σ$ detection of X-rays from a polluted white dwarf, G29$-$38, using a 106 ks exposure with the Chandra X-ray Observatory, demonstrating directly that the star is currently accreting. From the measured X-ray luminosity, we find an instantaneous accretion rate of $\dot{M_{\rm X}}=1.63^{+1.29}_{-0.40}\times 10^{9}\mathrm{\,g\,s^{-1}}$. This is the first direct measurement of the accretion rate onto the white dwarf, which is independent of stellar atmosphere models. This rate exceeds estimates based on past studies of the photospheric abundances by more than a factor two, and implies that convective overshoot has to be accounted for in modelling the spectra of debris-accreting white dwarfs. We measure a low plasma temperature of $kT=0.5\pm0.2\,\mathrm{keV}$, corroborating the predicted bombardment solution for white dwarfs accreting at low accretion rates. Offering a new method for studying evolved planetary systems, these observations provide the opportunity to independently measure the instantaneous accretion rate of planetary material, and therefore investigate the timescale of accretion onto white dwarfs, and the evolution and replenishment of debris disks.

=== arXiv:2202.05858v1  [2022-02-11]
TITLE  : Detectability of Chlorofluorocarbons in the Atmospheres of Habitable M-dwarf Planets
AUTHORS: Jacob Haqq-Misra, Ravi Kopparapu, Thomas J. Fauchez, Adam Frank, Jason T. Wright, Manasvi Lingam1
JOURNAL: Planet. Sci. J. (2022) 3: 60
DOI    : 10.3847/PSJ/ac5404
ABS    : The presence of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) in Earth's atmosphere is a direct result of technology. Ozone-depleting CFCs have been banned by most countries, but some CFCs have persistent in elevated concentrations due to their long stratospheric lifetimes. CFCs are effective greenhouse gases and could serve as a remotely detectable spectral signature of technology. Here we use a three-dimensional climate model and a synthetic spectrum generator to assess the detectability of CFC-11 and CFC-12 as a technosignature on exoplanets. We consider the case of TRAPPIST-1e as well as a habitable Earth-like planet around a 3300 K M-dwarf star, with CFC abundances ranging from one to five times present-day levels. Assuming an optimistic James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) Mid Infrared Instrument (MIRI) low resolution spectrometer (LRS) noise floor level of 10 ppm to multiple co-added observations, we find that spectral features potentially attributable to present or historic Earth-level CFC features could be detected with a SNR $\ge 3-5$ on TRAPPIST-1e, if present, in $\sim 100$ hours of in-transit time. However, applying a very conservative 50 ppm noise floor to co-added observations, even a 5x Earth-level CFC would not be detectable no matter the observation time. Such observations could be carried out simultaneously and at no additional cost with searches for biosignature gases. Non-detection would place upper limits on the CFC concentration. We find that with the launch of JWST, humanity may be approaching the cusp of being able to detect passive atmospheric technosignatures equal in strength to its own around the nearest stars.

=== arXiv:2202.05608v1  [2022-02-11]
TITLE  : Dissecting the different components of the modest accretion bursts of the very young protostar HOPS 373
AUTHORS: Sung-Yong Yoon, Gregory J. Herczeg, Jeong-Eun Lee, Ho-Gyu Lee, Doug Johnstone, Watson Varricatt, John J. Tobin, Carlos Contreras Peña
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac5632
ABS    : Observed changes in protostellar brightness can be complicated to interpret. In our JCMT~Transient monitoring survey, we discovered that a young binary protostar, HOPS 373, is undergoing a modest $30\%$ brightness increase at 850 $μ$m, caused by a factor of 1.8$-$3.3 enhancement in the accretion rate. The initial burst occurred over a few months, with a sharp rise and then shallower decay. A second rise occurred soon after the decay, and the source is still bright one year later. The mid-IR emission, the small-scale CO outflow mapped with ALMA, and the location of variable maser emission indicate that the variability is associated with the SW component. The near-infrared and NEOWISE $W1$ and $W2$ emission is located along the blueshifted CO outflow, spatially offset by $\sim3$ to $4^{\prime\prime}$ from the SW component. The $K$-band emission imaged by UKIRT shows a compact H$_2$ emission source at the edge of the outflow, with a tail tracing the outflow back to the source. The $W1$ emission, likely dominated by scattered light, brightens by 0.7 mag, consistent with expectations based on the sub-mm lightcurve. The signal of continuum variability in $K$-band and $W2$ is masked by stable H$_2$ emission, as seen in our Gemini/GNIRS spectrum, and perhaps by CO emission. These differences in emission sources complicate infrared searches for variability of the youngest protostars.

=== arXiv:2201.12187v2  [2022-01-28]
TITLE  : Nothing to see here: Failed supernovae are faint or rare
AUTHORS: Robert Byrne, Morgan Fraser
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stac1308
ABS    : The absence of Type IIP core-collapse supernovae arising from progenitors above 17 solar masses suggests the existence of another evolutionary path by which massive stars end their lives. The direct collapse of a stellar core to a black hole without the production of a bright, explosive transient is expected to produce a long-lived, dim, red transient known as a failed supernova. Despite the detection of a number of candidates for disappearing massive stars in recent years, conclusive observational evidence for failed supernovae remains elusive. A custom-built pipeline designed for the detection of faint transients is used to re-analyse 10 years of observations of 231 nearby galaxies from the PTF/ZTF surveys. This analysis recovers known supernovae, and yields a number of interesting transients. However, none of these are consistent with a failed supernova. Through Monte Carlo tests the recovery efficiency of our pipeline is quantified. By assuming failed supernovae occur as a Poissonian process with zero detections in the data set, 95 per cent upper limits to the rate of failed supernovae are calculated as a function of failed supernova absolute magnitude. We estimate failed supernovae to be less than 0.61, 0.33, 0.26, or 0.23 of the core-collapse SN rate for absolute magnitudes of $-11$, $-12$, $-13$, and $-14$ respectively. Finally, we show that if they exist, the Vera C. Rubin Observatory will find 1.7 - 3.7 failed SNe per year for an absolute bolometric luminosity of $\sim 6 \times 10^{39} \textrm{ erg s}^{-1}$ out to distances of 33 - 43 Mpc, depending on their assumed spectral energy distribution.

=== arXiv:2201.11123v2  [2022-01-26]
TITLE  : Project Hephaistos I. Upper limits on partial Dyson spheres in the Milky Way
AUTHORS: Matías Suazo, Erik Zackrisson, Jason T. Wright, Andreas Korn, Macy Huston
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stac280
ABS    : Dyson spheres are hypothetical megastructures built by advanced extraterrestrial civilizations to harvest radiation energy from stars. Here, we combine optical data from Gaia DR2 with mid-infrared data from AllWISE to set the strongest upper limits to date on the prevalence of partial Dyson spheres within the Milky Way, based on their expected waste-heat signatures. Conservative upper limits are presented on the fraction of stars at G $\leq$ 21 that may potentially host non-reflective Dyson spheres that absorb 1 - 90$\%$ of the bolometric luminosity of their host stars and emit thermal waste-heat in the 100 - 1000 K range. Based on a sample of $\approx$ $2.7\mathrm{e}\,5$ stars within 100 pc, we find that a fraction less than $\approx$ $2\mathrm{e}\,-5$ could potentially host $\sim$300 K Dyson spheres at 90$\%$ completion. These limits become progressively weaker for less complete Dyson spheres due to increased confusion with naturally occurring sources of strong mid-infrared radiation, and also at larger distances, due to the detection limits of WISE. For the $\sim2.9\mathrm{e}\,8$ stars within 5 kpc in our Milky Way sample, the corresponding upper limit on the fraction of stars that could potentially be $\sim$300 K Dyson spheres at 90$\%$ completion is $\leq$ $8\mathrm{e}\,-4$.

=== arXiv:2201.09459v1  [2022-01-24]
TITLE  : Dippers from TESS Full-frame Images. II. Spectroscopic Characterization of Four Young Dippers
AUTHORS: Yui Kasagi, Takayuki Kotani, Hajime Kawahara, Tomoyuki Tajiri, Takayuki Muto, Masataka Aizawa, Michiko S. Fujii, Kohei Hattori
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4365/ac4e8b
ABS    : Photometric monitoring by the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) has discovered not only periodic signals by transiting exoplanets but also episodic or quasi-periodic dimming around young stellar objects. The mechanisms of the dimming of these objects, so-called "dippers", are thought to be related to the property of the accretion or the structure of protoplanetary disks especially in regions close to the host star. Recently, we have created the catalog of dippers from the one year of TESS Full Frame Image (FFI) data. In this paper, we report spectral features of four newly found dippers in that catalog and show that they potentially shed light on the dimming mechanisms. We found that all of the targets exhibit the H alpha emission line, which is an indicator of an ongoing accretion. Based on its line profiles and/or their variability, we characterized the properties of the disks of each source, which can support the dimming mechanisms due to a dusty disk wind or an accretion warp. Also, we found an interesting dipper (TIC 317873721), "close-in binary dipper," showing the complex variability of the line profile and the large radial velocity variation. Since the dimming intervals are similar to the orbital period of the binary, we suggest that the dips are caused by dust in the warp of accretion from a circumbinary disk onto stars. Such a close-in ($&lt;$ 0.1 au) binary dipper is rarely reported so far, further investigation will reveal the new aspect of the disk evolution and planetary formation.

=== arXiv:2201.08529v1  [2022-01-21]
TITLE  : H$_2$-dominated Atmosphere as an Indicator of Second-generation Rocky White Dwarf Exoplanets
AUTHORS: Zifan Lin, Sara Seager, Sukrit Ranjan, Thea Kozakis, Lisa Kaltenegger
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8213/ac4788
ABS    : Following the discovery of the first exoplanet candidate transiting a white dwarf (WD), a "white dwarf opportunity" for characterizing the atmospheres of terrestrial exoplanets around WDs is emerging. Large planet-to-star size ratios and hence large transit depths make transiting WD exoplanets favorable targets for transmission spectroscopy - conclusive detection of spectral features on an Earth-like planet transiting a close-by WD can be achieved within a medium James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) program. Despite the apparently promising opportunity, however, the post-main sequence (MS) evolutionary history of a first-generation WD exoplanet has never been incorporated in atmospheric modeling. Furthermore, second-generation planets formed in WD debris disks have never been studied from a photochemical perspective. We demonstrate that transmission spectroscopy can identify a second-generation rocky WD exoplanet with a thick ($\sim1$ bar) H$_2$-dominated atmosphere. In addition, we can infer outgassing activities of a WD exoplanet based on its transmission spectra and test photochemical runaway by studying CH$_4$ buildup.

=== arXiv:2201.02405v4  [2022-01-07]
TITLE  : Substructure in the stellar halo near the Sun. II. Characterisation of independent structures
AUTHORS: Tomás Ruiz-Lara, Tadafumi Matsuno, S. Sofie Lövdal, Amina Helmi, Emma Dodd, Helmer H. Koppelman
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 665, A58 (2022)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202243061
ABS    : In Lövdal et al, we presented a data-driven method for clustering in Integrals of Motion space and applied it to a large sample of nearby halo stars with 6D phase-space information. We identified a large number of clusters, many of which could tentatively be merged into larger groups. Our goal is to establish the reality of the clusters through a combined study of their stellar populations to gain more insights into the accretion history of the Milky Way. We develop a procedure that quantifies the similarity of clusters based on KS tests using their metallicity distribution functions, and an isochrone fitting method to determine their average age, which is also used to compare the distribution of stars in the Colour-Absolute magnitude diagram. This allows us to group clusters into substructures, and to compare substructures with one another. The clusters identified are merged into 12 extended substructures, while 8 small clusters remain as such. The large substructures include the previously known Gaia-Enceladus, Helmi streams, Sequoia, and Thamnos 1 and 2. We identify overdensities associated with the hot thick disc and hosting a metal-poor population. Especially notable is our largest substructure which, although peaking at the metallicity characteristic of the thick disk has a well populated metal-poor component, and dynamics in-between hot thick disc and halo. We identify additional debris in the region occupied by Sequoia with distinct kinematics, likely remnants of three different accretion events with progenitors of similar mass. We also identify different trends of [Mg/Fe] vs [Fe/H] for the various substructures confirming our dissection of the nearby halo. At least 20\% of the halo near the Sun is associated to substructures. When comparing their global properties, we note that those substructures on retrograde orbits are not only more metal-poor on average but also older.

=== arXiv:2201.00918v1  [2022-01-04]
TITLE  : The Breakthrough Listen Search for Intelligent Life: Technosignature Search of Transiting TESS Targets of Interest
AUTHORS: Noah Franz, Steve Croft, Andrew P. V. Siemion, Raffy Traas, Bryan Brzycki, Vishal Gajjar, Howard Isaacson, Matt Lebofsky
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/ac46c9
ABS    : The Breakthrough Listen Initiative, as part of its larger mission, is performing the most thorough technosignature search of nearby stars. Additionally, Breakthrough Listen is collaborating with scientists working on NASAs Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS), to examine TESS Targets of Interest (TOIs) for technosignatures. Here, we present a $1-11$ $\textrm{GHz}$ radio technosignature search of $61$ TESS TOIs that were in transit during their Breakthrough Listen observation at the Robert C. Byrd Green Bank Telescope. We performed a narrowband Doppler drift search with a minimum S/N threshold of $10$, across a drift rate range of $\pm 4$ $\textrm{Hz}$ $\textrm{s}$ $^{-1}$, with a resolution of $3$ $\textrm{Hz}$. We removed radio frequency interference by comparing signals across cadences of target sources. After interference removal, there are no remaining events in our survey, and therefore no technosignature signals-of-interest detected in this work. This null result implies that at L, S, C, and X bands, fewer than $52\textrm{%}$, $20\textrm{%}$, $16\textrm{%}$, and $15\textrm{%}$, respectively, of TESS TOIs possess a transmitter with an equivalent isotropic radiated power greater than a few times $10^{14}$ $\textrm{W}$.

=== arXiv:2112.05775v2  [2021-12-10]
TITLE  : The Complexity of the Cetus Stream Unveiled from the Fusion of STREAMFINDER and StarGO
AUTHORS: Zhen Yuan, Khyati Malhan, Federico Sestito, Rodrigo A. Ibata, Nicolas F. Martin, Jiang Chang, Ting S. Li, Elisabetta Caffau
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac616f
ABS    : We combine the power of two stream-searching tools, STREAMFINDER and StarGO applied to the Gaia EDR3 data, to detect stellar debris belonging to the Cetus stream system that forms a complex, nearly polar structure around the Milky Way. In this work, we find the southern extensions of the northern Cetus stream as the Palca stream and a new southern stream, which overlap on the sky but have different distances. These two stream wraps extend over more than $\sim100°$ on the sky ($-60°&lt;δ&lt;+40°$). The current N-body model of the system reproduces both wraps in the trailing arm. We also show that the Cetus system is confidently associated with the Triangulum/Pisces, Willka Yaku, and the recently discovered C-20 streams. The association with the ATLAS-Aliqa Uma stream is much weaker. All of these stellar debris are very metal-poor, comparable to the average metallicity of the southern Cetus stream with [Fe/H] = $-2.17\pm0.2$. The estimated stellar mass of the Cetus progenitor is at least $10^{5.6}\rm\,M_\odot$, compatible with Ursa Minor or Draco dwarf galaxies. The associated globular cluster with similar stellar mass, NGC 5824 very possibly was accreted in the same group infall. The multi-wrap Cetus stream is a perfect example of a dwarf galaxy that has undergone several periods of stripping, leaving behind debris at multiple locations in the halo. The full characterization of such systems is crucial to unravel the assembly history of the Milky Way and, as importantly, to provide nearby fossils to study ancient low-mass dwarf galaxies.

=== arXiv:2111.14975v1  [2021-11-29]
TITLE  : Hen 3-860: New southern eclipsing symbiotic star observed in the outburst
AUTHORS: J. Merc, R. Gális, M. Wolf, P. Velez, T. Bohlsen, B. N. Barlow
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stab3512
ABS    : Brightening of Hen 3-860, previously classified as an H$α$ emitter, was detected by the ASAS-SN survey at the end of the year 2016. We have obtained the first spectroscopic observations of the transient and supplemented them with photometric data from the DASCH archive of astronomical plates, ASAS and ASAS-SN surveys. Based on the results of our analysis, we can classify the object as a classical symbiotic star of the infrared type S, consisting of an M2-3 giant with $T_{\rm g}$ $\sim$ 3 550 K, a radius $R_{\rm g}\sim$ 60 - 75 R$_{\odot}$, and a luminosity $L_{\rm g}\sim$ 540 - 760 L$_{\odot}$, and a hot and luminous component ($T_{\rm h}$ $\sim$ $1-2 \times 10^5$ K and $L_{\rm h} \sim 10^3 \rm L_\odot$). The system experienced at least four outbursts in the last 120 years. In addition to the outbursts, its light curves revealed the presence of eclipses of the hot component and its surrounding (relatively cool) shell, which developed during the outburst and redistributed a fraction of the radiation of the hot component into the optical, by the giant, classifying the object as a representative of a group of eclipsing symbiotic stars. The eclipses allowed us to reveal the orbital period of the system to be 602 days.

=== arXiv:2111.08779v1  [2021-11-16]
TITLE  : Planets or asteroids? A geochemical method to constrain the masses of White Dwarf pollutants
AUTHORS: Andrew M. Buchan, Amy Bonsor, Oliver Shorttle, Jon Wade, John Harrison, Lena Noack, Detlev Koester
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stab3624
ABS    : Polluted white dwarfs that have accreted planetary material provide a unique opportunity to probe the geology of exoplanetary systems. However, the nature of the bodies which pollute white dwarfs is not well understood: are they small asteroids, minor planets, or even terrestrial planets? We present a novel method to infer pollutant masses from detections of Ni, Cr and Si. During core--mantle differentiation, these elements exhibit variable preference for metal and silicate at different pressures (i.e., object masses), affecting their abundances in the core and mantle. We model core--mantle differentiation self-consistently using data from metal--silicate partitioning experiments. We place statistical constraints on the differentiation pressures, and hence masses, of bodies which pollute white dwarfs by incorporating this calculation into a Bayesian framework. We show that Ni observations are best suited to constraining pressure when pollution is mantle-like, while Cr and Si are better for core-like pollution. We find 3 systems (WD0449-259, WD1350-162 and WD2105-820) whose abundances are best explained by the accretion of fragments of small parent bodies ($&lt;0.2M_\oplus$). For 2 systems (GD61 and WD0446-255), the best model suggests the accretion of fragments of Earth-sized bodies, although the observed abundances remain consistent ($&lt;3σ$) with the accretion of undifferentiated material. This suggests that polluted white dwarfs potentially accrete planetary bodies of a range of masses. However, our results are subject to inevitable degeneracies and limitations given current data. To constrain pressure more confidently, we require serendipitous observation of (nearly) pure core and/or mantle material.

=== arXiv:2111.03124v1  [2021-11-04]
TITLE  : Polluted White Dwarfs Reveal Exotic Mantle Rock Types on Exoplanets in our Solar Neighborhood
AUTHORS: Keith D. Putirka, Siyi Xu
DOI    : 10.1038/s41467-021-26403-8
ABS    : Prior studies have hypothesized that some polluted white dwarfs record continent-like granitic crust--which is abundant on Earth and perhaps uniquely indicative of plate tectonics. But these inferences derive from only a few elements, none of which define rock type. We thus present the first estimates of rock types on exoplanets that once orbited polluted white dwarfs--stars whose atmospheric compositions record the infall of formerly orbiting planetary objects--examining cases where Mg, Si, Ca and Fe are measured with precision. We find no evidence for continental crust, or other crust types, even after correcting for core formation. However, the silicate mantles of such exoplanets are discernible: one case is Earth like, but most are exotic in composition and mineralogy. Because these exoplanets exceed the compositional spread of &gt;4,000 nearby main sequence stars, their unique silicate compositions are unlikely to reflect variations in parent star compositions. Instead, polluted white dwarfs reveal greater planetary variety in our solar neighborhood than currently appreciated, with consequently unique planetary accretion and differentiation paths that have no direct counterparts in our Solar System. These require new rock classification schemes, for quartz + orthopyroxene and periclase + olivine assemblages, which are proposed here.

=== arXiv:2111.01208v1  [2021-11-01]
TITLE  : A Search for Analogs of KIC 8462852 (Boyajian's Star): A Second List of Candidates
AUTHORS: Edward G. Schmidt
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/ac3416
ABS    : In data from the Kepler mission, the normal F3V star KIC 8462852 (Boyajian's star) was observed to exhibit infrequent dips in brightness that have not been satisfactorily explained. A previous paper reported the first results of a search for other similar stars in a limited region of the sky around the Kepler field. This paper expands on that search to cover the entire sky between declinations of +22 degrees and +68 degrees. Fifteen new candidates with low rates of dipping, referred to as "slow dippers" in Paper I, have been identified. The dippers occupy a limited region of the HR diagram and an apparent clustering in space is found. This latter feature suggests that these stars are attractive targets for SETI searches.

=== arXiv:2110.13887v1  [2021-10-26]
TITLE  : Evolutionary and Observational Consequences of Dyson Sphere Feedback
AUTHORS: Macy J. Huston, Jason T. Wright
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac3421
ABS    : The search for signs of extraterrestrial technology, or technosignatures, includes the search for objects which collect starlight for some technological use, such as those composing a Dyson sphere. These searches typically account for a star's light and some blackbody temperature for the surrounding structure. However, such a structure inevitably returns some light back to the surface of its star, either from direct reflection or thermal re-emission. In this work, we explore how this feedback may affect the structure and evolution of stars, and when such feedback may affect observations. We find that in general this returned light can cause stars to expand and cool. Our MESA models show that this energy is only transported toward a star's core effectively by convection, so low mass stars are strongly affected, while higher mass stars with radiative exteriors are not. Ultimately, the effect only has significant observational consequences for spheres with very high temperatures (much higher than the often assumed ~300 K) and/or high specular reflectivity. Lastly, we produce color-magnitude diagrams of combined star-Dyson sphere systems for a wide array of possible configurations.

=== arXiv:2110.11615v2  [2021-10-22]
TITLE  : Reanalysis of c-type RR Lyrae Variable BE Dor, Period Modulations and Possible Mechanism
AUTHORS: L. -J. Li, S. -B. Qian, L. -Y. Zhu
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stab3808
ABS    : We reanalyzed the c-type RR Lyrae star BE Dor (MACHO 5.4644.8, OGLE-LMC-RRLYR-06002) that had been discovered to show cyclic period changes. The photometric data of several sky surveys (DASCH, MACHO, OGLE, ASAS-SN, and TESS) were used for analyses. The O-C diagram and pulsation period obtained from Fourier analysis show significant period modulations in BE Dor. However, different from the previous viewpoint, the changes are quasi-periodic and abrupt. Therefore, the light-travel time effect caused by the companion motion cannot explain the changes. Noting a same subtype star KIC 9453114 with similar phenomena has a high macroturbulent velocity, and the degree of O-C changes seem to be positively correlated with these velocities, we consider that the mechanism leading to period modulation should be caused by the interaction between turbulent convection and magnetic field activity in the ionization zone, i.e., the viewpoint of Stothers. It may not explain the general Blazhko effect but should explain such period modulations in BE Dor and those other c-type RR Lyrae stars. We hope our discoveries and viewpoints can provide some information and inspiration for relevant research.

=== arXiv:2110.11376v2  [2021-10-21]
TITLE  : An Exceptional Dimming Event for a Massive, Cool Supergiant in M51
AUTHORS: Jacob E. Jencson, David J. Sand, Jennifer E. Andrews, Nathan Smith, Jeniveve Pearson, Jay Strader, Stefano Valenti, Emma R. Beasor
JOURNAL: ApJ 930 (2022) 81
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac626c
ABS    : We present the discovery of an exceptional dimming event in a cool supergiant star in the Local Volume spiral M51. The star, dubbed M51-DS1, was found as part of a Hubble Space Telescope (HST) search for failed supernovae (SNe). The supergiant, which is plausibly associated with a very young ($\lesssim6$ Myr) stellar population, showed clear variability (amplitude $ΔF814W\approx0.7$ mag) in numerous HST images obtained between 1995 and 2016, before suddenly dimming by $&gt;$2 mag in $F814W$ sometime between late 2017 and mid-2019. In follow-up data from 2021, the star rebrightened, ruling out a failed supernova. Prior to its near-disappearance, the star was luminous and red ($M_{F814W}\lesssim-7.6$ mag, $F606W-F814W=1.9$ - $2.2$ mag). Modeling of the pre-dimming spectral energy distribution of the star favors a highly reddened, very luminous ($\log[L/L_{\odot}] = 5.4$ - $5.7$) star with $T_{\mathrm{eff}}\approx3700$ - $4700$ K, indicative of a cool yellow or post-red supergiant (RSG) with an initial mass of $\approx26$ - $40$ $M_{\odot}$. However, the local interstellar extinction and circumstellar extinction are uncertain, and could be lower: the near-IR colors are consistent with an RSG, which would be cooler ($T_{\mathrm{eff}}\lesssim3700$ K) and slightly less luminous ($\log[L/L_{\odot}] = 5.2$ - $5.3$), giving an inferred initial mass of $\approx19$ - $22$ $M_{\odot}$. In either case, the dimming may be explained by a rare episode of enhanced mass loss that temporarily obscures the star, potentially a more extreme counterpart to the 2019 - 2020 "Great Dimming" of Betelgeuse. Given the emerging evidence that massive evolved stars commonly exhibit variability that can mimic a disappearing star, our work highlights a substantial challenge in identifying true failed SNe.

=== arXiv:2110.05533v1  [2021-10-11]
TITLE  : Velocity-imaging the rapidly precessing planetary disc around the white dwarf HE 1349-2305 using Doppler tomography
AUTHORS: Christopher J. Manser, Erik Dennihy, Boris T. Gänsicke, John H. Debes, Nicola P. Gentile Fusillo, J. J. Hermes, Mark Hollands, Paula Izquierdo
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stab2948
ABS    : The presence of planetary material in white dwarf atmospheres, thought to be accreted from a dusty debris disc produced via the tidal disruption of a planetesimal, is common. Approximately five per cent of these discs host a co-orbital gaseous component detectable via emission from atomic transitions - usually the 8600 Angstrom CaII triplet. These emission profiles can be highly variable in both morphology and strength. Furthermore, the morphological variations in a few systems have been shown to be periodic, likely produced by an apsidally precessing asymmetric disc. Of the known gaseous debris discs, that around HE1349-2305 has the most rapidly evolving emission line morphology, and we present updated spectroscopy of the CaII triplet of this system. The additional observations show that the emission line morphologies vary periodically and consistently, and we constrain the period to two aliases of 459$\pm$3d and 502$\pm$3d. We produce images of the CaII triplet emission from the disc in velocity space using Doppler tomography - only the second such imaging of a white dwarf debris disc. We suggest that the asymmetric nature of these velocity images is generated by gas moving on eccentric orbits with radially-dependent excitation conditions via photo-ionisation from the white dwarf. We also obtained short-cadence (~ 4 min) spectroscopy to search for variability on the time-scale of the disc's orbital period (~ hours) due to the presence of a planetesimal, and rule out variability at a level of ~ 1.4 per cent.

=== arXiv:2110.03543v1  [2021-10-07]
TITLE  : Space-Based Photometry Of Binary Stars: From Voyager To TESS
AUTHORS: John Southworth
ABS    : Binary stars are crucial laboratories for stellar physics, so have been photometric targets for space missions beginning with the very first orbiting telescope (OAO-2) launched in 1968. This review traces the binary stars observed and the scientific results obtained from the early days of ultraviolet missions (OAO-2, Voyager, ANS, IUE), through a period of diversification (Hipparcos, WIRE, MOST, BRITE), to the current era of large planetary transit surveys (CoRoT, Kepler, TESS). In this time observations have been obtained of detached, semi-detached and contact binaries containing dwarfs, sub-giants, giants, supergiants, white dwarfs, planets, neutron stars and accretion discs. Recent missions have found a huge variety of objects such as pulsating stars in eclipsing binaries, multi-eclipsers, heartbeat stars and binaries hosting transiting planets. Particular attention is paid to eclipsing binaries, because they are staggeringly useful, and to the NASA Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) because its huge sky coverage enables a wide range of scientific investigations with unprecedented ease. These results are placed into context, future missions are discussed, and a list of important science goals is presented.

=== arXiv:2109.09579v1  [2021-09-20]
TITLE  : Dust rings as a footprint of planet formation in a protoplanetary disk
AUTHORS: Kazuhiro D. Kanagawa, Takayuki Muto, Hidekazu Tanaka
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac282b
ABS    : Relatively large dust grains (referred to as pebbles) accumulate at the outer edge of the gap induced by a planet in a protoplanetary disk, and a ring structure with a high dust-to-gas ratio can be formed. Such a ring has been thought to be located right outside of the planet orbit. We examined the evolution of the dust ring formed by a migrating planet, by performing two-fluid (gas and dust) hydrodynamic simulations. We found that the initial dust ring does not follow the migrating planet and remains at the initial location of the planet in the cases with a low viscosity of $α\sim 10^{-4}$. The initial ring is gradually deformed by viscous diffusion, and a new ring is formed in the vicinity of the migrating planet, which developes from the trap of the dust grains leaking from the initial ring. During this phase, two rings co-exist outside the planet orbit. This phase can continue over $\sim 1$~Myr for a planet migrating from 100~au. After the initial ring disappears, only the later ring remains. This change in the ring morphology can provide clues as to when and where the planet was formed, and is the footprint of the planet. We also carried out simulations with a mass-growing planet. These simulations show more complex asymmetric structures in the dust rings. The observed asymmetric structures in the protoplanetary disks may be related to a migrating and mass-growing planet.

=== arXiv:2109.06219v2  [2021-09-13]
TITLE  : The ZTF-BTS Type Ia supernovae luminosity function is consistent with a single progenitor channel for the explosions
AUTHORS: Amir Sharon, Doron Kushnir
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stab3380
ABS    : We construct the Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) luminosity function (LF) using the Zwicky Transient Facility Bright Transient Survey (BTS) catalogue. While this magnitude-limited survey has an unprecedented number of objects, it suffers from large distance uncertainties and lacks an estimation of host extinction. We bypass these issues by calculating the intrinsic luminosities from the shape parameters of the light curve's $ g $ and $ r $ bands, with the luminosities calibrated from the well observed SNe Ia sample of the Carnegie Supernova Project, allowing us to construct, for the first time, the intrinsic LF of SNe Ia. We then use a novel tight relation between the color stretch and the synthesized $^{56}$Ni mass, $M_\mathrm{Ni56}$, to determine the $M_\mathrm{Ni56}$ distribution of SNe Ia. We find that the LFs are unimodal, with their peaks in line with previous results, but have a much lower rate of dim events and luminous events. We show that the features on top of the unimodal LF-derived distributions are all compatible with statistical noise, consistent with a single progenitor channel for the explosions. We further derive, for the first time, the SNe Ia distribution of host galaxy extinction, and find a mean selective extinction of $E(B-V)\approx0.1$ and a non-negligible fraction with large, $ &gt;1\,\text{mag} $, extinction in the optical bands. The high extinction is typical for luminous SNe, supporting their young population origin.

=== arXiv:2109.02632v2  [2021-09-06]
TITLE  : Looking for a twist: probing the cosmological gravitomagnetic effect via weak lensing-kSZ cross correlations
AUTHORS: Cristian Barrera-Hinojosa, Baojiu Li, Yan-Chuan Cai
JOURNAL: MNRAS, 510, 3589 (2022)
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stab3657
ABS    : General relativity predicts that the rotational momentum flux of matter twists the spacetime via a vector gravitomagnetic (frame-dragging) field, which remains undetected in cosmology. This vector field induces an additional gravitational lensing effect; at the same time, the momentum field sources the kinetic Sunyaev-Zel'dovich (kSZ) effect. The common origin of these two effects allows us to probe the gravitomagnetic signal via their cross-correlations. In this paper, we explore the possibility of detecting the gravitomagnetic field in $Λ$CDM by cross-correlating the weak-lensing convergence field with the CMB temperature map, which is imprinted with the kSZ signal. This approach allows us to extract the gravitomagnetic effect because the cross correlation between the standard Newtonian contribution to the weak-lensing convergence field, $κ_Φ$, and the kSZ effect is expected to vanish. We study the cross correlations with a suite of large-volume Newtonian $N$-body simulations and a small-volume, high-resolution, general-relativistic counterpart. We show that insufficient simulation resolution can introduce significant spurious correlations between $κ_Φ$ and kSZ. From the high-resolution simulation, we find that the cumulative signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the kSZ-gravitomagnetic convergence field can reach almost 15 (30) at $\ell\simeq5000$ ($10^4$) for the lensing source redshift $z_s=0.83$, if only cosmic variance is considered. We make forecast for next-generation lensing surveys such as Euclid and LSST, and CMB experiments such as Simons Observatory and CMB-S4, and find that, for $z_s=1.4$, the cumulative SNR can exceed 5 (9) at $\ell\simeq5000$ ($10^4$), indicating that the cosmological gravitomagnetic effect can be detected, if several foreground contaminations can be removed.

=== arXiv:2108.02901v1  [2021-08-06]
TITLE  : Extreme Variability of the V488 Persei Debris Disk
AUTHORS: G. H. Rieke, K. Y. L. Su, Carl Melis, Andras Gaspar
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac0dc4
ABS    : V488 Persei is the most extreme debris disk known in terms of the fraction of the stellar luminosity it intercepts and reradiates. The infrared output of its disk is extremely variable, similar in this respect to the most variable disk known previously, that around ID8 in NGC 2547. We show that the variations are likely to be due to collisions of large planetesimals (&gt; 100 km in diameter) in a belt being stirred gravitationally by a planetary or low-mass-brown-dwarf member of a planetary system around the star. The dust being produced by the resulting collisions is falling into the star due to drag by the stellar wind. The indicated planetesimal destruction rate is so high that it is unlikely that the current level of activity can persist for much longer than ~ 1000 - 10,000 years, and it may signal a major realignment of the configuration of the planetary system.

=== arXiv:2107.12520v1  [2021-07-26]
TITLE  : The Mass Budgets and Spatial Scales of Exoplanet Systems and Protoplanetary Disks
AUTHORS: Gijs D. Mulders, Ilaria Pascucci, Fred J. Ciesla, Rachel B. Fernandes
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac178e
ABS    : Planets are born from disks of gas and dust, and observations of protoplanetary disks are used to constrain the initial conditions of planet formation. However, dust mass measurements of Class II disks with ALMA have called into question whether they contain enough solids to build the exoplanets that have been detected to date. In this paper, we calculate the mass and spatial scale of solid material around Sun-like stars probed by transit and radial velocity exoplanet surveys, and compare those to the observed dust masses and sizes of Class II disks in the same stellar mass regime. We show that the apparent mass discrepancy disappears when accounting for observational selection and detection biases. We find a discrepancy only when the planet formation efficiency is below 100%, or if there is a population of undetected exoplanets that significantly contributes to the mass in solids. We identify a positive correlation between the masses of planetary systems and their respective orbital periods, which is consistent with the trend between the masses and the outer radii of Class II dust disks. This implies that, despite a factor 100 difference in spatial scale, the properties of protoplanetary disks seem to be imprinted on the exoplanet population.

=== arXiv:2107.10954v1  [2021-07-22]
TITLE  : The Rise and Fall of the Eclipsing Binary HS Hydrae
AUTHORS: James R. A. Davenport, Diana Windemuth, Karen Warmbein, Erin L. Howard, Courtney Klein, Jessica Birky
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/ac1f97
ABS    : HS Hydrae is a short period eclipsing binary (P_orb=1.57 day) that belongs to a rare group of systems observed to have rapidly changing inclinations. This evolution is due to a third star on an intermediate orbit, and results in significant differences in eclipse depths and timings year-to-year. Zasche &amp; Paschke (2012) revealed that HS Hydrae's eclipses were rapidly fading from view, predicting they would cease around 2022. Using 25 days of photometric data from Sector 009 of the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS), we find that the primary eclipses for HS Hydrae were only 0.00173+/-0.00007 mag in depth in March 2019. This data from TESS likely represents the last eclipses detected from HS Hydrae. We also searched the Digitization of the Harvard Astronomical Plate Collection (DASCH) archive for historic data from the system. With a total baseline of over 125 years, this unique combination of data sets - from photographic plates to precision space-based photometry - allows us to trace the emergence and decay of eclipses from HS Hydrae, and further constrain its evolution. Recent TESS observations from Sector 035 confirm that eclipses have ceased for HS Hya, and we estimate they will begin again in 2195.

=== arXiv:2107.10751v1  [2021-07-22]
TITLE  : Quantifying Variability of YSOs in the Mid-IR Over Six Years with NEOWISE
AUTHORS: Wooseok Park, Jeong-Eun Lee, Carlos Contreras Peña, Doug Johnstone, Gregory Herczeg, Sieun Lee, Seonjae Lee, Anupam Bhardwaj
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac1745
ABS    : Variability in young stellar objects (YSOs) can be caused by various time-dependent phenomena associated with star formation, including accretion rates, geometric changes in the circumstellar disks, stochastic hydromagnetic interactions between stellar surfaces and inner disk edges, reconnections within the stellar magnetosphere, and hot/cold spots on stellar surfaces. We uncover and characterize $\sim$1700 variables from a sample of $\sim$5400 YSOs in nearby low-mass star-forming regions using mid-IR light curves obtained from the 6.5-years NEOWISE All Sky Survey. The mid-IR variability traces a wide range of dynamical, physical, and geometrical phenomenon. We classify six types of YSO mid-IR variability based on their light curves: secular variability ($Linear, Curved, Periodic$) and stochastic variability ($Burst, Drop, Irregular$). YSOs in earlier evolutionary stages have higher fractions of variables and higher amplitudes for the variability, with the recurrence timescale of FUor-type outbursts (defined here as $Δ$W1 or $Δ$W2 $&gt;1$ mag followed by inspection of candidates) of $\sim$1000 years in the early embedded protostellar phase. Known eruptive young stars and subluminous objects show fractions of variables similar to the fraction ($\sim55\%$) found in typical protostars, suggesting that these two distinct types are not distinct in variability over the 6.5-year timescale. Along with brightness variability, we also find a diverse range of secular color variations, which can be attributed to a competitive interplay between the variable accretion luminosity of the central source and the variable extinction by material associated with the accretion process.

=== arXiv:2107.10284v1  [2021-07-21]
TITLE  : UV Fluorescence Traces Gas and LyA Evolution in Protoplanetary Disks
AUTHORS: Nicole Arulanantham, Kevin France, Keri Hoadley, P. C. Schneider, Catherine C. Espaillat, H. M. Günther, Gregory J. Herczeg, Alexander Brown
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/ac1593
ABS    : Ultraviolet spectra of protoplanetary disks trace distributions of warm gas at radii where rocky planets form. We combine HST-COS observations of H2 and CO emission from 12 classical T Tauri stars to more extensively map inner disk surface layers, where gas temperature distributions allow radially stratified fluorescence from the two species. We calculate empirical emitting radii for each species under the assumption that the line widths are entirely set by Keplerian broadening, demonstrating that the CO fluorescence originates further from the stars (r ~ 20 AU) than the H2 (r ~ 0.8 AU). This is supported by 2-D radiative transfer models, which show that the peak and outer radii of the CO flux distributions generally extend further into the outer disk than the H2. These results also indicate that additional sources of LyA photons remain unaccounted for, requiring more complex models to fully reproduce the molecular gas emission. As a first step, we confirm that the morphologies of the UV-CO bands and LyA radiation fields are significantly correlated and discover that both trace the degree of dust disk evolution. The UV tracers appear to follow the same sequence of disk evolution as forbidden line emission from jets and winds, as the observed LyA profiles transition between dominant red wing and dominant blue wing shapes when the high-velocity optical emission disappears. Our results suggest a scenario where UV radiation fields, disk winds and jets, and molecular gas evolve in harmony with the dust disks throughout their lifetimes.

=== arXiv:2107.00322v1  [2021-07-01]
TITLE  : White dwarf planetary debris dependence on physical structure distributions within asteroid belts
AUTHORS: Catriona H. McDonald, Dimitri Veras
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stab1906
ABS    : White dwarfs which exhibit transit signatures of planetary debris and accreted planetary material provide exceptional opportunities to probe the material composition and dynamical structure of planetary systems. Although previous theoretical work investigating the role of minor body disruption around white dwarfs has focussed on spherical bodies, Solar System asteroids can be more accurately modelled as triaxial ellipsoids. Here we present an analytical framework to identify the type of disruption (tidal fragmentation, total sublimation or direct impact) experienced by triaxial asteroids approaching white dwarfs on extremely eccentric (e \sim 1) orbits. This framework is then used to identify the outcomes for simplified Main belt analogues of 100 bodies across five different white dwarf temperatures. We also present an empirical relationship between cooling age and effective temperature for both DA and DB white dwarfs to identify the age of the white dwarfs considered here. We find that using a purely spherical shape model can underestimate the physical size and radial distance at which an asteroid is subjected to complete sublimation, and these differences increase with greater elongation of the body. Contrastingly, fragmentation always occurs in the largest semi-axis of a body and so can be modelled by a sphere of that radius. Both fragmentation and sublimation are greatly affected by the body's material composition, and hence by the composition of their progenitor asteroid belts. The white dwarf temperature, and hence cooling age, can affect the expected debris distribution: higher temperatures sublimate large elongated asteroids, and cooler temperatures accommodate more direct impacts.

=== arXiv:2106.15181v2  [2021-06-29]
TITLE  : A Dyson Sphere around a black hole
AUTHORS: Tiger Yu-Yang Hsiao, Tomotsugu Goto, Tetsuya Hashimoto, Daryl Joe D. Santos, Alvina Y. L. On, Ece Kilerci-Eser, Yi Hang Valerie Wong, Seong Jin Kim
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stab1832
ABS    : The search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) has been conducted for nearly 60 years. A Dyson Sphere, a spherical structure that surrounds a star and transports its radiative energy outward as an energy source for an advanced civilisation, is one of the main targets of SETI. In this study, we discuss whether building a Dyson Sphere around a black hole is effective. We consider six energy sources: (i) the cosmic microwave background, (ii) the Hawking radiation, (iii) an accretion disk, (iv) Bondi accretion, (v) a corona, and (vi) relativistic jets. To develop future civilisations (for example, a Type II civilisation), $4\times10^{26}\,{\rm W}$($1\,{\rm L_{\odot}}$) is expected to be needed. Among (iii) to (vi), the largest luminosity can be collected from an accretion disk, reaching $10^{5}\,{\rm L_{\odot}}$, enough to maintain a Type II civilisation. Moreover, if a Dyson Sphere collects not only the electromagnetic radiation but also other types of energy (e.g., kinetic energy) from the jets, the total collected energy would be approximately 5 times larger. Considering the emission from a Dyson Sphere, our results show that the Dyson Sphere around a stellar-mass black hole in the Milky Way ($10\,\rm kpc$ away from us) is detectable in the ultraviolet$(\rm 10-400\,{\rm nm)}$, optical$(\rm 400-760\,{\rm nm)}$, near-infrared($\rm 760\,{\rm nm}-5\,{\rm μm}$), and mid-infrared($\rm 5-40\,{\rm μm}$) wavelengths via the waste heat radiation using current telescopes such as Galaxy Evolution Explorer Ultraviolet Sky Surveys. Performing model fitting to observed spectral energy distributions and measuring the variability of radial velocity may help us to identify these possible artificial structures.

=== arXiv:2106.14808v1  [2021-06-28]
TITLE  : Transmission spectroscopy with VLT FORS2: a featureless spectrum for the low-density transiting exoplanet WASP-88b
AUTHORS: Petros Spyratos, Nikolay Nikolov, John Southworth, Savvas Constantinou, Nikku Madhusudhan, Aarynn L. Carter, Ernst J. W. de Mooij, Jonathan J. Fortney
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stab1847
ABS    : We present ground-based optical transmission spectroscopy of the low-density hot Jupiter WASP-88b covering the wavelength range 4413-8333 Å with the FORS2 spectrograph on the Very Large Telescope. The FORS2 white light curves exhibit a significant time-correlated noise which we model using a Gaussian Process and remove as a wavelength-independent component from the spectroscopic light curves. We analyse complementary photometric observations from the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite and refine the system properties and ephemeris. We find a featureless transmission spectrum with increased absorption towards shorter wavelengths. We perform an atmospheric retrieval analysis with the AURA code, finding tentative evidence for haze in the upper atmospheric layers and a lower likelihood for a dense cloud deck. Whilst our retrieval analysis results point toward clouds and hazes, further evidence is needed to definitively reject a clear-sky scenario.

=== arXiv:2106.14510v2  [2021-06-28]
TITLE  : Spatial structure of magnetic polarons in strongly interacting antiferromagnets
AUTHORS: K. K. Nielsen, M. A. Bastarrachea-Magnani, T. Pohl, G. M. Bruun
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. B 104, 155136 (2021)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevB.104.155136
ABS    : The properties of mobile impurities in quantum magnets are fundamental for our understanding of strongly correlated materials and may play a key role in the physics of high-temperature superconductivity. Hereby, the motion of hole-like defects through an antiferromagnet has been of particular importance. It creates magnetic frustrations that lead to the formation of a quasiparticle, whose complex structure continues to pose substantial challenges to theory and numerical simulations. In this article, we develop a non-perturbative theoretical approach to describe the microscopic properties of such magnetic polarons. Based on the self-consistent Born approximation, which is provenly accurate in the strong-coupling regime, we obtain a complete description of the polaron wave function by solving a set of Dyson-like equations that permit to compute relevant spin-hole correlation functions. We apply this new method to analyze the spatial structure of magnetic polarons in the strongly interacting regime and find qualitative differences from predictions of previously applied truncation schemes. Our calculations reveal a remarkably high spatial symmetry of the polaronic magnetization cloud and a surprising misalignment between its orientation and the polaron crystal momentum. The developed framework opens up an approach to the microscopic properties of doped quantum magnets and will enable detailed analyses of ongoing experiments based on cold-atom quantum simulations of the Fermi-Hubbard model.

=== arXiv:2106.11518v1  [2021-06-22]
TITLE  : AGB interlopers in YSO catalogues hunted out by NEOWISE
AUTHORS: Jeong-Eun Lee, Sieun Lee, Seonjae Lee, Kyung-Won Suh, Se-Hyung Cho, Do-Young Byun, Wooseok Park, Gregory Herczeg
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8213/ac0d59
ABS    : AGBs and YSOs often share the same domains in IR color-magnitude or color-color diagrams leading to potential mis-classification. We extracted a list of AGB interlopers from the published YSO catalogues using the periodogram analysis on NEOWISE time series data. YSO IR variability is typically stochastic and linked to episodic mass accretion. Furthermore, most variable YSOs are at an early evolutionary stage, with significant surrounding envelope and/or disk material. In contrast, AGBs are often identified by a well defined sinusoidal variability with periods of a few hundreds days. From our periodogram analysis of all known low mass YSOs in the Gould Belt, we find 85 AGB candidates, out of which 62 were previously classified as late-stage Class III YSOs. Most of these new AGB candidates have similar IR colors to O-rich AGBs. We observed 73 of these AGB candidates in the H2O, CH3OH and SiO maser lines to further reveal their nature. The SiO maser emission was detected in 10 sources, confirming them as AGBs since low mass YSOs, especially Class III YSOs, do not show such maser emission. The H2O and CH3OH maser lines were detected in none of our targets.

=== arXiv:2106.09727v1  [2021-06-17]
TITLE  : Magnetic dynamos in white dwarfs -- II. Relating magnetism and pollution
AUTHORS: Matthias R. Schreiber, Diogo Belloni, Boris T. Gaensicke, Steven G. Parsons
DOI    : 10.1093/mnrasl/slab069
ABS    : We investigate whether the recently suggested rotation and crystallization driven dynamo can explain the apparent increase of magnetism in old metal polluted white dwarfs. We find that the effective temperature distribution of polluted magnetic white dwarfs is in agreement with most/all of them having a crystallizing core and increased rotational velocities are expected due to accretion of planetary material which is evidenced by the metal absorption lines. We conclude that a rotation and crystallization driven dynamo offers not only an explanation for the different occurrence rates of strongly magnetic white dwarfs in close binaries, but also for the high incidence of weaker magnetic fields in old metal polluted white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:2106.02659v1  [2021-06-04]
TITLE  : Recurring Planetary Debris Transits and Circumstellar Gas around White Dwarf ZTF J0328$-$1219
AUTHORS: Zachary P. Vanderbosch, Saul Rappaport, Joseph A. Guidry, Bruce L. Gary, Simon Blouin, Thomas G. Kaye, Alycia J. Weinberger, Carl Melis
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac0822
ABS    : We present follow-up photometry and spectroscopy of ZTF J0328$-$1219 strengthening its status as a white dwarf exhibiting transiting planetary debris. Using TESS and Zwicky Transient Facility photometry, along with follow-up high speed photometry from various observatories, we find evidence for two significant periods of variability at 9.937 and 11.2 hr. We interpret these as most likely the orbital periods of different debris clumps. Changes in the detailed dip structures within the light curves are observed on nightly, weekly, and monthly timescales, reminiscent of the dynamic behavior observed in the first white dwarf discovered to harbor a disintegrating asteroid, WD 1145+017. We fit previously published spectroscopy along with broadband photometry to obtain new atmospheric parameters for the white dwarf, with $M_{\star} = 0.731 \pm 0.023\,M_{\odot}$, $T_{\mathrm{eff}} = 7630 \pm 140\,$K, and $\mathrm{[Ca/He]}=-9.55\pm0.12$. With new high-resolution spectroscopy, we detect prominent and narrow Na D absorption features likely of circumstellar origin, with velocities $21.4\pm1.0$ km s$^{-1}$ blue-shifted relative to atmospheric lines. We attribute the periodically modulated photometric signal to dusty effluents from small orbiting bodies such as asteroids or comets, but are unable to identify the most likely material that is being sublimated, or otherwise ejected, as the environmental temperatures range from roughly 400K to 600K.

=== arXiv:2105.03947v1  [2021-05-09]
TITLE  : QCD phase transition and equation of state of stellar strong interaction matter via Dyson-Schwinger equation approach
AUTHORS: Zhan Bai, Yu-xin Liu
JOURNAL: Eur. Phys. J. C 81, 612 (2021)
DOI    : 10.1140/epjc/s10052-021-09423-y
ABS    : We study the phase structure and phase transition of cold dense QCD matter via the Dyson-Schwinger equation approach. We take the rainbow approximation and the Gaussian-type gluon model. In order to guarantee that the quark number density begins to appear at the nuclear liquid-gas phase transition chemical potential, we propose a chemical potential dependent modification factor for the gluon model. We find that for the iso-symmetric quark matter, the modification reduces the chemical potential of the phase coexistence region of the first--order phase transition. We also implement the relativistic mean field theory to describe the hadron matter, and make use of the Maxwell and Gibbs construction method to study the phase transition of beta--equilibrium and charge neutral matter in compact stars. The results show that the phase transition will not happen in case of the Gaussian--type gluon model without any modification. The results also indicate that the upper boundary of the coexistence region should be larger than the current Nambu solution existing region. We also calculate the mass-radius relation of the compact stars, and find that the hadron-quark phase transition happens at too high chemical potential so that the maximum mass of the compact star is hardly affected by the hadron-quark phase transition.

=== arXiv:2104.10512v2  [2021-04-21]
TITLE  : Failed Supernova Remnants
AUTHORS: Daichi Tsuna
DOI    : 10.1093/pasj/psab041
ABS    : In a failed supernova, partial ejection of the progenitor's outer envelope can occur due to weakening of the core's gravity by neutrino emission in the protoneutron star phase. We consider emission when this ejecta sweeps up the circumstellar material, analogous to supernova remnants (SNRs). We focus on failed explosions of blue supergiants, and find that the emission can be bright in soft X-rays. Due to its soft emission, we find that sources in the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) are more promising to detect than those in the Galactic disk. These remnants are characteristic in smallness ($\lesssim 10$ pc) and slowness (100s of ${\rm km\ s^{-1}}$) compared to typical SNRs. Although the expected number of detectable sources is small (up to a few by eROSITA 4-year all-sky survey), prospects are better for deeper surveys targeting the LMC. Detection of these failed SNRs will realize observational studies of mass ejection upon black hole formation.

=== arXiv:2104.07693v1  [2021-04-15]
TITLE  : Black Swans in Astronomical Data
AUTHORS: David Kipping
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stab1129
ABS    : Astronomy has always been propelled by the discovery of new phenomena lacking precedent, often followed by new theories to explain their existence and properties. In the modern era of large surveys tiling the sky at ever high precision and sampling rates, these serendipitous discoveries look set to continue, with recent examples including Boyajian's Star, Fast Radio Bursts and `Oumuamua. Accordingly, we here look ahead and aim to provide a statistical framework for interpreting such events and providing guidance to future observations, under the basic premise that the phenomenon in question stochastically repeat at some unknown, constant rate, $λ$. Specifically, expressions are derived for 1) the a-posteriori distribution for $λ$, 2) the a-posteriori distribution for the recurrence time, and, 3) the benefit-to-cost ratio of further observations relative to that of the inaugural event. Some rule-of-thumb results for each of these are found to be 1) $λ&lt; \{0.7, 2.3, 4.6\}\,t_1^{-1}$ to $\{50, 90, 95\}\%$ confidence (where $t_1=$ time to obtain the first detection), 2) the recurrence time is $t_2 &lt; \{1, 9, 99\}\,t_1$ to $\{50, 90, 95\}\%$ confidence, with a lack of repetition by time $t_2$ yielding a $p$-value of $1/[1+(t_2/t_1)]$, and, 3) follow-up for $\lesssim 10\,t_1$ is expected to be scientifically worthwhile under an array of differing assumptions about the object's intrinsic scientific value. We apply these methods to the Breakthrough Listen Candidate 1 signal and tidal disruption events observed by TESS.

=== arXiv:2104.04117v1  [2021-04-08]
TITLE  : Light variability of white dwarfs and subdwarfs due to surface abundance spots
AUTHORS: J. Krticka, M. Prvak, I. Krtickova, Z. Mikulasek, A. Kawka
ABS    : Classical main-sequence chemically peculiar stars show light variability that originates in surface abundance spots. In the spots, the flux redistribution due to line (bound-bound) and bound-free transitions is modulated by stellar rotation and leads to light variability. White dwarfs and hot subdwarfs may also have surface abundance spots either owing to the elemental diffusion or as a result of accretion of debris. We model the light variability of typical white dwarfs and hot subdwarfs that results from putative surface abundance spots. We show that the spots with radiatively supported iron overabundance may cause observable light variability of hot white dwarfs and subdwarfs. Accretion of debris material may lead to detectable light variability in warm white dwarfs. We apply our model to the helium star HD 144941 and conclude that the spot model is able to explain most of observed light variations of this star.

=== arXiv:2103.15124v1  [2021-03-28]
TITLE  : A new approach to spectroscopic phase curves: The emission spectrum of WASP-12b observed in quadrature with HST/WFC3
AUTHORS: J. Arcangeli, J. -M. Désert, V. Parmentier, S. -M. Tsai, K. B. Stevenson
JOURNAL: A&amp;A, 646, A94 (2021)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202038865
ABS    : We analyse emission spectra of WASP-12b from a partial phase curve observed over three epochs with the Hubble Space Telescope, covering eclipse, quadrature, and transit, respectively. As the 1.1-day period phase curve was only partially covered over three epochs, traditional methods to extract the planet flux and instrument systematic errors cannot recover the thermal emission away from the secondary eclipse. To analyse this partial phase curve, we introduce a new method, which corrects for the wavelength-independent component of the systematic errors. Our new method removes the achromatic instrument and stellar variability, and uses the measured stellar spectrum in eclipse to then retrieve a relative planetary spectrum in wavelength at each phase. We are able to extract the emission spectrum of an exoplanet at quadrature outside of a phase curve for the first time; we recover the quadrature spectrum of WASP-12b up to an additive constant. The dayside emission spectrum is extracted in a similar manner, and in both cases we are able to estimate the brightness temperature, albeit at a greatly reduced precision. We estimate the brightness temperature from the dayside (Tday=3186+-677 K) and from the quadrature spectrum (Tquad=2124+-417 K) and combine them to constrain the energy budget of the planet. We compare our extracted relative spectra to global circulation models of this planet, which are generally found to be a good match. However, we do see tentative evidence of a steeper spectral slope in the measured dayside spectrum compared to our models. We find that we cannot match this increased slope by increasing optical opacities in our models. We also find that this spectral slope is unlikely to be explained by a non-equilibrium water abundance, as water advected from the nightside is quickly dissociated on the dayside.

=== arXiv:2103.01536v2  [2021-03-02]
TITLE  : Concepts for future missions to search for technosignatures
AUTHORS: Hector Socas-Navarro, Jacob Haqq-Misra, Jason T. Wright, Ravi Kopparapu, James Benford, Ross Davis, TechnoClimes 2020 workshop participants
DOI    : 10.1016/j.actaastro.2021.02.029
ABS    : New and unique opportunities now exist to look for technosignatures (TS) beyond traditional SETI radio searches, motivated by tremendous advances in exoplanet science and observing capabilities in recent years. Space agencies, both public and private, may be particularly interested in learning about the community's views as to the optimal methods for future TS searches with current or forthcoming technology. This report is an effort in that direction. We put forward a set of possible mission concepts designed to search for TS, although the data supplied by such missions would also benefit other areas of astrophysics. We introduce a novel framework to analyze a broad diversity of TS in a quantitative manner. This framework is based on the concept of ichnoscale, which is a new parameter related to the scale of a TS cosmic footprint, together with the number of potential targets where such TS can be searched for, and whether or not it is continuous in time.

=== arXiv:2103.00568v1  [2021-02-28]
TITLE  : A new sample of warm extreme debris disks from the ALLWISE catalog
AUTHORS: Attila Moór, Péter Ábrahám, Gyula Szabó, Krisztián Vida, Gianni Cataldi, Alíz Derekas, Thomas Henning, Karen Kinemuchi
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/abdc26
ABS    : Extreme debris disks (EDDs) are rare systems with peculiarly large amounts of warm dust that may stem from recent giant impacts between planetary embryos during the final phases of terrestrial planet growth. Here we report on the identification and characterization of six new EDDs. These disks surround F5-G9 type main-sequence stars with ages &gt;100 Myr, have dust temperatures higher than 300K and fractional luminosities between 0.01 and 0.07. Using time-domain photometric data at 3.4 and 4.6$μ$m from the WISE all sky surveys, we conclude that four of these disks exhibited variable mid-infrared emission between 2010 and 2019. Analyzing the sample of all known EDDs, now expanded to 17 objects, we find that 14 of them showed changes at 3-5$μ$m over the past decade suggesting that mid-infrared variability is an inherent characteristic of EDDs. We also report that wide-orbit pairs are significantly more common in EDD systems than in the normal stellar population. While current models of rocky planet formation predict that the majority of giant collisions occur in the first 100 Myr, we find that the sample of EDDs is dominated by systems older than this age. This raises the possibility that the era of giant impacts may be longer than we think, or that some other mechanism(s) can also produce EDDs. We examine a scenario where the observed warm dust stems from the disruption and/or collisions of comets delivered from an outer reservoir into the inner regions, and explore what role the wide companions could play in this process.

=== arXiv:2102.05027v1  [2021-02-09]
TITLE  : Nitrogen Dioxide Pollution as a Signature of Extraterrestrial Technology
AUTHORS: Ravi Kopparapu, Giada Arney, Jacob Haqq-Misra, Jacob Lustig-Yaeger, Geronimo Villanueva
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/abd7f7
ABS    : Nitrogen dioxide (NO$_2$) on Earth today has biogenic and anthropogenic sources. During the COVID-19 pandemic, observations of global NO$_2$ emissions have shown significant decrease in urban areas. Drawing upon this example of NO$_2$ as an industrial byproduct, we use a one-dimensional photochemical model and synthetic spectral generator to assess the detectability of NO$_2$ as an atmospheric technosignature on exoplanets. We consider cases of an Earth-like planet around Sun-like, K-dwarf and M-dwarf stars. We find that NO$_2$ concentrations increase on planets around cooler stars due to less short-wavelength photons that can photolyze NO$_2$. In cloud-free results, present Earth-level NO$_2$ on an Earth-like planet around a Sun-like star at 10pc can be detected with SNR ~5 within ~400 hours with a 15 meter LUVOIR-like telescope when observed in the 0.2 - 0.7micron range where NO$_2$ has a strong absorption. However, clouds and aerosols can reduce the detectability and could mimic the NO$_2$ feature. Historically, global NO$_2$ levels were 3x higher, indicating the capability of detecting a 40-year old Earth-level civilization. Transit and direct imaging observations to detect infrared spectral signatures of NO$_2$ on habitable planets around M-dwarfs would need several 100s of hours of observation time, both due to weaker NO$_2$ absorption in this region, and also because of masking features by dominant H$_2$O and CO$_2$ bands in the infrared part of the spectrum. Non-detection at these levels could be used to place upper limits on the prevalence of NO$_2$ as a technosignature.

=== arXiv:2102.00066v4  [2021-01-29]
TITLE  : R-process-rich stellar streams in the Milky Way
AUTHORS: Maude Gull, Anna Frebel, Karina Hinojosa, Ian U. Roederer, Alexander P. Ji, Kaley Brauer
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/abea1a
ABS    : We present high-resolution Magellan/MIKE spectra of 22 bright ($9&lt;V&lt;13.5$) metal-poor stars ($-3.18&lt;\mbox{[Fe/H]}&lt;-1.37$) in three different stellar streams, the Helmi debris stream, the Helmi trail stream, and the $ω$ Centauri progenitor stream. We augment our Helmi debris sample with results for ten stars by Roederer et al. 2010 (arXiv:1001.1745), for a total of 32 stars. Detailed chemical abundances of light elements as well as heavy neutron-capture elements have been determined for our 22 stars. All three streams contain carbon-enhanced stars. For 13 stars, neutron-capture element lines were detectable and they all show signatures in agreement with the scaled solar $r$-process pattern, albeit with a large spread of $-0.5&lt;\mbox{[Eu/Fe]}&lt;+1.3$. Eight of these stars show an additional small $s$-process contribution superposed onto their $r$-process pattern. This could be discerned because of the relatively high $S/N$ of the spectra given that the stars are close by in the halo. Our results suggest that the progenitors of these streams experienced one or more $r$-process events, such as a neutron star merger or another prolific $r$-process source, early on that widely enriched these host systems before their accretion by the Milky Way. The small $s$-process contribution suggests the presence of AGB stars and associated local (inhomogeneous) enrichment as part of the ongoing chemical evolution by low mass stars. Stars in stellar streams may thus be a promising avenue for studying the detailed history of large dwarf galaxies and their role in halo assembly with easily accessible targets for high-quality spectra of many stars.

=== arXiv:2101.12049v1  [2021-01-28]
TITLE  : A $~75\%$ Occurrence Rate of Debris Discs around F stars in the $β$ Pic Moving Group
AUTHORS: Nicole Pawellek, Mark Wyatt, Luca Matrà, Grant Kennedy, Ben Yelverton
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stab269
ABS    : Only 20\% of old field stars have detectable debris discs, leaving open the question of what disc, if any, is present around the remaining 80\%. Young moving groups allow to probe this population, since discs are expected to have been brighter early on. This paper considers the population of F~stars in the 23~Myr-old BPMG where we find that 9/12 targets possess discs. We also analyse archival ALMA data to derive radii for 4 of the discs, presenting the first image of the 63au radius disc of HD~164249. Comparing the BPMG results to disc samples from $\sim45$~Myr and $\sim150$~Myr-old moving~groups, and to discs found around field stars, we find the disc incidence rate in young moving~groups is comparable to that of the BPMG and significantly higher than that of field~stars. The BPMG discs tend to be smaller than those around field~stars. However, this difference is not statistically significant due to the small number of targets. Yet, by analysing the fractional luminosity vs disc radius parameter space we find that the fractional luminosities in the populations considered drop by two orders of magnitude within the first 100~Myr. This is much faster than expected by collisional evolution, implying a decay equivalent to $1/\text{age}^2$. We attribute this depletion to embedded planets which would be around 170~$M_\text{earth}$ to cause a depletion on the appropriate timescale. However, we cannot rule out that different birth environments of nearby young clusters result in brighter debris discs than the progenitors of field~stars which likely formed in a more dense environment.

=== arXiv:2101.07515v1  [2021-01-19]
TITLE  : The equation of state and radial oscillations of neutron stars
AUTHORS: Ting-Ting Sun, Zi-Yue Zheng, Huan Chen, G. Fiorella Burgio, Hans-Josef Schulze
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. D 103, 103003 (2021)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevD.103.103003
ABS    : We investigate radial oscillations of pure neutron stars and hybrid stars, employing equations of state of nuclear matter from Brueckner-Hartree-Fock theory, and of quark matter from the Dyson-Schwinger quark model, performing a Gibbs construction for the mixed phase in hybrid stars. We calculate the eigenfrequencies and corresponding oscillation functions. Our results for the zero points of the first-order radial oscillation frequencies give the maximum mass of stable neutron stars, consistent with the common criterion $dM/dρ_c=0$. Possible observations of the radial oscillation frequencies could help to learn more about the equation of state, predict the maximum mass of neutron stars more precisely, and indicate the presence of quark matter.

=== arXiv:2101.06731v3  [2021-01-17]
TITLE  : Level correlations of the CMB temperature angular power spectrum
AUTHORS: Md Ishaque Khan, Rajib Saha
JOURNAL: J Astrophys Astron 43, 100 (2022)
DOI    : 10.1007/s12036-022-09893-w
ABS    : If the principle of statistical isotropy is valid, then the angular power spectrum (APS) of cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation is uncorrelated between different multipoles. We propose a novel technique to analyse any possible correlations of the foreground cleaned CMB temperature angular power spectrum (APS) measures ($C_{\ell}$ and $\mathcal{D}_\ell=\frac{\ell(\ell+1)}{2π}C_\ell$). This is motivated by the behaviour of level spacings between random matrix eigenvalues. The method helps distinguish uncorrelated statistically isotropic CMB APS from correlated APS, where the latter can arise due to breakdown of isotropy or presence of some residual systematics in the foreground cleaned CMB maps. Spacings of statistically isotropic CMB $C_\ell$'s and $\mathcal{D}_\ell$'s are seen to closely obey Poisson statistics and introduction of correlations changes the distribution to appropriate Wigner-Dyson statistics. For foreground cleaned CMB, we employ the average spacing of consecutive multipole APS for multipoles $\in [2,31]$. This estimator is sensitive to departures from the null hypothesis of zero correlations between the APS measures of statistically isotropic CMB. We study full sky WMAP 9 year ILC and 2018 Planck foreground cleaned maps (Commander, NILC and SMICA). Sans parity distinctions, average spacings are in good agreement with theoretical expectation. With parity distinctions, even multipoles indicate unusually low average spacings for both $C_\ell$'s (at $\geq 98.86\%$ C.L.) and $\mathcal{D}_\ell$'s (at $\geq 95.07\%$ C.L.). We use an inpainting method based on constrained Gaussian realisations and show that for the Planck $U73$ and WMAP $KQ75$ masks, all the foreground cleaned inpainted CMB maps robustly confirm the existence of such unusually low average spacings of even multipole APS. In addition, this signal is independent of the non-Gaussian cold spot.

=== arXiv:2101.06313v2  [2021-01-15]
TITLE  : Boyajian's Star B: The co-moving stellar companion to KIC 8462852
AUTHORS: Logan A. Pearce, Adam L. Kraus, Trent J. Dupuy, Andrew W. Mann, Daniel Huber
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/abdd33
ABS    : The light curve of KIC 8462852, a.k.a Boyajian's Star, undergoes deep dips the origin of which remains unclear. A faint star $\approx$2\arcsec to the east was discovered in Keck/NIRC2 imaging in Boyajian et al. (2016), but its status as a binary, and possible contribution to the observed variability, was unclear. Here, we use three epochs of Keck/NIRC2 imaging, spanning five years, in JHK near-infrared bands to obtain 1-mas precision astrometry. We show that the two objects exhibit common proper motion, measure a relative velocity of $μ=0.14\pm0.44$ mas yr$^{-1}$ ($μ=0.30\pm0.93$ km s$^{-1}$) and conclude that they are a binary pair at $880\pm10$ AU projected separation. There is marginal detection of possible orbital motion, but our astrometry is insufficient to characterize the orbit. We show that two other point sources are not associated with KIC 8462852. We recommend that attempts to model KIC 8462852 A's light curve should revisit the possibility that the bound stellar companion may play a role in causing the irregular brightness variations, for example through disruption of the orbits of bodies around the primary due to long-term orbital evolution of the binary orbit.

=== arXiv:2012.06368v2  [2020-12-11]
TITLE  : General Relativistic Effects in Weak Lensing Angular Power Spectra
AUTHORS: Nastassia Grimm, Jaiyul Yoo
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. D 104 (2021) 8, 083548
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevD.104.083548
ABS    : Advances in upcoming weak lensing surveys pose new challenges for an accurate modeling of the lensing observables. The wide sky coverage of Euclid makes angular scales down to $l_\mathrm{min}=10$ accessible. At such large angular scales, general relativistic effects manifest themselves, and the lensing magnification cannot be correctly described by the standard lensing convergence only. The impact of line-of-sight velocities on the magnification angular power spectrum, referred to as the Doppler magnification, is already well recognized in literature. In particular, it was suggested that the Doppler magnification could be extracted by measurements of both cosmic shear and magnification. In this work, we point out two previously neglected aspects with respect to this method. Firstly, the impact of the Doppler magnification is reduced through non-vanishing cross terms with the standard lensing convergence. This is particularly relevant when the sources are averaged over a bin of width $Δz\approx 0.1$, such as in Euclid's tomographic weak lensing survey. Secondly, general relativistic potential terms slightly enhance the signal. We present numerical calculations of all relativistic effects in the weak lensing angular power spectra on large scales.

=== arXiv:2012.04690v2  [2020-12-08]
TITLE  : Variability, periodicity and contact binaries in WISE
AUTHORS: Evan Petrosky, Hsiang-Chih Hwang, Nadia L. Zakamska, Vedant Chandra, Matthew J. Hill
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stab592
ABS    : The time-series component of WISE is a valuable resource for the study of variable objects. We present an analysis of an all-sky sample of ~450,000 AllWISE+NEOWISE infrared light curves of likely variables identified in AllWISE. By computing periodograms of all these sources, we identify ~56,000 periodic variables. Of these, ~42,000 are short-period (P&lt;1 day), near-contact or contact eclipsing binaries, many of which are on the main sequence. We use the periodic and aperiodic variables to test computationally inexpensive methods of periodic variable classification and identification, utilizing various measures of the probability distribution function of fluxes and of timescales of variability. The combination of variability measures from our periodogram and non-parametric analyses with infrared colors from WISE and absolute magnitudes, colors and variability amplitude from Gaia is useful for the identification and classification of periodic variables. Furthermore, we show that the effectiveness of non-parametric methods for the identification of periodic variables is comparable to that of the periodogram but at a much lower computational cost. Future surveys can utilize these methods to accelerate more traditional time-series analyses and to identify evolving sources missed by periodogram-based selections.

=== arXiv:2012.00035v2  [2020-11-30]
TITLE  : I Spy Transits and Pulsations: Empirical Variability in White Dwarfs Using Gaia and the Zwicky Transient Facility
AUTHORS: Joseph A. Guidry, Zachary P. Vanderbosch, J. J. Hermes, Brad N. Barlow, Isaac D. Lopez, Emily M. Boudreaux, Kyle A. Corcoran, Keaton J. Bell
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/abee68
ABS    : We present a novel method to detect variable astrophysical objects and transient phenomena using anomalous excess scatter in repeated measurements from public catalogs of Gaia DR2 and Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF) DR3 photometry. We first provide a generalized, all-sky proxy for variability using only Gaia DR2 photometry, calibrated to white dwarf stars. To ensure more robust candidate detection, we further employ a method combining Gaia with ZTF photometry and alerts. To demonstrate the efficacy, we apply this latter technique to a sample of roughly $12,100$ white dwarfs within 200 pc centered on the ZZ Ceti instability strip, where hydrogen-atmosphere white dwarfs are known to pulsate. Through inspecting the top $1\%$ samples ranked by these methods, we demonstrate that both the Gaia-only and ZTF-informed techniques are highly effective at identifying known and new variable white dwarfs, which we verify using follow-up, high-speed photometry. We confirm variability in all 33 out of 33 ($100\%$) observed white dwarfs within our top $1\%$ highest-ranked candidates, both inside and outside the ZZ Ceti instability strip. In addition to dozens of new pulsating white dwarfs, we also identify five white dwarfs highly likely to show transiting planetary debris; if confirmed, these systems would more than triple the number of white dwarfs known to host transiting debris.

=== arXiv:2011.07083v1  [2020-11-13]
TITLE  : The Age of the Carina Young Association and Potential Membership of HD 95086
AUTHORS: Mark Booth, Carlos del Burgo, Valeri V. Hambaryan
JOURNAL: MNRAS, 500, 4, 5552-5560 (2021)
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa3631
ABS    : Carina is a nearby young stellar association. So far, only a small number of stars have been clearly identified as members of this association. In this paper we reanalyse the membership of the association in light of Gaia DR2 data, in particular finding that HD 95086 is a potential member (probability of 71%). This star is noteworthy as one of the few stars that hosts both a detected debris disc and a directly imaged planet. It has previously only been considered as a potential member of the Lower Centaurus Crux (LCC) - part of the Scorpius-Centaurus association. We also reanalyse the age of the Carina association. Using a Bayesian inference code applied to infer a solution from stellar evolution models for the most probable (&gt;99%) members of Carina, we infer an age for the association of 13.3$^{+1.1}_{-0.6}$ Myr, much younger than previous studies. Whilst we have revised HD 95086's association membership from LCC to Carina, the fact that we also find Carina to have a younger age, similar to that of LCC, means that the estimates of HD 95086b's mass remain unchanged. However, the younger age of Carina does mean that the companion to another Carina member, HD 44627 (or AB Pic), has a mass that is more clearly in the planet rather than brown dwarf range.

=== arXiv:2011.02659v2  [2020-11-05]
TITLE  : The GALAH Survey: Accreted stars also inhabit the Spite Plateau
AUTHORS: Jeffrey D. Simpson, Sarah L. Martell, Sven Buder, Sanjib Sharma, Martin Asplund, Joss Bland-Hawthorn, Andrew R. Casey, Gayandhi M. De Silva
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stab2012
ABS    : The ESA Gaia astrometric mission has enabled the remarkable discovery that a large fraction of the stars near the Solar neighbourhood appear to be debris from a single in-falling system, the so-called Gaia-Enceladus-Sausage (GSE). One exciting feature of this result is that it gives astronomers for the first time a large sample of easily observable unevolved stars that formed in an extra-Galactic environment, which can be compared to stars that formed within our Milky Way. Here we use these stars to investigate the "Spite Plateau" -- the near-constant lithium abundance observed in metal-poor dwarf stars across a wide range of metallicities (-3&lt;[Fe/H]&lt;-1). In particular our aim is to test whether the stars that formed in the GSE show a different Spite Plateau to other Milky Way stars that inhabit the disk and halo. Individual galaxies could have different Spite Plateaus -- e.g., the ISM could be more depleted in lithium in a lower galactic mass system due to it having a smaller reservoir of gas. We identified 76 GSE dwarf stars observed and analyzed by the GALactic Archeology with HERMES (GALAH) survey as part of its Third Data Release. Orbital actions were used to select samples of Gaia-Enceladus stars, and comparison samples of halo and disk stars. We find that the Gaia-Enceladus stars show the same lithium abundance as other likely accreted stars and in situ Milky Way stars, strongly suggesting that the "lithium problem" is not a consequence of the formation environment. This result fits within the growing consensus that the Spite Plateau, and more generally the "cosmological lithium problem" -- the observed discrepancy between the amount of lithium in warm, metal-poor dwarf stars in our Galaxy, and the amount of lithium predicted to have been produced by Big Bang Nucleosynthesis -- is the result of lithium depletion processes within stars.

=== arXiv:2010.14521v1  [2020-10-27]
TITLE  : Resolving the outer ring of HD 38206 using ALMA and constraining limits on planets in the system
AUTHORS: Mark Booth, Michael Schulz, Alexander V. Krivov, Sebastián Marino, Tim D. Pearce, Ralf Launhardt
JOURNAL: MNRAS, 500, 2, 1604-1611 (2021)
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa3362
ABS    : HD 38206 is an A0V star in the Columba association, hosting a debris disc first discovered by IRAS. Further observations by Spitzer and Herschel showed that the disc has two components, likely analogous to the asteroid and Kuiper belts of the Solar System. The young age of this star makes it a prime target for direct imaging planet searches. Possible planets in the system can be constrained using the debris disc. Here we present the first ALMA observations of the system's Kuiper belt and fit them using a forward modelling MCMC approach. We detect an extended disc of dust peaking at around 180 au with a width of 140 au. The disc is close to edge on and shows tentative signs of an asymmetry best fit by an eccentricity of $0.25^{+0.10}_{-0.09}$. We use the fitted parameters to determine limits on the masses of planets interior to the cold belt. We determine that a minimum of four planets are required, each with a minimum mass of 0.64 M$_J$, in order to clear the gap between the asteroid and Kuiper belts of the system. If we make the assumption that the outermost planet is responsible for the stirring of the disc, the location of its inner edge and the eccentricity of the disc, then we can more tightly predict its eccentricity, mass and semimajor axis to be $e_{\rm{p}}=0.34^{+0.20}_{-0.13}$, $m_{\rm{p}}=0.7^{+0.5}_{-0.3}\,\rm{M}_{\rm{J}}$ and $a_{\rm{p}}=76^{+12}_{-13}\,\rm{au}$.

=== arXiv:2010.13807v2  [2020-10-26]
TITLE  : White dwarfs with planetary remnants in the era of Gaia I: six emission line systems
AUTHORS: N. P. Gentile Fusillo, C. J. Manser, Boris T. Gänsicke, O. Toloza, D. Koester, E. Dennihy, W. R. Brown, J. Farihi
JOURNAL: 2021, MNRAS, 504, 2707
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stab992
ABS    : White dwarfs with emission lines from gaseous debris discs are among the rarest examples of planetary remnant hosts, but at the same time they are key objects for studying the final evolutionary stage of planetary systems. Making use of the large number of white dwarfs identified in Gaia DR2, we are conducting a survey of planetary remnants and here we present the first results of our search: six white dwarfs with gaseous debris discs. This first publication focuses on the main observational properties of these objects and highlights their most unique features. Three systems in particular stand out: WDJ084602.47+570328.64 displays an exceptionally strong infrared excess which defies the standard model of a geometrically-thin, optically-thick dusty debris disc; WDJ213350.72+242805.93 is the hottest gaseous debris disc host known with Teff=29282 K; and WDJ052914.32-340108.11, in which we identify a record number of 51 emission lines from five elements. These discoveries shed light on the underlying diversity in gaseous debris disc systems and bring the total number of these objects to 21. With these numbers we can now start looking at the properties of these systems as a class of objects rather than on a case-by-case basis.

=== arXiv:2010.03693v2  [2020-10-08]
TITLE  : Five New Post-Main-Sequence Debris Disks with Gaseous Emission
AUTHORS: Erik Dennihy, Siyi Xu, Samuel Lai, Amy Bonsor, J. C. Clemens, Patrick Dufour, Boris T. Gansicke, Nicola Pietro Gentile Fusillo
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/abc339
ABS    : Observations of debris disks, the products of the collisional evolution of rocky planetesimals, can be used to trace planetary activity across a wide range of stellar types. The most common end points of stellar evolution are no exception as debris disks have been observed around several dozen white dwarf stars. But instead of planetary formation, post-main-sequence debris disks are a signpost of planetary destruction, resulting in compact debris disks from the tidal disruption of remnant planetesimals. In this work, we present the discovery of five new debris disks around white dwarf stars with gaseous debris in emission. All five systems exhibit excess infrared radiation from dusty debris, emission lines from gaseous debris, and atmospheric absorption features indicating on-going accretion of metal-rich debris. In four of the systems, we detect multiple metal species in emission, some of which occur at strengths and transitions previously unseen in debris disks around white dwarf stars. Our first year of spectroscopic follow-up hints at strong variability in the emission lines that can be studied in the future, expanding the range of phenomena these post-main-sequence debris disks exhibit.

=== arXiv:2010.00235v3  [2020-10-01]
TITLE  : The nature of the Milky Way's stellar halo revealed by the three integrals of motion
AUTHORS: Daniela Carollo, Masashi Chiba
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/abd7a4
ABS    : We developed a new selection method of halo stars in the phase-space distribution defined by the three integrals of motion in an axisymmetric Galactic potential, ($E$, $L_z$, $I_3$), where $I_3$ is the third integral of motion. The method is used to explore the general chemo-dynamical structure of the halo based on stellar samples from SDSS-SEGUE DR7 and DR16-APOGEE, matched with Gaia-DR2. We found, (a) halo stars can be separated from disk stars by selecting over (1) $0 &lt; L_z &lt; 1500$ \kpckms, $(2I_3)^{1/2} &gt; 1000$ \kpckms (orbital angle $θ_{\rm orb}$ $&gt;$ 15-20 deg), and $E &lt; -1.5 \times 10^5$ km$^2$ s$^{-2}$, and (2) $L_z &lt; 0$ \kpckms. These selection criteria are free from kinematical biases introduced by the simple high-velocity cuts adopted in recent literature; (b) the averaged, or {\it coarse-grained}, halo phased-space distribution shows a monotonic exponential decrease with increasing $E$ and $I_3$ like the Michie-Bodenheimer models; (c) the inner stellar halo described in \citet{carollo2007,carollo2010} is found to comprise a combination of Gaia Enceladus debris (GE; \citealt{helmi2018}), lowest-$E$ stars (likely in-situ stars), as well as metal-poor prograde stars missed by the high velocity cuts selection; (d) the very metal poor outer halo, ([Fe/H] $&lt; -$2.2), exhibits both retrograde and prograde rotation, with an asymmetric $L_z$ distribution towards high retrograde motions, and larger $θ_{\rm orb}$ than those possessed by the GE dominated inner halo; (e) the Sgr dSph galaxy could induce a long-range dynamical effect on local halo stars. Implication for the formation of the stellar halo are also discussed.

=== arXiv:2009.14733v2  [2020-09-30]
TITLE  : Height Distribution and Orientation of Colloidal Dumbbells Near a Wall
AUTHORS: Ruben W. Verweij, Stefania Ketzetzi, Joost de Graaf, Daniela J. Kraft
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. E 102, 062608 (2020)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevE.102.062608
ABS    : Geometric confinement strongly influences the behavior of microparticles in liquid environments. However, to date, nonspherical particle behaviors close to confining boundaries, even as simple as planar walls, remain largely unexplored. Here, we measure the height distribution and orientation of colloidal dumbbells above walls by means of digital in-line holographic microscopy. We find that while larger dumbbells are oriented almost parallel to the wall, smaller dumbbells of the same material are surprisingly oriented at preferred angles. We determine the total height-dependent force acting on the dumbbells by considering gravitational effects and electrostatic particle-wall interactions. Our modeling reveals that at specific heights both net forces and torques on the dumbbells are simultaneously below the thermal force and energy, respectively, which makes the observed orientations possible. Our results highlight the rich near-wall dynamics of nonspherical particles, and can further contribute to the development of quantitative frameworks for arbitrarily-shaped microparticle dynamics in confinement.

=== arXiv:2009.12830v1  [2020-09-27]
TITLE  : Dippers from the TESS Full-Frame Images I: The Results of the first 1 year data and Discovery of A Runaway dipper
AUTHORS: Tomoyuki Tajiri, Hajime Kawahara, Masataka Aizawa, Michiko S. Fujii, Kohei Hattori, Yui Kasagi, Takayuki Kotani, Kento Masuda
ABS    : We present a comprehensive catalog of the dippers---young stellar objects that exhibit episodic dimming---derived from the one year's worth of data of Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite ($ TESS$) full-frame images. In the survey, we found 35 dippers using the convolutional neural network, most of them newly discovered. Although these dippers are widely distributed over the first half-hemisphere that $TESS$ surveyed, we identified the majority's membership with the nearest association Scorpius--Centaurus, Velorum OB2, and nearby Orion molecular cloud complex. However, several dippers are likely to be located in the field. We also found three old dippers whose age exceeds ten million year, which is considered as the disk dissipation time. The color-color diagram indicates that these old dippers are likely to have an extreme debris disk. In particular, we found a runaway old dipper having a large three-dimensional velocity of $72 \mathrm{km\ s}^{-1}$. The dippers in the field, which were probably escaping from their birth molecular clouds or were born outside the current area of star forming regions, are more common than previously considered.

=== arXiv:2009.11694v2  [2020-09-24]
TITLE  : (Sub)stellar companions shape the winds of evolved stars
AUTHORS: L. Decin, M. Montargès, A. M. S. Richards, C. A. Gottlieb, W. Homan, I. McDonald, I. El Mellah, T. Danilovich
JOURNAL: Science, 2000, Vol 369, Issue 6510, p. 1497
DOI    : 10.1126/science.abb1229
ABS    : Binary interactions dominate the evolution of massive stars, but their role is less clear for low- and intermediate-mass stars. The evolution of a spherical wind from an asymptotic giant branch (AGB) star into a nonspherical planetary nebula (PN) could be due to binary interactions. We observed a sample of AGB stars with the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) and found that their winds exhibit distinct nonspherical geometries with morphological similarities to planetary nebulae (PNe). We infer that the same physics shapes both AGB winds and PNe; additionally, the morphology and AGB mass-loss rate are correlated. These characteristics can be explained by binary interaction. We propose an evolutionary scenario for AGB morphologies that is consistent with observed phenomena in AGB stars and PNe.

=== arXiv:2009.10813v4  [2020-09-22]
TITLE  : Launching the VASCO citizen science project
AUTHORS: Beatriz Villarroel, Kristiaan Pelckmans, Enrique Solano, Mikael Laaksoharju, Abel Souza, Onyeuwaoma Nnaemeka Dom, Khaoula Laggoune, Jamal Mimouni
JOURNAL: Universe, 2022, vol. 8, issue 11, p. 561
DOI    : 10.3390/universe8110561
ABS    : The Vanishing &amp; Appearing Sources during a Century of Observations (VASCO) project investigates astronomical surveys spanning a time interval of 70 years, searching for unusual and exotic transients. We present herein the VASCO Citizen Science Project, which can identify unusual candidates driven by three different approaches: hypothesis, exploratory, and machine learning, which is particularly useful for SETI searches. To address the big data challenge, VASCO combines three methods: the Virtual Observatory, user-aided machine learning, and visual inspection through citizen science. Here we demonstrate the citizen science project and its improved candidate selection process, and we give a progress report. We also present the VASCO citizen science network led by amateur astronomy associations mainly located in Algeria, Cameroon, and Nigeria. At the moment of writing, the citizen science project has carefully examined 15,593 candidate image pairs in the data (ca. 10% of the candidates), and has so far identified 798 objects classified as "vanished". The most interesting candidates will be followed up with optical and infrared imaging, together with the observations by the most potent radio telescopes.

=== arXiv:2009.07282v1  [2020-09-15]
TITLE  : A Giant Planet Candidate Transiting a White Dwarf
AUTHORS: Andrew Vanderburg, Saul A. Rappaport, Siyi Xu, Ian Crossfield, Juliette C. Becker, Bruce Gary, Felipe Murgas, Simon Blouin
DOI    : 10.1038/s41586-020-2713-y
ABS    : Astronomers have discovered thousands of planets outside the solar system, most of which orbit stars that will eventually evolve into red giants and then into white dwarfs. During the red giant phase, any close-orbiting planets will be engulfed by the star, but more distant planets can survive this phase and remain in orbit around the white dwarf. Some white dwarfs show evidence for rocky material floating in their atmospheres, in warm debris disks, or orbiting very closely, which has been interpreted as the debris of rocky planets that were scattered inward and tidally disrupted. Recently, the discovery of a gaseous debris disk with a composition similar to ice giant planets demonstrated that massive planets might also find their way into tight orbits around white dwarfs, but it is unclear whether the planets can survive the journey. So far, the detection of intact planets in close orbits around white dwarfs has remained elusive. Here, we report the discovery of a giant planet candidate transiting the white dwarf WD 1856+534 (TIC 267574918) every 1.4 days. The planet candidate is roughly the same size as Jupiter and is no more than 14 times as massive (with 95% confidence). Other cases of white dwarfs with close brown dwarf or stellar companions are explained as the consequence of common-envelope evolution, wherein the original orbit is enveloped during the red-giant phase and shrinks due to friction. In this case, though, the low mass and relatively long orbital period of the planet candidate make common-envelope evolution less likely. Instead, the WD 1856+534 system seems to demonstrate that giant planets can be scattered into tight orbits without being tidally disrupted, and motivates searches for smaller transiting planets around white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:2009.06760v2  [2020-09-14]
TITLE  : A method for finding anomalous astronomical light curves and their analogs
AUTHORS: Juan Rafael Martínez-Galarza, Federica Bianco, Dennis Crake, Kushal Tirumala, Ashish A. Mahabal, Matthew J. Graham, Daniel Giles
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stab2588
ABS    : Our understanding of the Universe has profited from deliberate, targeted studies of known phenomena, as well as from serendipitous, unexpected discoveries, such as the discovery of a complex variability pattern in the direction of KIC 8462852 (Boyajian's star). Upcoming surveys, such as the Vera C. Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST), will explore the parameter space of astrophysical transients at all time scales, and offer the opportunity to discover even more extreme examples of unexpected phenomena. We investigate strategies to identify novel objects and to contextualize them within large time-series data sets in order to facilitate the discovery of new classes of objects, as well as the physical interpretation of their anomalous nature. We develop a method that combines tree-based and manifold-learning algorithms for anomaly detection in order to perform two tasks: 1) identify and rank anomalous objects in a time-domain dataset; and 2) group those anomalies according to their similarity in order to identify analogs. We achieve the latter by combining an anomaly score from a tree-based method with a dimensionality manifold-learning reduction strategy. Clustering in the reduced space allows for the successful identification of anomalies and analogs. We also assess the impact of pre-processing and feature engineering schemes and investigate the astrophysical nature of the objects that our models identify as anomalous by augmenting the Kepler data with Gaia color and luminosity information. We find that multiple models, used in combination, are a promising strategy to identify novel light curves and light curve families.

=== arXiv:2009.03444v2  [2020-09-07]
TITLE  : The Effect of a Magnetic Field on the Dynamics of Debris Discs Around White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: Miriam A Hogg, Ry Cutter, Graham Wynn
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa3316
ABS    : Observational estimates of the lifetimes and inferred accretion rates from debris discs around polluted white dwarfs are often inconsistent with the predictions of models of shielded Poynting-Robertson drag on the dust particles in the discs. Moreover, many cool polluted white dwarfs do not show any observational evidence of accompanying discs. This may be explained, in part, if the debris discs had shorter lifetimes and higher accretion rates than predicted by Poynting-Robertson drag alone. We consider the role of a magnetic field on tidally disrupted diamagnetic debris and its subsequent effect on the formation, evolution, and accretion rate of a debris disc. We estimate that magnetic field strengths greater than $\sim$10kG may decrease the time needed for circularisation and the disc lifetimes by several orders of magnitude and increase the associated accretion rates by a similar factor, relative to Poynting-Robertson drag. We suggest some polluted white dwarfs may host magnetic fields below the typical detectable limit and that these fields may account for a proportion of polluted white dwarfs with missing debris discs. We also suggest that diamagnetic drag may account for the higher accretion rate estimates among polluted white dwarfs that cannot be predicted solely by Poynting-Robertson drag and find a dependence on magnetic field strength, orbital pericentre distance, and particle size on predicated disc lifetimes and accretion rates.

=== arXiv:2008.07406v1  [2020-08-17]
TITLE  : Solution to the debris disc mass problem: planetesimals are born small?
AUTHORS: Alexander V. Krivov, Mark C. Wyatt
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa2385
ABS    : Debris belts on the periphery of planetary systems, encompassing the region occupied by planetary orbits, are massive analogues of the Solar system's Kuiper belt. They are detected by thermal emission of dust released in collisions amongst directly unobservable larger bodies that carry most of the debris disc mass. We estimate the total mass of the discs by extrapolating up the mass of emitting dust with the help of collisional cascade models. The resulting mass of bright debris discs appears to be unrealistically large, exceeding the mass of solids available in the systems at the preceding protoplanetary stage. We discuss this "mass problem" in detail and investigate possible solutions to it. These include uncertainties in the dust opacity and planetesimal strength, variation of the bulk density with size, steepening of the size distribution by damping processes, the role of the unknown "collisional age" of the discs, and dust production in recent giant impacts. While we cannot rule out the possibility that a combination of these might help, we argue that the easiest solution would be to assume that planetesimals in systems with bright debris discs were "born small", with sizes in the kilometre range, especially at large distances from the stars. This conclusion would necessitate revisions to the existing planetesimal formation models, and may have a range of implications for planet formation. We also discuss potential tests to constrain the largest planetesimal sizes and debris disc masses.

=== arXiv:2008.04660v1  [2020-08-11]
TITLE  : The Origin of Elements from Carbon to Uranium
AUTHORS: Chiaki Kobayashi, Amanda I. Karakas, Maria Lugaro
ABS    : To reach a deeper understanding of the origin of elements in the periodic table, we construct Galactic chemical evolution (GCE) models for all stable elements from C (A=12) to U (A=238) from first principles, i.e., using theoretical nucleosynthesis yields and event rates of all chemical enrichment sources. This enables us to predict the origin of elements as a function of time and environment. In the solar neighborhood, we find that stars with initial masses of M&gt;30M_\odot can become failed supernovae if there is a significant contribution from hypernovae (HNe) at M~20-50M_\odot. The contribution to GCE from super asymptotic giant branch (AGB) stars (with M~8-10M_\odot at solar metallicity) is negligible, unless hybrid white dwarfs from low-mass super-AGB stars explode as so-called Type Iax supernovae, or high-mass super-AGB stars explode as electron-capture supernovae (ECSNe). Among neutron-capture elements, the observed abundances of the second (Ba) and third (Pb) peak elements are well reproduced with our updated yields of the slow neutron-capture process (s-process) from AGB stars. The first peak elements, Sr, Y, and Zr, are sufficiently produced by ECSNe together with AGB stars. Neutron star mergers can produce rapid neutron-capture process (r-process) elements up to Th and U, but the timescales are too long to explain observations at low metallicities. The observed evolutionary trends, such as for Eu, can well be explained if ~3% of 25-50 M_\odot hypernovae are magneto-rotational supernovae producing r-process elements. Along with the solar neighborhood, we also predict the evolutionary trends in the halo, bulge, and thick disk for future comparison with galactic archaeology surveys.

=== arXiv:2008.02392v1  [2020-08-05]
TITLE  : The Discovery of lambda Bootis Stars -- The Southern Survey II
AUTHORS: Simon J. Murphy, Richard O. Gray, Christopher J. Corbally, Charles Kuehn, Timothy R. Bedding, Josiah Killam
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa2347
ABS    : The $λ$ Boo stars are chemically peculiar A-type stars whose abundance anomalies are associated with the accretion of metal-poor material. We searched for $λ$ Boo stars in the southern hemisphere in a targeted spectroscopic survey of metal-weak and emission-line stars. Obtaining spectra for 308 stars and classifying them on the MK system, we found or co-discovered 24 new $λ$ Boo stars. We also revised the classifications of 11 known $λ$ Boo stars, one of which turned out to be a chemically normal rapid rotator. We show that stars previously classified in the literature as blue horizontal branch stars or emission-line A stars have a high probability of being $λ$ Boo stars, although this conclusion is based on small-number statistics. Using WISE infrared fluxes, we searched our targets for infrared excesses that might be attributable to protoplanetary or debris discs as the source of the accreted material. Of the 34 $λ$ Boo stars in our sample, 21 at various main-sequence ages have infrared excesses, confirming that not all $λ$ Boo stars are young.

=== arXiv:2008.00039v1  [2020-07-31]
TITLE  : Phase diagram of a two-site coupled complex Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev model
AUTHORS: Antonio M. García-García, Jie Ping Zheng, Vaios Ziogas
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. D 103, 106023 (2021)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevD.103.106023
ABS    : We study the thermodynamic properties of a two-site coupled complex Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev (SYK) model in the large $N$ limit by solving the saddle-point Schwinger-Dyson (SD) equations. We find that its phase diagram is richer than in the Majorana case. In the grand canonical ensemble, we identify a region of small chemical potential, and weak coupling between the two SYKs, for which two first order thermodynamic phase transitions occur as a function of temperature. First, we observe a transition from a cold wormhole phase to an intermediate phase that may correspond to a charged wormhole. For a higher temperature, there is another first order transition to the black hole phase. As in the Majorana case, the low temperature wormhole phase is gapped and, for sufficiently large coupling between the two complex SYK, or chemical potential, the first order transitions become crossovers. The total charge is good indicator to study the phase diagram of the model: it is zero in the cold wormhole phase and jumps discontinuously at the temperatures at which the transitions take place. Based on the approximate conformal symmetry of the ground state, expected to be close to a thermofield double state, we identify the effective low energy action of the model. It is a generalized Schwarzian action with $SL(2,R)\times U(1)$ symmetry with an additional potential and a extra degree of freedom related to the charge. In the large $N$ limit, results from this low energy action are consistent with those from the solution of the SD equations. Our findings are a preliminary step towards the characterization of traversable wormholes by its field theory dual, a strongly interacting fermionic system with charger, that is easier to model experimentally.

=== arXiv:2007.15979v1  [2020-07-31]
TITLE  : Planetary System from the Outer Edge of the Inner Void -- Classes and Populations of Variety
AUTHORS: Masahiro Morikawa, Suzuka Amaya
ABS    : Planets are common objects in the Universe, observationally as well as theoretically. However, the standard theory of their formation encounters many difficulties, such as dust fall and disk lifetime problems. We positively analyze them, expecting that those problems as a whole may indicate some consistent effective model. Thus we propose a dynamical model of the planet formation based on the assumption that the inner void of gas is commonly formed in the disk without specifying any Physical origin. The basic processes of this model are the dust fall, the accumulation, and the slingshots. The dust in the protoplanetary disk rapidly falls as it grows to the meter size. Then, all of them stops at the outer edge of the void where the gas friction disappears. Such dust clusters rapidly coalesce with each other and easily cause the runaway in the dense and coherent environment. Then the huge clusters are formed there and they are the first generation planets Hot-Jupiters. They immediately slingshot smaller clusters around them towards the outer regions. They are Rockey-Planets, Cold-Gas-Giants, Ice-Giants, and `Trans Neptunian objects including `Kuiper belt/Oort cloud objects`, depending on the original core mass or the distance blown. Combining numerical calculations of the slingshots and coagulation equations, we obtain the planet population diagram, including the possibility of the massive thermal metamorphosis, the origin of the variety of planetary systems, and the possibility of stray planets/objects.

=== arXiv:2007.15817v3  [2020-07-31]
TITLE  : Robust Template Matching via Hierarchical Convolutional Features from a Shape Biased CNN
AUTHORS: Bo Gao, M. W. Spratling
ABS    : Finding a template in a search image is an important task underlying many computer vision applications. Recent approaches perform template matching in a deep feature-space, produced by a convolutional neural network (CNN), which is found to provide more tolerance to changes in appearance. In this article we investigate if enhancing the CNN's encoding of shape information can produce more distinguishable features that improve the performance of template matching. This investigation results in a new template matching method that produces state-of-the-art results on a standard benchmark. To confirm these results we also create a new benchmark and show that the proposed method also outperforms existing techniques on this new dataset. Our code and dataset is available at: https://github.com/iminfine/Deep-DIM.

=== arXiv:2007.04992v1  [2020-07-09]
TITLE  : Searching for debris discs in the 30 Myr open cluster IC 4665
AUTHORS: Núria Miret-Roig, Nuria Huélamo, Hervé Bouy
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 641, A156 (2020)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202038205
ABS    : Context: Debris discs orbiting young stars are key to understand dust evolution and the planetary formation process. We take advantage of a recent membership analysis of the 30 Myr nearby open cluster IC 4665 based on the Gaia and DANCe surveys to revisit the disc population of this cluster. Aims: We aim to study the disc population of IC 4665 using Spitzer (MIPS and IRAC) and WISE photometry. Methods: We use several colour-colour diagrams with empirical photospheric sequences to detect the sources with an infrared excess. Independently, we also fit the spectral energy distribution (SED) of our debris disc candidates with the Virtual Observatory SED analyser (VOSA) which is capable of automatically detecting infrared excesses and provides effective temperature estimates. Results: We find six candidates debris disc host-stars (five with MIPS and one with WISE) and two of them are new candidates. We estimate a disc fraction of 24$\pm$10\% for the B-A stars, where our sample is expected to be complete. This is similar to what has been reported in other clusters of similar ages (Upper Centaurus Lupus, Lower Centaurus Crux, the $β$ Pictoris moving group, and the Pleiades). For solar type stars we find a disk fraction of 9$\pm$9%, lower than that observed in regions with comparable ages. Conclusions: Our candidates debris disc host-stars are excellent targets to be studied with ALMA or the future James Webb Space Telescope (JWST).

=== arXiv:2006.07921v1  [2020-06-14]
TITLE  : ISO-ChaI 52: a weakly-accreting young stellar object with a dipper light curve
AUTHORS: A. Frasca, C. F. Manara, J. M. Alcalá, K. Biazzo, L. Venuti, E. Covino, G. Rosotti, B. Stelzer
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 639, L8 (2020)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/202038157
ABS    : We report on the discovery of periodic dips in the multiband lightcurve of ISO-ChaI 52, a young stellar object in the Chamaeleon I dark cloud. This is one among the peculiar objects that display very low or negligible accretion both in their UV continuum and spectral lines, although they present a remarkable infrared excess emission characteristic of optically-thick circumstellar disks. We have analyzed a VLT/X-Shooter spectrum with the tool ROTFIT to determine the stellar parameters. The latter, along with photometry from our campaign with the REM telescope and from the literature, have allowed us to model the spectral energy distribution and to estimate the size and temperature of the inner and outer disk. From the rotational period of the star/disk system of 3.45 days we estimate a disk inclination of 36$^\circ$. The depth of the dips in different bands has been used to gain information about the occulting material. A single extinction law is not able to fit the observed behavior, while a two-component model of a disk warp composed of a dense region with a gray extinction and an upper layer with an ISM-type extinction provides a better fit of the data.

=== arXiv:2006.03073v1  [2020-06-04]
TITLE  : The lifetimes of planetary debris discs around white dwarfs
AUTHORS: Dimitri Veras, Kevin Heng
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa1632
ABS    : The lifetime of a planetary disc which orbits a white dwarf represents a crucial input parameter into evolutionary models of that system. Here we apply a purely analytical formalism to estimate lifetimes of the debris phase of these discs, before they are ground down into dust or are subject to sublimation from the white dwarf. We compute maximum lifetimes for three different types of white dwarf discs, formed from (i) radiative YORP breakup of exo-asteroids along the giant branch phases at 2-100 au, (ii) radiation-less spin-up disruption of these minor planets at $\sim 1.5-4.5R_{\odot}$, and (iii) tidal disruption of minor or major planets within about $1.3R_{\odot}$. We display these maximum lifetimes as a function of disc mass and extent, constituent planetesimal properties, and representative orbital excitations of eccentricity and inclination. We find that YORP discs with masses up to $10^{24}$ kg live long enough to provide a reservoir of surviving cm-sized pebbles and m- to km-sized boulders that can be perturbed intact to white dwarfs with cooling ages of up to 10 Gyr. Debris discs formed from the spin or tidal disruption of these minor planets or major planets can survive in a steady state for up to respectively 1 Myr or 0.01 Myr, although most tidal discs would leave a steady state within about 1 yr. Our results illustrate that dust-less planetesimal transit detections are plausible, and would provide particularly robust evolutionary constraints. Our formalism can easily be adapted to individual systems and future discoveries.

=== arXiv:2006.00965v2  [2020-06-01]
TITLE  : $\textit{Gaia}$ white dwarfs within 40 pc I: spectroscopic observations of new candidates
AUTHORS: P. -E. Tremblay, M. A. Hollands, N. P. Gentile Fusillo, J. McCleery, P. Izquierdo, B. T. Gänsicke, E. Cukanovaite, D. Koester
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa1892
ABS    : We present a spectroscopic survey of 230 white dwarf candidates within 40 pc of the Sun from the William Herschel Telescope and Gran Telescopio Canarias. All candidates were selected from $\textit{Gaia}$ Data Release 2 (DR2) and in almost all cases had no prior spectroscopic classifications. We find a total of 191 confirmed white dwarfs and 39 main-sequence star contaminants. The majority of stellar remnants in the sample are relatively cool ($\langle T_{\rm eff} \rangle$ = 6200 K), showing either hydrogen Balmer lines or a featureless spectrum, corresponding to 89 DA and 76 DC white dwarfs, respectively. We also recover two DBA white dwarfs and 9--10 magnetic remnants. We find two carbon-bearing DQ stars and 14 new metal-rich white dwarfs. This includes the possible detection of the first ultra-cool white dwarf with metal lines. We describe three DZ stars for which we find at least four different metal species, including one which is strongly Fe- and Ni-rich, indicative of the accretion of a planetesimal with core-Earth composition. We find one extremely massive (1.31 $\pm$ 0.01 M$_{\odot}$) DA white dwarf showing weak Balmer lines, possibly indicating stellar magnetism. Another white dwarf shows strong Balmer line emission but no infrared excess, suggesting a low-mass sub-stellar companion. High spectroscopic completeness ($&gt;$99%) has now been reached for $\textit{Gaia}$ DR2 sources within 40 pc sample, in the northern hemisphere ($δ&gt;$ 0 deg) and located on the white dwarf cooling track in the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram. A statistical study of the full northern sample is presented in a companion paper.

=== arXiv:2005.14201v1  [2020-05-28]
TITLE  : The ASAS-SN Catalog of Variable Stars VIII: "Dipper" Stars in the Lupus Star-Forming Region
AUTHORS: J. W. Bredall, B. J. Shappee, E. Gaidos, T. Jayasinghe, P. Vallely, K. Z. Stanek, C. S. Kochanek, J. Gagné
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa1588
ABS    : Some young stellar objects such as T Tauri-like "dipper" stars vary due to transient partial occultation by circumstellar dust, and observations of this phenomenon inform us of conditions in the planet-forming zones close to these stars. Although many dipper stars have been identified with space missions such as $Kepler$/$K2$, ground-based telescopes offer longer term and multi-wavelength perspectives. We identified 11 dipper stars in the Lupus star forming region in data from the All-Sky Automated Survey for SuperNovae (ASAS-SN), and further characterized these using observations by the Las Cumbres Global Observatory Telescope (LCOGT) and the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite $TESS$, as well as archival data from other missions. Dipper stars were identified from a catalog of nearby young stars and selected based on the statistical significance, asymmetry, and quasi-periodicity or aperiodicity of variability in their ASAS-SN light curves. All 11 stars lie above or red-ward of the zero-age main sequence and have infrared excesses indicating the presence of full circumstellar disks. We obtain reddening-extinction relations for the variability of 7 stars using our combined ASAS-SN-$TESS$ and LCOGT photometry. In all cases the slopes are below the ISM value, suggesting larger grains, and we find a tentative relation between the slope (grain size) and the $\text{K}_\text{s}-[22\:μ\text{m}]$ infrared color regarded as a proxy for disk evolutionary state.

=== arXiv:2005.10253v1  [2020-05-20]
TITLE  : PTFO 8-8695: Two Stars, Two Signals, No Planet
AUTHORS: L. G. Bouma, J. N. Winn, G. R. Ricker, R. Vanderspek, D. W. Latham, S. Seager, J. M. Jenkins, T. Barclay
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa1038
ABS    : PTFO 8-8695 (CVSO 30) is a star in the 7-10 million year old Orion-OB1a cluster that shows brightness dips that resemble planetary transits. Although strong evidence against the planet hypothesis has been presented, the possibility remains debated in the literature. To obtain further clues, we inspected data from the NASA Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) and the ESA Gaia mission. The Gaia data suggest that PTFO 8-8695 is a binary: the photometric data show it to be overluminous with respect to members of its kinematic group, and the astrometric data are inconsistent with a single star. The TESS light curve shows two different photometric periods. The variability is dominated by a sinusoidal signal with a period of 11.98 hr, presumably caused by stellar rotation. Also present is a 10.76 hr signal consisting of a not-quite sinusoid interrupted by hour-long dips, the type of signal previously interpreted as planetary transits. The phase of the dips is nearly 180$^\circ$ away from the phase of the originally reported dips. As noted previously, this makes them difficult to explain as planetary transits. Instead, we believe that PTFO 8-8695 is a pair of young and rapidly rotating M dwarfs, one of which shows the same "transient-dipper" behavior that has been seen in at least 5 other cases. The origin of these transient dips is still unknown but likely involves circumstellar material.

=== arXiv:2005.07931v6  [2020-05-16]
TITLE  : A framework for the next generation of stationary cosmological models
AUTHORS: Yves-Henri Sanejouand
JOURNAL: Int. J. Mod, Phys. D 2022, vol.31 (10), 2250084
DOI    : 10.1142/S0218271822500845
ABS    : According to a new tired-light cosmological model, where H(z) = H 0 (1 + z), the number density of galaxies has been nearly constant over the last 10 Gyr, at least, meaning that, as far as galaxy counts are concerned, the Universe has been stationary. In this context, an analysis of the luminosity distances of quasars and supernovae Ia shows that the Universe is far from being as transparent as assumed nowadays, the photon lifetime along the line-of-sight being one third of the Hubble time. Such a low value could mean that there are huge amounts of grey dust in the inter galactic medium, that have so far escaped detection. It could also be a signature of new physics, namely, a consequence of the decay of photons into lighter particles. The tired-light model advocated in the present study would be falsified if, for instance, the time-dilation of remote events were shown to have a general character, that is, if it were definitely observed for phenomenons other than the light curves of supernovae Ia. On the other hand, further developments are needed in order to turn this model into an actual cosmology. In particular, the physical origin of the current stability of the Universe on galactic scales remains to be identified.

=== arXiv:2005.06569v1  [2020-05-13]
TITLE  : Non-gray, Month-long Brightening of KIC 8462852 in the Immediate Aftermath of a Deep Dip
AUTHORS: James Hitchcock, Stephen J. Fossey, Giorgio Savini
JOURNAL: Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 131(1002), p.084204
DOI    : 10.1088/1538-3873/ab254f
ABS    : We present an analysis of the results of long-term multi-band photometric monitoring of the enigmatic star, KIC 8462852. Observations in the $B$, $g'$, $V$, $r'$ and $I_C$ passbands have been acquired at University College London Observatory (UCLO) between May 2017 and September 2018. We interrogate the wavelength dependence of the $\sim$month-long dimming and brightening exhibited by the target star over an 85-day interval, immediately following a days-long $\sim5$ per cent drop in brightness on Julian Date (JD) 2458203. Between JD 2458215--300 we measure brightness variations which correspond to relative extinctions of $A_B/A_V = 1.39\pm0.27$, $A_{g'}/A_V = 1.16\pm0.11$, $A_{r'}/A_V = 0.80\pm0.25$ and $A_{Ic}/A_V = 0.49\pm0.19$, from which we infer an Angström absorption coefficient of $1.33\pm0.43$ ($R_V \simeq 3.2^{+2.6}_{-1.0}$). As with the days-long `dips', the wavelength dependence of the longer-term brightness variations must also be associated with extinction arising from a dust distribution containing a substantial fraction of sub-micron-sized grains. This implies some common mechanism is responsible for the star's variability over both these short and longer timescales.

=== arXiv:2005.06452v1  [2020-05-13]
TITLE  : A Low Incidence of Mid-Infrared Variability in Dwarf Galaxies
AUTHORS: Nathan Secrest, Shobita Satyapal
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ab9309
ABS    : Using 8.4 years of photometry from the AllWISE/NEOWISE multi-epoch catalogs, we compare the mid-infrared variability properties of a sample of 2197 dwarf galaxies (M_stellar &lt; 2 x 10^9 h^-2 M_sun) to a sample of 6591 more massive galaxies (M_stellar &gt;= 10^10 h^-2 M_sun) matched in mid-infrared apparent magnitude. We find only 2 dwarf galaxies with mid-infrared variability, a factor of ~10 less frequent than the more massive galaxies (p = 6 x 10^-6), consistent with previous findings of optical variability in low-mass and dwarf galaxies using data with a similar baseline and cadence. Within the more massive control galaxy population, we see no evidence for a stellar mass dependence of mid-infrared variability, suggesting that this apparent reduction in the frequency of variable objects occurs below a stellar mass of ~10^10 h^-2 M_sun. Compared to the more massive galaxies, AGNs selected in dwarf galaxies using either their mid-infrared color or optical emission line classification are systematically missed by variability selection. Our results suggest, in agreement with previous optical studies at similar cadence, that variability selection of AGNs in dwarf galaxies is ineffective unless higher-cadence data is used.

=== arXiv:2005.03573v1  [2020-05-07]
TITLE  : No significant correlation between radial velocity planet presence and debris disc properties
AUTHORS: Ben Yelverton, Grant M. Kennedy, Kate Y. L. Su
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa1316
ABS    : We investigate whether the tentative correlation between planets and debris discs which has been previously identified can be confirmed at high significance. We compile a sample of 201 stars with known planets and existing far infrared observations. The sample is larger than those studied previously since we include targets from an unpublished Herschel survey of planet hosts. We use spectral energy distribution modelling to characterise Kuiper belt analogue debris discs within the sample, then compare the properties of the discs against a control sample of 294 stars without known planets. Survival analysis suggests that there is a significant ($p\sim 0.002$) difference between the disc fractional luminosity distributions of the two samples. However, this is largely a result of the fact that the control sample contains a higher proportion of close binaries and of later-type stars; both of these factors are known to reduce disc detection rates. Considering only Sun-like stars without close binary companions in each sample greatly reduces the significance of the difference ($p\sim 0.3$). We also find no evidence for a difference in the disc fractional luminosities of stars hosting planets more or less massive than Saturn ($p\sim 0.9$). Finally, we find that the planet hosts have cooler discs than the control stars, but this is likely a detection bias, since the warmest discs in the control sample are also the faintest, and would thus be undetectable around the more distant planet hosts. Considering only discs in each sample that could have been detected around a typical planet host, we find $p\sim 0.07$ for the temperatures.

=== arXiv:2005.03058v1  [2020-05-06]
TITLE  : Nonlinear dynamical tides in white dwarf binaries
AUTHORS: Hang Yu, Nevin N. Weinberg, Jim Fuller
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa1858
ABS    : Compact white dwarf (WD) binaries are important sources for space-based gravitational-wave (GW) observatories, and an increasing number of them are being identified by surveys like ZTF. We study the effects of nonlinear dynamical tides in such binaries. We focus on the global three-mode parametric instability and show that it has a much lower threshold energy than the local wave-breaking condition studied previously. By integrating networks of coupled modes, we calculate the tidal dissipation rate as a function of orbital period. We construct phenomenological models that match these numerical results and use them to evaluate the spin and luminosity evolution of a WD binary. While in linear theory the WD's spin frequency can lock to the orbital frequency, we find that such a lock cannot be maintained when nonlinear effects are taken into account. Instead, as the orbit decays, the spin and orbit go in and out of synchronization. Each time they go out of synchronization, there is a brief but significant dip in the tidal heating rate. While most WDs in compact binaries should have luminosities that are similar to previous traveling-wave estimates, a few percent should be about ten times dimmer because they reside in heating rate dips. This offers a potential explanation for the low luminosity of the CO WD in J0651. Lastly, we consider the impact of tides on the GW signal and show that LISA and TianGO can constrain the WD's moment of inertia to better than 1% for deci-Hz systems.

=== arXiv:2005.01569v1  [2020-05-04]
TITLE  : The Relationship between Mid-Infrared and Sub-Millimetre Variability of Deeply Embedded Protostars
AUTHORS: Carlos Contreras Peña, Doug Johnstone, Giseon Baek, Gregory J. Herczeg, Steve Mairs, Aleks Scholz, Jeong-Eun Lee, The JCMT Transient Team
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa1254
ABS    : We study the relationship between the mid-infrared and sub-mm variability of deeply embedded protostars using the multi-epoch data from the Wide Infrared Survey Explorer ($WISE$/NEOWISE) and the ongoing James Clerk Maxwell Telescope (JCMT) transient survey. Our search for signs of stochastic (random) and/or secular (roughly monotonic in time) variability in a sample of 59 young stellar objects (YSOs) revealed that 35 are variable in at least one of the two surveys. This variability is dominated by secular changes. Of those objects with secular variability, 14 objects ($22\%$ of the sample) show correlated secular variability over mid-IR and sub-mm wavelengths. Variable accretion is the likely mechanism responsible for this type of variability. Fluxes of YSOs that vary in both wavelengths follow a relation of $\log_{10} F_{4.6}(t)=η\log_{10} F_{850}(t)$ between the mid-IR and sub-mm, with $η=5.53\pm0.29$. This relationship arises from the fact that sub-mm fluxes respond to the dust temperature in the larger envelope whereas the mid-IR emissivity is more directly proportional to the accretion luminosity. The exact scaling relation, however, depends on the structure of the envelope, the importance of viscous heating in the disc, and dust opacity laws.

=== arXiv:2004.02384v1  [2020-04-06]
TITLE  : 5D cooling and nonlinear dynamics of an optically levitated nanodumbbell
AUTHORS: Jaehoon Bang, Troy Seberson, Peng Ju, Jonghoon Ahn, Zhujing Xu, Xingyu Gao, Francis Robicheaux, Tongcang Li
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. Research 2, 043054 (2020)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.043054
ABS    : Optically levitated nonspherical particles in vacuum are excellent candidates for torque sensing, rotational quantum mechanics, high-frequency gravitational wave detection, and multiple other applications. Many potential applications, such as detecting the Casimir torque near a birefringent surface, require simultaneous cooling of both the center-of-mass motion and the torsional vibration (or rotation) of a nonspherical nanoparticle. Here we report the first 5D cooling of a levitated nanoparticle. We cool the 3 center-of-mass motion modes and 2 torsional vibration modes of a levitated nanodumbbell in a linearly-polarized laser simultaneously. The only uncooled rigid-body degree of freedom is the rotation of the nanodumbbell around its long axis. This free rotation mode does not couple to the optical tweezers directly. Surprisingly, we observe that it strongly affects the torsional vibrations of the nanodumbbell. This work deepens our understanding of the nonlinear dynamics and rotation coupling of a levitated nanoparticle and paves the way towards full quantum control of its motion.

=== arXiv:2003.13711v1  [2020-03-30]
TITLE  : Near-infrared variability in dusty white dwarfs: tracing the accretion of planetary material
AUTHORS: Laura K. Rogers, Siyi Xu, Amy Bonsor, Simon Hodgkin, Kate Y. L. Su, Ted von Hippel, Michael Jura
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa873
ABS    : The inwards scattering of planetesimals towards white dwarfs is expected to be a stochastic process with variability on human time-scales. The planetesimals tidally disrupt at the Roche radius, producing dusty debris detectable as excess infrared emission. When sufficiently close to the white dwarf, this debris sublimates and accretes on to the white dwarf and pollutes its atmosphere. Studying this infrared emission around polluted white dwarfs can reveal how this planetary material arrives in their atmospheres. We report a near-infrared monitoring campaign of 34 white dwarfs with infrared excesses with the aim to search for variability in the dust emission. Time series photometry of these white dwarfs from the United Kingdom Infrared Telescope (Wide Field Camera) in the J, H and K bands were obtained over baselines of up to three years. We find no statistically significant variation in the dust emission in all three near-infrared bands. Specifically, we can rule out variability at ~1.3% for the 13 white dwarfs brighter than 16th mag in K band, and at ~10% for the 32 white dwarfs brighter than 18th mag over time-scales of three years. Although to date two white dwarfs, SDSS J095904.69-020047.6 and WD 1226+110, have shown K band variability, in our sample we see no evidence of new K band variability at these levels. One interpretation is that the tidal disruption events which lead to large variabilities are rare, occur on short time-scales, and after a few years the white dwarfs return to being stable in the near-infrared.

=== arXiv:2003.06870v1  [2020-03-15]
TITLE  : HD 145263: Spectral Observations of Silica Debris Disk Formation via Extreme Space Weathering?
AUTHORS: C. M. Lisse, H. Y. A. Meng, M. L. Sitko, A. Morlok, B. C. Johnson, A. P. Jackson, R. J. Vervack, C. H. Chen
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ab7b80
ABS    : We report here time domain infrared spectroscopy and optical photometry of the HD145263 silica-rich circumstellar disk system taken from 2003 through 2014. We find an F4V host star surrounded by a stable, massive 1e22 - 1e23 kg (M_Moon to M_Mars) dust disk. No disk gas was detected, and the primary star was seen rotating with a rapid ~1.75 day period. After resolving a problem with previously reported observations, we find the silica, Mg-olivine, and Fe-pyroxene mineralogy of the dust disk to be stable throughout, and very unusual compared to the ferromagnesian silicates typically found in primordial and debris disks. By comparison with mid-infrared spectral features of primitive solar system dust, we explore the possibility that HD 145263's circumstellar dust mineralogy occurred with preferential destruction of Fe-bearing olivines, metal sulfides, and water ice in an initially comet-like mineral mix and their replacement by Fe-bearing pyroxenes, amorphous pyroxene, and silica. We reject models based on vaporizing optical stellar megaflares, aqueous alteration, or giant hypervelocity impacts as unable to produce the observed mineralogy. Scenarios involving unusually high Si abundances are at odds with the normal stellar absorption near-infrared feature strengths for Mg, Fe, and Si. Models involving intense space weathering of a thin surface patina via moderate (T &lt; 1300 K) heating and energetic ion sputtering due to a stellar superflare from the F4V primary are consistent with the observations. The space weathered patina should be reddened, contain copious amounts of nanophase Fe, and should be transient on timescales of decades unless replenished.

=== arXiv:2002.12291v1  [2020-02-27]
TITLE  : The VMC survey -- XXXVI. Young stellar variability in the Large Magellanic Cloud
AUTHORS: Viktor Zivkov, Joana M. Oliveira, Monika G. Petr-Gotzens, Stefano Rubele, Maria-Rosa L. Cioni, Jacco Th. van Loon, Richard de Grijs, Jim Emerson
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa626
ABS    : Studies of young stellar objects (YSOs) in the Galaxy have found that a significant fraction exhibit photometric variability. However, no systematic investigation has been conducted on the variability of extragalactic YSOs. Here we present the first variability study of massive YSOs in a $\sim 1.5\,\mathrm{deg^2}$ region of the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC). The aim is to investigate whether the different environmental conditions in the metal-poor LMC ($\sim$ 0.4-0.5 Z_sun) have an impact on the variability characteristics. Multi-epoch near-infrared (NIR) photometry was obtained from the VISTA Survey of the Magellanic Clouds (VMC) and our own monitoring campaign using the VISTA telescope. By applying a reduced $χ^2$-analysis, stellar variability was identified. We found 3062 candidate variable stars from a population of 362 425 stars detected. Based on several Spitzer studies, we compiled a sample of high-reliability massive YSOs: a total of 173 massive YSOs have NIR counterparts ($K_{\mathrm{s}}\sim 18.5\,$mag) in the VMC catalogue, of which 39 display significant ($&gt;3σ$) variability. They have been classified as eruptive, fader, dipper, short-term variable and long-period variable YSOs based mostly on the appearance of their $K_{\mathrm{s}}$ band light curves. The majority of YSOs are aperiodic, only five YSOs exhibit periodic lightcurves. The observed amplitudes are comparable or smaller than those for Galactic YSOs (only two Magellanic YSOs exhibit $ΔK_{\mathrm{s}}&gt;1\,$mag), not what would have been expected from the typically larger mass accretion rates observed in the Magellanic Clouds.

=== arXiv:2002.10370v1  [2020-02-24]
TITLE  : Extrasolar enigmas: from disintegrating exoplanets to exoasteroids
AUTHORS: Jan Budaj, Petr Kabath, Enric Palle
DOI    : 10.1007/978-3-030-38509-5_3
ABS    : Thousands of transiting exoplanets have been discovered to date, thanks in great part to the {\em Kepler} space mission. As in all populations, and certainly in the case of exoplanets, one finds unique objects with distinct characteristics. Here we will describe the properties and behaviour of a small group of `disintegrating' exoplanets discovered over the last few years (KIC 12557548b, K2-22b, and others). They evaporate, lose mass unraveling their naked cores, produce spectacular dusty comet-like tails, and feature highly variable asymmetric transits. Apart from these exoplanets, there is observational evidence for even smaller `exo-'objects orbiting other stars: exoasteroids and exocomets. Most probably, such objects are also behind the mystery of Boyajian's star. Ongoing and upcoming space missions such as {\em TESS} and PLATO will hopefully discover more objects of this kind, and a new era of the exploration of small extrasolar systems bodies will be upon us.

=== arXiv:2002.06162v1  [2020-02-14]
TITLE  : The Breakthrough Listen Search for Intelligent Life: A 3.95-8.00 GHz Search for Radio Technosignatures in the Restricted Earth Transit Zone
AUTHORS: Sofia Z. Sheikh, Andrew Siemion, J. Emilio Enriquez, Danny C. Price, Howard Isaacson, Matt Lebofsky, Vishal Gajjar, Paul Kalas
JOURNAL: The Astronomical Journal, 160(1), (2020), 29
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/ab9361
ABS    : We report on a search for artificial narrowband signals of 20 stars within the restricted Earth Transit Zone as a part of the ten-year Breakthrough Listen (BL) search for extraterrestrial intelligence. The restricted Earth Transit Zone is the region of the sky from which an observer would see the Earth transit the Sun with an impact parameter of less than 0.5. This region of the sky is geometrically unique, providing a potential way for an extraterrestrial intelligence to discover the Solar System. The targets were nearby (7-143 pc) and the search covered an electromagnetic frequency range of 3.95-8.00 GHz. We used the Robert C. Byrd Green Bank Telescope to perform these observations with the standard BL data recorder. We searched these data for artificial narrowband ($\sim$Hz) signals with Doppler drift rates of $\pm 20$ Hz s$^{-1}$. We found one set of potential candidate signals on the target HIP 109656 which was then found to be consistent with known properties of anthropogenic radio frequency interference. We find no evidence for radio technosignatures from extraterrestrial intelligence in our observations. The observing campaign achieved a minimum detectable flux which would have allowed detections of emissions that were $10^{-3}$ to $0.88$ times as powerful as the signaling capability of the Arecibo radar transmitter, for the nearest and furthest stars respectively. We conclude that at least $8\%$ of the systems in the restricted Earth Transit Zone within 150 pc do not possess the type of transmitters searched in this survey. To our knowledge, this is the first targeted search for extraterrestrial intelligence of the restricted Earth Transit Zone. All data used in this paper are publicly available via the Breakthrough Listen Public Data Archive (http://seti.berkeley.edu/bldr2).

=== arXiv:2001.09423v1  [2020-01-26]
TITLE  : On the use of light polarization to investigate the size, shape and refractive index dependence of backscattering Angstroem exponents
AUTHORS: Alain Miffre, Danael Cholleton, Patrick Rairoux
DOI    : 10.1364/OL.385107
ABS    : In this letter, we exploit the polarization property of light to investigate the Angstroem exponent describing the wavelength dependence of optical backscatter between two wavelengths. Where previous interpretation of Angstroem exponent was that of a particles size indicator, the use of light polarization makes it possible to investigate the Angstroem exponent dependence on the particles shape by separately retrieving the backscattering Angstroem exponent of the spherical and nonspherical particles contained in an atmospheric particle mixture. As an output, analytical solutions of the Maxwell equations, Lorenz Mie theory, spheroidal model,can then be applied to investigate the Angstroem exponent dependence on the particles size and complex refractive index for each assigned shape. Interestingly, lidar retrieved vertical profiles of backscattering Angstroem exponents specific to s and ns particles can be used by the optical community to evaluate a range of involved particles sizes and complex refractive indices for both particles shapes, spherical and nonspherical, as we remotely demonstrate on a case study dedicated to a dust nucleation event.

=== arXiv:2001.09152v2  [2020-01-24]
TITLE  : Distant foreground and the Planck-derived Hubble constant
AUTHORS: V. N. Yershov, A. A. Raikov, N. Yu. Lovyagin, N. P. M. Kuin, E. A. Popova
JOURNAL: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 2020, 492, 5052-5056
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa189
ABS    : It is possible to reduce the discrepancy between the local measurement of the cosmological parameter $H_0$ and the value derived from the $Planck$ measurements of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) by considering contamination of the CMB by emission from some medium around distant extragalactic sources, such as extremely cold coarse-grain dust. Though being distant, such a medium would still be in the foreground with respect to the CMB, and, as any other foreground, it would alter the CMB power spectrum. This could contribute to the dispersion of CMB temperature fluctuations. By generating a few random samples of CMB with different dispersions, we have checked that the increased dispersion leads to a smaller estimated value of $H_0$, the rest of the cosmological model parameters remaining fixed. This might explain the reduced value of the $Planck$-derived parameter $H_0$ with respect to the local measurements. The signature of the distant foreground in the CMB traced by SNe was previously reported by the authors of this paper -- we found a correlation between the SN redshifts, $z_{\rm SN}$, and CMB temperature fluctuations at the SNe locations, $T_{\rm SN}$. Here we have used the slopes of the regression lines $T_{\rm SN}\,/\,z_{\rm SN}$ corresponding to different {\it Planck} wave bands in order to estimate the possible temperature of the distant extragalactic medium, which turns out to be very low, about 5\,K. The most likely ingredient of this medium is coarse-grain ($grey$) dust, which is known to be almost undetectable, except for the effect of dimming remote extragalactic sources.

=== arXiv:2001.08890v1  [2020-01-24]
TITLE  : Sporadic and intense accretion in a 1 Myr-old brown dwarf candidate
AUTHORS: D. Nguyen-Thanh, N. Phan-Bao, S. J. Murphy, M. S. Bessell
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 634, A128 (2020)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201936810
ABS    : Studying the accretion process in very low-mass objects has important implications for understanding their formation mechanism. Many nearby late-M dwarfs that have previously been identified in the field are in fact young brown dwarf members of nearby young associations. Some of them are still accreting. They are therefore excellent targets for further studies of the accretion process in the very low-mass regime at different stages. We aim to search for accreting young brown dwarf candidates in a sample of 85 nearby late-M dwarfs. Using photometric data from DENIS, 2MASS, and WISE, we constructed the spectral energy distribution of the late-M dwarfs based on BT-Settl models to detect infrared excesses. We then searched for lithium and H$α$ emission in candidates that exhibit infrared excesses to confirm their youth and the presence of accretion. Among the 85 late-M dwarfs, only DENIS-P J1538317$-$103850 (M5.5) shows strong infrared excesses in WISE bands. The detection of lithium absorption in the M5.5 dwarf and its Gaia trigonometric parallax indicate an age of $\sim$1 Myr and a mass of 47 $M_{\rm J}$. The H$α$ emission line in the brown dwarf shows significant variability that indicates sporadic accretion. This 1 Myr-old brown dwarf also exhibits intense accretion bursts with accretion rates of up to $10^{-7.9}$$M_{\odot}$ yr$^{-1}$. Our detection of sporadic accretion in one of the youngest brown dwarfs might imply that sporadic accretion at early stages could play an important role in the formation of brown dwarfs. Very low-mass cores would not be able to accrete enough material to become stars, and thus they end up as brown dwarfs.

=== arXiv:2001.08757v1  [2020-01-23]
TITLE  : Constraining planet formation around 6$M_{\odot}$-8$M_{\odot}$ stars
AUTHORS: Dimitri Veras, Pier-Emmanuel Tremblay, J. J. Hermes, Catriona H. McDonald, Grant M. Kennedy, Farzana Meru, Boris T. Gänsicke
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa241
ABS    : Identifying planets around O-type and B-type stars is inherently difficult; the most massive known planet host has a mass of only about $3M_{\odot}$. However, planetary systems which survive the transformation of their host stars into white dwarfs can be detected via photospheric trace metals, circumstellar dusty and gaseous discs, and transits of planetary debris crossing our line-of-sight. These signatures offer the potential to explore the efficiency of planet formation for host stars with masses up to the core-collapse boundary at $\approx 8M_{\odot}$, a mass regime rarely investigated in planet formation theory. Here, we establish limits on where both major and minor planets must reside around $\approx 6M_{\odot}-8M_{\odot}$ stars in order to survive into the white dwarf phase. For this mass range, we find that intact terrestrial or giant planets need to leave the main sequence beyond approximate minimum star-planet separations of respectively about 3 and 6 au. In these systems, rubble pile minor planets of radii 10, 1.0, and 0.1 km would have been shorn apart by giant branch radiative YORP spin-up if they formed and remained within, respectively, tens, hundreds and thousands of au. These boundary values would help distinguish the nature of the progenitor of metal-pollution in white dwarf atmospheres. We find that planet formation around the highest mass white dwarf progenitors may be feasible, and hence encourage both dedicated planet formation investigations for these systems and spectroscopic analyses of the highest mass white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:2001.08223v1  [2020-01-22]
TITLE  : Constraining the origin of the planetary debris surrounding ZTF J0139+5245 through rotational fission of a triaxial asteroid
AUTHORS: Dimitri Veras, Catriona H. McDonald, Valeri V. Makarov
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa243
ABS    : White dwarfs containing orbiting planetesimals or their debris represent crucial benchmarks by which theoretical investigations of post-main-sequence planetary systems may be calibrated. The photometric transit signatures of likely planetary debris in the ZTF J0139+5245 white dwarf system has an orbital period of about 110 days. An asteroid which breaks up to produce this debris may spin itself to destruction through repeated close encounters with the star without entering its Roche radius and without influence from the white dwarf's luminosity. Here, we place coupled constraints on the orbital pericentre ($q$) and the ratio ($β$) of the middle to longest semiaxes of a triaxial asteroid which disrupts outside of this white dwarf's Roche radius ($r_{\rm Roche}$) soon after attaining its 110-day orbit. We find that disruption within tens of years is likely when $β\lesssim 0.6$ and $q\approx 1.0-2.0r_{\rm Roche}$, and when $β\lesssim 0.2$ out to $q\approx 2.5r_{\rm Roche}$. Analysing the longer-timescale disruption of triaxial asteroids around ZTF J0139+5245 is desirable but may require either an analytical approach relying on ergodic theory or novel numerical techniques.

=== arXiv:2001.05930v2  [2020-01-16]
TITLE  : Primordial Gravitational Waves from Galaxy Intrinsic Alignments
AUTHORS: Matteo Biagetti, Giorgio Orlando
JOURNAL: JCAP 07 (2020) 005
DOI    : 10.1088/1475-7516/2020/07/005
ABS    : Galaxy shapes have been observed to align with external tidal fields generated by the large-scale structures of the Universe. While the main source for these tidal fields is provided by long-wavelength density perturbations, tensor perturbations also contribute with a non-vanishing amplitude at linear order. We show that parity-breaking gravitational waves produced during inflation leave a distinctive imprint in the galaxy shape power spectrum which is not hampered by any scalar-induced tidal field. We also show that a certain class of tensor non-Gaussianities produced during inflation can leave a signature in the density-weighted galaxy shape power spectrum. We estimate the possibility of observing such imprints in future galaxy surveys.

=== arXiv:2001.03876v1  [2020-01-12]
TITLE  : Unified equations of state for cold non-accreting neutron stars with Brussels-Montreal functionals. II. Pasta phases in semi-classical approximation
AUTHORS: J. M. Pearson, N. Chamel, A. Y. Potekhin
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. C 101, 015802 (2020)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevC.101.015802
ABS    : We generalize our earlier work on neutron stars (arXiv:1903.04981), which assumed spherical Wigner-Seitz cells in the inner crust, to admit the possibility of pasta phases, i.e., non-spherical cell shapes. Full fourth-order extended Thomas-Fermi calculations using the density functional BSk24 are performed for cylindrical and plate-like cells. Unlike in our spherical-cell calculations, we do not include shell and pairing corrections, but there are grounds for expecting these corrections for pasta to be significantly smaller. It is therefore meaningful to compare the ETF pasta results with the full spherical-cell results, i.e., with shell and pairing corrections included. However, in view of the many previous studies in which shell and pairing corrections were omitted entirely, it is of interest to compare our pasta results with the ETF part of the corresponding spherical calculations. Making this latter comparison we find that as the density increases the cell shapes pass through the usual sequence sphere $\to$ cylinder $\to$ plate before the transition to the homogeneous core. The filling fractions found at the phase transitions are in close agreement with expectations based on the liquid-drop model. On the other hand, when we compare with the full spherical-cell results, we find the sequence to be sphere $\to$ cylinder $\to$ sphere $\to$ cylinder $\to$ plate. In neither case do any "inverted", i.e., bubble-like, configurations appear. We provide accurate fitting formulas to all our essential numerical results for each of the three phases, designed especially for the density range where the nonspherical shapes are expected, which enable one to capture not only the general behavior of the fitted functions, but also the differences between them in different phases.

=== arXiv:2001.02939v1  [2020-01-09]
TITLE  : Sunspot Drawings at Kodaikanal Observatory: A Representative Results on Hemispheric Sunspot Numbers and Area Measurements
AUTHORS: Ravindra B., Kumaravel Pichamani, Selvendran R., Joyce Samuel, Praveen Kumar, Nancy Jassoria, Navneeth R. S
ABS    : The importance of the periodicity in sunspot appearance was well recognized by the mid of 19th century. Several observatories around the globe have made the record of sunspots in the form of drawings and preserved them safely for posterity. At the Kodaikanal Observatory (KO), the sunspot observations have begun in 1905. In those times observations were recorded on photographic plates and after the development of those plates in the laboratory, the drawings of the same were made on the Stonyhurst grids. In these drawings, called {\em sun charts}, different features on the sun's disk, e.g., sunspots, plages, filaments, prominences, etc. were clearly identified and visually marked with different colors. We have collected 111 years of sunspot drawing spanning over 10 solar cycles. These sunspot drawings were carefully stitched to make bound volumes, each for every 6-months. The drawings are kept at the Kodaikanal library for scientific use and analysis. In this article, we describe briefly the process of drawing, methods of counting sunspot numbers and measurement of sunspot area using square grids. We have collected the data for the Northern and Southern hemispheres separately. From the collected data, we compute the sunspot number and area and compare it with Royal Greenwich Observatory (RGO) and Sunspot Index and Long-term Solar Observations (SILSO) data. The results show that the measurement of the sunspot number is underestimated by about 40\%. The KO monthly averaged sunspot number data of both hemispheres is normalized with the RGO monthly averaged total sunspot number data.

=== arXiv:2001.00049v3  [2019-12-31]
TITLE  : High-resolution Spectra and Biosignatures of Earth-like Planets Transiting White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: Thea Kozakis, Zifan Lin, Lisa Kaltenegger
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8213/ab6f6a
ABS    : With the first observations of debris disks as well as proposed planets around white dwarfs, the question of how rocky planets around such stellar remnants can be characterized and probed for signs of life becomes tangible. White dwarfs are similar in size to Earth and have relatively stable environments for billions of years after initial cooling, making them intriguing targets for exoplanet searches and terrestrial planet atmospheric characterization. Their small size and the resulting large planet transit signal allows observations with next generation telescopes to probe the atmosphere of such rocky planets, if they exist. We model high-resolution transmission spectra for planets orbiting white dwarfs from as they cool from 6,000-4,000 K, for i) planets receiving equivalent irradiation to modern Earth, and ii) planets orbiting at the distance around a cooling white dwarf which allows for the longest continuous time in the habitable zone. All high-resolution transmission spectra will be publicly available online upon publication of this study and can be used as a tool to prepare and interpret upcoming observations with JWST, the Extremely Large Telescopes as well as mission concepts like Origins, HabEx, and LUVOIR.

=== arXiv:1912.01611v1  [2019-12-03]
TITLE  : Accretion of a giant planet onto a white dwarf
AUTHORS: Boris T. Gaensicke, Matthias R. Schreiber, Odette Toloza, Nicola P. Gentile Fusillo, Detlev Koester, Christopher J. Manser
DOI    : 10.1038/s41586-019-1789-8
ABS    : The detection of a dust disc around G29-38 and transits from debris orbiting WD1145+017 confirmed that the photospheric trace metals found in many white dwarfs arise from the accretion of tidally disrupted planetesimals. The composition of these planetesimals is similar to that of rocky bodies in the inner solar system. Gravitationally scattering planetesimals towards the white dwarf requires the presence of more massive bodies, yet no planet has so far been detected at a white dwarf. Here we report optical spectroscopy of a $\simeq27\,750$K hot white dwarf that is accreting from a circumstellar gaseous disc composed of hydrogen, oxygen, and sulphur at a rate of $\simeq3.3\times10^9\,\mathrm{g\,s^{-1}}$. The composition of this disc is unlike all other known planetary debris around white dwarfs, but resembles predictions for the makeup of deeper atmospheric layers of icy giant planets, with H$_2$O and H$_2$S being major constituents. A giant planet orbiting a hot white dwarf with a semi-major axis of $\simeq15$ solar radii will undergo significant evaporation with expected mass loss rates comparable to the accretion rate onto the white dwarf. The orbit of the planet is most likely the result of gravitational interactions, indicating the presence of additional planets in the system. We infer an occurrence rate of spectroscopically detectable giant planets in close orbits around white dwarfs of $\simeq10^{-4}$.

=== arXiv:1911.10253v3  [2019-11-22]
TITLE  : Variable warm dust around the Herbig Ae star HD~169142: Birth of a ring?
AUTHORS: Lei Chen, Attila Moor, Alexander Kreplin, Agnes Kospal, Peter Abraham, Alexis Matter, Andres Carmona, Karl-Heinz Hofmann
JOURNAL: ApJL, 887, L32 (2019 December)
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8213/ab59dd
ABS    : The Herbig Ae star HD 169142 is known to have a gaseous disk with a large inner hole, and also a photometrically variable inner dust component in the sub-au region. Following up our previous analysis, we further studied the temporal evolution of inner dust around HD 169142, which may provide information on the evolution from late-stage protoplanetary disks to debris disks. We used near-infrared interferometric observations obtained with VLTI/PIONIER to constrain the dust distribution at three epochs spanning six years. We also studied the photometric variability of HD 169142 using our optical-infrared observations and archival data. Our results indicate that a dust ring at ~0.3 au formed at some time between 2013 and 2018, and then faded (but did not completely disappear) by 2019. The short-term variability resembles that observed in extreme debris disks, and is likely related to short-lived dust of secondary origin, though variable shadowing from the inner ring could be an alternative interpretation. If confirmed, this is the first direct detection of secondary dust production inside a protoplanetary disk.

=== arXiv:1911.07889v1  [2019-11-18]
TITLE  : The Search for Planet and Planetesimal Transits of White Dwarfs with the Zwicky Transient Facility
AUTHORS: Keaton J. Bell
DOI    : 10.1017/S1743921320000204
ABS    : Planetary materials orbiting white dwarf stars reveal the ultimate fate of the planets of the Solar System and all known transiting exoplanets. Observed metal pollution and infrared excesses from debris disks support that planetary systems or their remnants are common around white dwarf stars; however, these planets are difficult to detect since a very high orbital inclination angle is required for a small white dwarf to be transited, and these transits have very short (minute) durations. The low odds of catching individual transits could be overcome by a sufficiently wide and fast photometric survey. I demonstrate that, by obtaining over 100 million images of white dwarf stars with 30-second exposures in its first three years, the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF) is likely to record the first exoplanetary transits of white dwarfs, as well as new systems of transiting, disintegrating planetesimals. In these proceedings, I describe my project strategy to discover these systems using the ZTF data.

=== arXiv:1911.05068v2  [2019-11-12]
TITLE  : The Vanishing &amp; Appearing Sources during a Century of Observations project: I. USNO objects missing in modern sky surveys and follow-up observations of a "missing star"
AUTHORS: Beatriz Villarroel, Johan Soodla, Sébastien Comerón, Lars Mattsson, Kristiaan Pelckmans, Martín López-Corredoira, Kevin Krisciunas, Eduardo Guerras
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/ab570f
ABS    : In this paper we report the current status of a new research program. The primary goal of the "Vanishing &amp; Appearing Sources during a Century of Observations" (VASCO) project is to search for vanishing and appearing sources using existing survey data to find examples of exceptional astrophysical transients. The implications of finding such objects extend from traditional astrophysics fields to the more exotic searches for evidence of technologically advanced civilizations. In this first paper we present new, deeper observations of the tentative candidate discovered by Villarroel et al. (2016). We then perform the first searches for vanishing objects throughout the sky by comparing 600 million objects from the US Naval Observatory Catalogue (USNO) B1.0 down to a limiting magnitude of $\sim 20 - 21$ with the recent Pan-STARRS Data Release-1 (DR1) with a limiting magnitude of $\sim$ 23.4. We find about 150,000 preliminary candidates that do not have any Pan-STARRS counterpart within a 30 arcsec radius. We show that these objects are redder and have larger proper motions than typical USNO objects. We visually examine the images for a subset of about 24,000 candidates, superseding the 2016 study with a sample ten times larger. We find about $\sim$ 100 point sources visible in only one epoch in the red band of the USNO which may be of interest in searches for strong M dwarf flares, high-redshift supernovae or other catagories of unidentified red transients.

=== arXiv:1910.13180v1  [2019-10-29]
TITLE  : Spectral evolution and radial dust transport in the prototype young eruptive system EX Lup
AUTHORS: Péter Ábrahám, Lei Chen, Ágnes Kóspál, Jeroen Bouwman, Andrés Carmona, Martin Haas, Aurora Sicilia-Aguilar, Catalina Sobrino Figaredo
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ab521d
ABS    : EX Lup is the prototype of a class of pre-main sequence eruptive stars defined by their repetitive outbursts lasting several months. In 2008 January-September EX Lup underwent its historically largest outburst, brightening by about 4 magnitudes in visual light. In previous studies we discovered on-going silicate crystal formation in the inner disk during the outburst, but also noticed that the measured crystallinity fraction started decreasing after the source returned to the quiescent phase. Here we present new observations of the 10 $μ$m silicate feature, obtained with the MIDI and VISIR instruments at Paranal Observatory. The observations demonstrate that within five years practically all crystalline forsterite disappeared from the surface of the inner disk. We reconstruct this process by presenting a series of parametric axisymmetric radiative transfer models of an expanding dust cloud that transports the crystals from the terrestrial zone to outer disk regions where comets are supposed to form. Possibly the early Sun also experienced similar flare-ups, and the forming planetesimals might have incorporated crystalline silicate material produced by such outbursts. Finally, we discuss how far the location of the dust cloud could be constrained by future JWST observations.

=== arXiv:1910.13142v2  [2019-10-29]
TITLE  : Observability of Debris Discs around M-stars
AUTHORS: Patricia Luppe, Alexander V. Krivov, Mark Booth, Jean-François Lestrade
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/staa2608
ABS    : Debris discs are second generation dusty discs formed by collisions of planetesimals. Many debris discs have been found and resolved around hot and solar-type stars. However, only a handful have been discovered around M-stars, and the reasons for their paucity remain unclear. Here we check whether the sensitivity and wavelength coverage of present-day telescopes are simply unfavourable for detection of these discs or if they are truly rare. We approach this question by looking at the Herschel/DEBRIS survey that has searched for debris discs including M-type stars. Assuming that these cool-star discs are "similar" to those of the hotter stars in some sense (i.e., in terms of dust location, temperature, fractional luminosity, or mass), we check whether this survey should have found them. With our procedure we can reproduce the $2.1^{+4.5}_{-1.7}$% detection rate of M-star debris discs of the DEBRIS survey, which implies that these discs can indeed be similar to discs around hotter stars and just avoid detection. We then apply this procedure to IRAM NIKA-2 and ALMA bands 3, 6 and 7 to predict possible detection rates and give recommendations for future observations. We do not favour observing with IRAM, since it leads to detection rates lower than for the DEBRIS survey, with 0.6%-4.5% for a 15 min observation. ALMA observations, with detection rates 0.9%-7.2%, do not offer a significant improvement either, and so we conclude that more sensitive far-infrared and single dish sub-millimetre telescopes are necessary to discover the missing population of M-star debris discs.

=== arXiv:1910.03711v1  [2019-10-08]
TITLE  : Breakthrough Listen Follow-up of the Random Transiter (EPIC 249706694/HD 139139) with the Green Bank Telescope
AUTHORS: Bryan Brzycki, Andrew P. V. Siemion, Steve Croft, Daniel Czech, David DeBoer, Julia DeMarines, Jamie Drew, J. Emilio Enriquez
ABS    : The star EPIC 249706694 (HD 139139) was found to exhibit 28 transit-like events over an 87 day period during the Kepler mission's K2 Campaign 15 (Rappaport et al. 2019). These events did not fall into an identifiable pattern and could not be explained by a multitude of transit scenarios explored by the authors. We conduct follow-up observations at C-band frequencies with the Green Bank Telescope as part of the ongoing Breakthrough Listen search for technosignatures. We search for narrow band signals above a signal-to-noise threshold of 10 and with Doppler drift rates within +-5 Hz/s. We detect no evidence of technosignatures from EPIC 249706694 and derive an upper limit for the EIRP (Equivalent Isotropic Radiated Power) of putative transmissions to be 10 TW.

=== arXiv:1909.12997v1  [2019-09-28]
TITLE  : Stellar population and structural properties of dwarf galaxies and young stellar systems in the M81 group
AUTHORS: Sakurako Okamoto, Nobuo Arimoto, Annette M. N. Ferguson, Mike J. Irwin, Edouard J. Bernard, Yousuke Utsumi
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ab44a7
ABS    : We use Hyper Suprime-Cam on the Subaru Telescope to investigate the structural and photometric properties of early-type dwarf galaxies and young stellar systems at the center of the M81 Group. We have mapped resolved stars to $\sim2$ magnitudes below the tip of the red giant branch over almost 6.5 square degrees, corresponding to a projected area of $160\times160 \rm{kpc}$ at the distance of M81. The resulting stellar catalogue enables a homogeneous analysis of the member galaxies with unprecedented sensitivity to low surface brightness emission. The radial profiles of the dwarf galaxies are well-described by Sersic and King profiles, and show no obvious signatures of tidal disruption. The measured radii for most of these systems are larger than the existing literature values and we find the total luminosity of IKN ($\rm{M_{V,0}}=-14.29$) to be almost 3 magnitudes brighter than previously-thought. We identify new dwarf satellite candidates, d1006+69 and d1009+68, which we estimate to lie at a distance of $4.3\pm0.2$ Mpc and $3.5\pm0.5$ Mpc. With $\rm{M_{V,0}}=-8.91\pm0.40$ and $\rm{[M/H]}=-1.83\pm0.28$, d1006+69 is one of the faintest and most metal-poor dwarf satellites currently-known in the M81 Group. The luminosity functions of young stellar systems in the outlying tidal HI debris imply continuous star formation in the recent past and the existence of populations as young as 30 Myr old. We find no evidence for old RGB stars coincident with the young MS/cHeB stars which define these objects, supporting the idea that they are genuinely new stellar systems resulting from triggered star formation in gaseous tidal debris.

=== arXiv:1909.08851v1  [2019-09-19]
TITLE  : Anomalous Variability of Dyson Megastructures
AUTHORS: Z. Osmanov, V. I. Berezhiani
ABS    : In the framework of the approach of Dyson megastructures, by assuming that a super-advanced civilization exists and is capable of constructing a ring-like megastructure around their host star, we have considered the observational signatures of cold (300 K) and hot (4000) K astro-engineering to answer the question: are the modern facilities capable to detect theoretically predicted fingerprints? By implying the spectral resolving power and the radial velocity methods it has been shown that the oscillation of the rings might be detected as anomalous variability of the megastructures.

=== arXiv:1909.08626v1  [2019-09-18]
TITLE  : The S-PLUS: a star/galaxy classification based on a Machine Learning approach
AUTHORS: M. V. Costa-Duarte, L. Sampedro, A. Molino, H. S. Xavier, F. R. Herpich, A. L. Chies-Santos, C. E. Barbosa, A. Cortesi
ABS    : We present a star/galaxy classification for the Southern Photometric Local Universe Survey (S-PLUS), based on a Machine Learning approach: the Random Forest algorithm. We train the algorithm using the S-PLUS optical photometry up to $r$=21, matched to SDSS/DR13, and morphological parameters. The metric of importance is defined as the relative decrease of the initial accuracy when all correlations related to a certain feature is vanished. In general, the broad photometric bands presented higher importance when compared to narrow ones. The influence of the morphological parameters has been evaluated training the RF with and without the inclusion of morphological parameters, presenting accuracy values of 95.0\% and 88.1\%, respectively. Particularly, the morphological parameter {\rm FWHM/PSF} performed the highest importance over all features to distinguish between stars and galaxies, indicating that it is crucial to classify objects into stars and galaxies. We investigate the misclassification of stars and galaxies in the broad-band colour-colour diagram $(g-r)$ versus $(r-i)$. The morphology can notably improve the classification of objects at regions in the diagram where the misclassification was relatively high. Consequently, it provides cleaner samples for statistical studies. The expected contamination rate of red galaxies as a function of the redshift is estimated, providing corrections for red galaxy samples. The classification of QSOs as extragalactic objects is slightly better using photometric-only case. An extragalactic point-source catalogue is provided using the classification without any morphology feature (only the SED information) with additional constraints on photometric redshifts and {\rm FWHM/PSF} values.

=== arXiv:1909.05444v1  [2019-09-12]
TITLE  : unWISE Coadds: The Five-year Data Set
AUTHORS: A. M. Meisner, D. Lang, E. F. Schlafly, D. J. Schlegel
DOI    : 10.1088/1538-3873/ab3df4
ABS    : We present full-sky coadded maps created by uniformly combining the first five years of Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) and NEOWISE imaging at 3.4 microns (W1) and 4.6 microns (W2). By incorporating both pre-hibernation WISE exposures from 2010-2011 and the first four years (2013-2017) of post-hibernation exposures from the NEOWISE-Reactivation mission, we are able to provide W1/W2 coadds that span a 15 times longer time baseline and are substantially deeper than the standard AllWISE data products. Our new five-year "full-depth" coadds are now the deepest ever all-sky maps at 3-5 microns, permitting detection of sources ~2 times (~0.7 mag) fainter than AllWISE at 5 sigma significance. We additionally present an updated set of "time-resolved" W1/W2 coadds, which separately stack each of ~10 sky passes at each inertial sky location, enabling motion and variability measurements for faint infrared sources over a long ~7.5 year time baseline. We highlight new processing improvements relative to our previous "unWISE" coadd releases, focusing on astrometric calibration and artifact flagging. The deep WISE stacks presented here are already being used to perform target selection for the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI), and our full-sky coadded WISE/NEOWISE products will be key precursor data sets for upcoming wide-field infrared missions including SPHEREx and NEOCam.

=== arXiv:1908.11176v1  [2019-08-29]
TITLE  : Infrared-excess white dwarfs in the Gaia 100 pc sample
AUTHORS: A. Rebassa-Mansergas, E. Solano, S. Xu, C. Rodrigo, F. M. Jiménez-Esteban, S. Torres
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stz2423
ABS    : We analyse the 100pc Gaia white dwarf volume-limited sample by means of VOSA (Virtual Observatory SED Analyser) with the aim of identifying candidates for displaying infrared excesses. Our search focuses on the study of the spectral energy distribution (SED) of 3,733 white dwarfs with reliable infrared photometry and GBP-GRP colours below 0.8 mag, a sample which seems to be nearly representative of the overall white dwarf population. Our search results in 77 selected candidates, 52 of which are new identifications. For each target we apply a two-component SED fitting implemented in VOSA to derive the effective temperatures of both the white dwarf and the object causing the excess. We calculate a fraction of infrared-excess white dwarfs due to the presence of a circumstellar disk of 1.6+-0.2%, a value which increases to 2.6+-0.3% if we take into account incompleteness issues. Our results are in agreement with the drop in the percentage of infrared excess detections for cool (&lt;8,000K) and hot (&gt;20,000K) white dwarfs obtained in previous analyses. The fraction of white dwarfs with brown dwarf companions we derive is ~0.1-0.2%.

=== arXiv:1908.09839v2  [2019-08-26]
TITLE  : A White Dwarf with Transiting Circumstellar Material Far Outside the Roche Limit
AUTHORS: Z. Vanderbosch, J. J. Hermes, E. Dennihy, B. H. Dunlap, P. Izquierdo, P. E. Tremblay, P. B. Cho, B. T. Gaensicke
JOURNAL: ApJ 2020, 897, 171
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ab9649
ABS    : We report the discovery of a white dwarf exhibiting deep, irregularly shaped transits, indicative of circumstellar planetary debris. Using Zwicky Transient Facility DR2 photometry of ZTF$\,$J013906.17+524536.89 and follow-up observations from the Las Cumbres Observatory, we identify multiple transit events that recur every ${\approx}\,107.2\,$d, much longer than the $4.5{-}4.9\,$h orbital periods observed in WD$\,$1145+017, the only other white dwarf known with transiting planetary debris. The transits vary in both depth and duration, lasting $15{-}25\,$d and reaching $20{-}45\,\%$ dips in flux. Optical spectra reveal strong Balmer lines, identifying the white dwarf as a DA with $T_{\mathrm{eff}}=10{,}530\pm140\,\mathrm{K}$ and $\log(g)=7.86\pm0.06$. A $\mathrm{Ca\,II\,K}$ absorption feature is present in all spectra both in and out of transit. Spectra obtained during one night at roughly $15\,\%$ transit depth show increased $\mathrm{Ca\,II\,K}$ absorption with a model atmospheric fit suggesting $[\mathrm{Ca/H}]=-4.6\pm0.3$, whereas spectra taken on three nights out of transit have $[\mathrm{Ca/H}]$ of -5.5, -5.3, and -4.9 with similar uncertainties. While the $\mathrm{Ca\,II\,K}$ line strength varies by only 2-sigma, we consider a predominantly interstellar origin for Ca absorption unlikely. We suggest a larger column density of circumstellar metallic gas along the line of site or increased accretion of material onto the white dwarf's surface are responsible for the Ca absorption, but further spectroscopic studies are required. In addition, high-speed time series photometry out of transit reveals variability with periods of 900 and 1030$\,$s, consistent with ZZ Ceti pulsations.

=== arXiv:1908.09402v1  [2019-08-25]
TITLE  : The Hot Gas Exhaust of Starburst Engines in Mergers: Testing Models of Stellar Feedback and Star Formation Regulation
AUTHORS: Beverly J. Smith, Peter Wagstaff, Curtis Struck, Roberto Soria, Brianne Dunn, Douglas Swartz, Mark L. Giroux
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/ab3e72
ABS    : Using archival data from the Chandra X-ray telescope, we have measured the spatial extent of the hot interstellar gas in a sample of 49 nearby interacting galaxy pairs, mergers, and merger remnants. For systems with SFR &gt; 1 M(sun)/yr, the volume and mass of hot gas are strongly and linearly correlated with the star formation rate (SFR). This supports the idea that stellar/supernovae feedback dominates the production of hot gas in these galaxies. We compared the mass of X-ray-emitting hot gas Mx(gas) with the molecular and atomic hydrogen interstellar gas masses in these galaxies (M(H2) and M(HI), respectively), using published carbon monoxide and 21 cm HI measurements. Systems with higher SFRs have larger Mx(gas)/(M(H2) + M(HI)) ratios on average, in agreement with recent numerical simulations of star formation and feedback in merging galaxies. The Mx(gas)/(M(H2) + M(HI)) ratio also increases with dust temperature on average. The ratio Mx(gas)/SFR is anti-correlated with the IRAS 60 micron to 100 micron flux ratio and with the Spitzer 3.6 micron to 24 micron. These trends may be due to variations in the spatial density of young stars, the stellar age, the ratio of young to old stars, the initial mass function, and/or the efficiency of stellar feedback. Galaxies with low SFR (&lt;1 M(sun)/yr) and high K band luminosities may have an excess of hot gas relative to the relation for higher SFR galaxies, while galaxies with low K band luminosities (and therefore low stellar masses) may have a deficiency in hot gas, but our sample is not large enough for strong statistical significance.

=== arXiv:1908.08047v1  [2019-08-21]
TITLE  : Interpretation and diversity of exoplanetary material orbiting white dwarfs
AUTHORS: Andrew Swan, Jay Farihi, Detlev Koester, Mark Hollands, Steven Parsons, P. Wilson Cauley, Seth Redfield, Boris T. Gaensicke
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stz2337
ABS    : Nine metal-polluted white dwarfs are observed with medium-resolution optical spectroscopy,where photospheric abundances are determined and interpreted through comparison against solar system objects. An improved method of making such comparisons is presented that overcomes potential weaknesses of prior analyses, with the numerous sources of error considered to highlight the limitations on interpretation. The stars are inferred to be accreting rocky, volatile-poor asteroidal materials with origins in differentiated bodies, in line with the consensus model. The most heavily polluted star in the sample has 14 metals detected, and appears to be accreting material from a rocky planetesimal, whose composition is mantle-like with a small Fe-Ni core component. Some unusual abundances are present: one star is strongly depleted in Ca, while two others show Na abundances elevated above bulk Earth, speculated either to reflect diversity in the formation conditions of the source material, or to be traces of past accretion events. Another star shows clear signs that accretion ceased around 5 Myr ago,causing Mg to dominate the photospheric abundances, as it has the longest diffusion time of the observed elements. Observing such post-accretion systems allows constraints to be placed on models of the accretion process.

=== arXiv:1908.00132v1  [2019-07-31]
TITLE  : High-Resolution Near Infrared Spectroscopy of HD~100546: IV. Orbiting Companion Disappears on Schedule
AUTHORS: Sean D. Brittain, Joan R. Najita, John S. Carr
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ab380b
ABS    : HD~100546 is a Herbig Ae/Be star surrounded by a disk with a large central region that is cleared of gas and dust (i.e., an inner hole). High-resolution near-infrared spectroscopy reveals a rich emission spectrum of fundamental ro-vibrational CO emission lines whose time variable properties point to the presence of an orbiting companion within the hole. The Doppler shift and spectroastrometric signal of the CO v=1-0 P26 line, observed from 2003 to 2013, are consistent with a source of excess CO emission that orbits the star near the inner rim of the disk. The properties of the excess emission are consistent with those of a circumplanetary disk. In this paper, we report follow up observations that confirm our earlier prediction that the orbiting source of excess emission would disappear behind the near side of the inner rim of the outer disk in 2017. We find that while the hotband CO lines remained unchanged in 2017, the v=1-0 P26 line and its spectroastrometric signal returned to the profile observed in 2003. With these new observations, we further constrain the origin of the emission and discuss possible ways of confirming the presence of an orbiting planetary companion in the inner disk.

=== arXiv:1908.02683v1  [2019-07-31]
TITLE  : The Nine Axes of Merit for Technosignature Searches
AUTHORS: Sofia Z. Sheikh
JOURNAL: International Journal of Astrobiology (2019) 1-7
DOI    : 10.1017/S1473550419000284
ABS    : The diverse methodologies and myriad orthogonal proposals for the best technosignatures to search for in SETI can make it difficult to develop an effective and balanced search strategy, especially from a funding perspective. Here I propose a framework to compare the relative advantages and disadvantages of various proposed technosignatures based on nine "axes of merit". This framework was first developed at the NASA Technosignatures Workshop in Houston in 2018 and published in that report. I give the definition and rationale behind the nine axes as well as the history of each axis in the SETI and technosignature literature. These axes are then applied to three example classes of technosignature searches as an illustration of their use. An open-source software tool is available to allow technosignature researchers to make their own version of the figure.

=== arXiv:1907.13244v1  [2019-07-30]
TITLE  : WISE Discovery of Mid-infrared Variability in Massive Young Stellar Objects
AUTHORS: Mizuho Uchiyama, Kohei Ichikawa
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ab372e
ABS    : We systematically investigate the mid-infrared (MIR; $λ&gt;3 ~μ$m) time variability of uniformly selected $\sim800$ massive young stellar objects (MYSOs) from the Red MSX Source (RMS) survey. Out of the 806 sources, we obtain reliable 9-year-long MIR magnitude variability data of 331 sources at the 3.4~$μ$m (W1) and 4.6~$μ$m (W2) bands by cross-matching the MYSO positions with ALLWISE and NEOWISE catalogs. After applying the variability selections using ALLWISE data, we identify 5 MIR-variable candidates. The light curves show various classes, with the periodic, plateau-like, and dipper features. Out of the obtained two color-magnitude diagram of W1 and W1$-$W2, one shows "bluer when brighter and redder when fainter" trends in variability, suggesting change in extinction or accretion rate. Finally, our results show that G335.9960$-$00.8532 (hereafter, G335) has a periodic light curve, with a $\approx 690$-day cycle. Spectral energy density model fitting results indicate that G335 is a relatively evolved MYSO; thus, we may be witnessing the very early stages of a hyper- or ultra-compact HII region, a key source for understanding MYSO evolution.

=== arXiv:1907.07832v1  [2019-07-18]
TITLE  : Searches for Technosignatures: The State of the Profession
AUTHORS: Jason T. Wright
ABS    : The search for life in the universe is a major theme of astronomy and astrophysics for the next decade. Searches for technosignatures are complementary to searches for biosignatures, in that they offer an alternative path to discovery, and address the question of whether complex (i.e. technological) life exists elsewhere in the Galaxy. This approach has been endorsed in prior Decadal Reviews and National Academies reports, and yet the field still receives almost no federal support in the US. Because of this lack of support, searches for technosignatures, precisely the part of the search of greatest public interest, suffers from a very small pool of trained practitioners. A major source of this issue is institutional inertia at NASA, which avoids the topic as a result of decades-past political grandstanding, conflation of the effort with non-scientific topics such as UFOs, and confusion regarding the scope of the term "SETI." The Astro2020 Decadal should address this issue by making developing the field an explicit priority for the next decade. It should recommend that NASA and the NSF support training and curricular development in the field in a way that supports equity and diversity, and make explicit calls for proposals to fund searches for technosignatures.

=== arXiv:1907.07830v1  [2019-07-18]
TITLE  : Technosignatures in Transit
AUTHORS: Jason T. Wright, David Kipping
JOURNAL: 2019 BAAS 51(3), 343
ABS    : Kepler, K2, TESS, and similar time-domain photometric projects, while designed with exoplanet detection in mind, are also well-suited projects for searches for large artificial structures orbiting other stars in the Galaxy. An effort to examine these data sets with an eye towards non-spherical or otherwise anomalous transit events, and a robust follow-up program to understand the stars and occulters that generate them, would enable the first robust upper limits on such megastructures in terms of their sizes, occurrence rates, and orbital properties. Such work also has the ancillary benefit of improving our understanding of stellar photometric variability and orbital and physical parameter estimation of exoplanets from photometric time series, and may lead to the identification of new, unexpected classes of stellar variables and exoplanets. Ultimately, searching for the most unusual and anomalous signatures benefits not only the search for technologies, but also the entire astronomical community by uncovering new mysteries to advance our understanding of the Universe.

=== arXiv:1907.07829v1  [2019-07-18]
TITLE  : Technosignatures in the Thermal Infrared
AUTHORS: Jason T. Wright, Erik Zackrisson, Casey Lisse
JOURNAL: 2019 Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society 51, 366
ABS    : WISE, Gaia, and JWST provide an opportunity to compute the first robust upper limits on the energy supplies of extraterrestrial civilizations, both for stars in the Galaxy (Kardashev Type II civilizations) and for other galaxies (Kardashev Type III civilizations). Together, they allow for a nearly-complete catalog of nearby stars with infrared excesses, which is valuable for both stellar astrophysics and searches for technosignatures; and of the MIR luminosities of galaxies, important for studies of galaxies' star and star-formation properties, but also for the identification of potential galaxies endemic with alien technology. JWST will provide the crucial mid-infrared spectroscopy necessary to identify the origin of these infrared excesses, advancing both traditional astronomy and searches for technosignatures. Such signatures are distinguished from dust by their lack of far-infrared emission and lack of association with star formation.

=== arXiv:1907.04800v2  [2019-07-10]
TITLE  : A statistically significant lack of debris discs in medium separation binary systems
AUTHORS: Ben Yelverton, Grant M. Kennedy, Kate Y. L. Su, Mark C. Wyatt
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stz1927
ABS    : We compile a sample of 341 binary and multiple star systems with the aim of searching for and characterising Kuiper belt-like debris discs. The sample is assembled by combining several smaller samples studied in previously published work with targets from two unpublished Herschel surveys. We find that 38 systems show excess emission at 70 or 100 $μ$m suggestive of a debris disc. While nine of the discs appear to be unstable to perturbations from their host binary based on a simple analysis of their inferred radii, we argue that the evidence for genuine instability is not strong, primarily because of uncertainty in the true disc radii, uncertainty in the boundaries of the unstable regions, and orbital projection effects. The binary separation distributions of the disc-bearing and disc-free systems are different at a confidence level of $99.4\%$, indicating that binary separation strongly influences the presence of detectable levels of debris. No discs are detected for separations between $\sim$25 and 135 au; this is likely a result of binaries whose separations are comparable with typical disc radii clearing out their primordial circumstellar or circumbinary material via dynamical perturbations. The disc detection rate is $19^{+5}_{-3}\%$ for binaries wider than 135 au, similar to published results for single stars. Only $8^{+2}_{-1}\%$ of systems with separations below 25 au host a detectable disc, which may suggest that planetesimal formation is inhibited in binaries closer than a few tens of au, similar to the conclusions of studies of known planet-hosting binaries.

=== arXiv:1907.04443v1  [2019-07-09]
TITLE  : SETI in the Spatio-Temporal Survey Domain
AUTHORS: James. R. A. Davenport
ABS    : Traditional searches for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) or "technosignatures" focus on dedicated observations of single stars or regions in the sky to detect excess or transient emission from intelligent sources. The newest generation of synoptic time domain surveys enable an entirely new approach: spatio-temporal SETI, where technosignatures may be discovered from spatially resolved sources or multiple stars over time. Current optical time domain surveys such as ZTF and the Evryscope can probe 10-100 times more of the "Cosmic Haystack" parameter space volume than many radio SETI investigations. Small-aperture, high cadence surveys like Evryscope can be comparable in their Haystack volume completeness to deeper surveys including LSST. Investigations with these surveys can also be conducted at a fraction of the cost of dedicated SETI surveys, since they make use of data already being gathered. However, SETI methodology has not widely utilized such surveys, and the field is in need of new search algorithms that can account for signals in both the spatial and temporal domains. Here I describe the broad potential for modern wide-field time domain optical surveys to revolutionize our search for technosignatures, and illustrate some example SETI approaches using transiting exoplanets to form a distributed beacon.

=== arXiv:1907.02476v1  [2019-07-04]
TITLE  : Planetesimals Around Stars with TESS (PAST): I. Transient Dimming of a Binary Solar Analog at the End of the Planet Accretion Era
AUTHORS: E. Gaidos, T. Jacobs, D. LaCourse, A. Vanderburg, S. Rappaport, T. Berger, L. Pearce, A. W. Mann
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stz1942
ABS    : We report detection of quasi-periodic (1.5 day) dimming of HD 240779, the solar-mass primary in a 5" visual binary (also TIC 284730577), by the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite. This dimming, as has been shown for other "dipper" stars, is likely due to occultation by circumstellar dust. The barycentric space motion, lithium abundance, rotation, and chromospheric emission of the stars in this system point to an age of ~125 Myr, and possible membership in the AB Doradus moving group. As such it occupies an important but poorly explored intermediate regime of stars with transient dimming between young stellar objects in star forming regions and main sequence stars, and between UX Orionis-type Ae/Be stars and M-type "dippers". HD 240779, but not its companion BD+10714B, has WISE-detected excess infrared emission at 12 and 22 microns indicative of circumstellar dust. We propose that infrared emission is produced by collisions of planetesimals during clearing of a residual disk at the end of rocky planet formation, and that quasi-periodic dimming is produced by the rapid disintegration of a 100 km planetesimal near the silicate evaporation radius. Further studies of this and similar systems will illuminate a poorly understood final phase of rocky planet formation like that which produced the inner Solar System.

=== arXiv:1906.11774v1  [2019-06-27]
TITLE  : Upper limits on protolunar disc masses using ALMA observations of directly-imaged exoplanets
AUTHORS: Sebastián Pérez, Sebastián Marino, Simon Casassus, Clément Baruteau, Alice Zurlo, Christian Flores, Gael Chauvin
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stz1775
ABS    : The Solar System gas giants are each surrounded by many moons, with at least 50 prograde satellites thought to have formed from circumplanetary material. Just like the Sun is not the only star surrounded by planets, extrasolar gas giants are likely surrounded by satellite systems. Here, we report on ALMA observations of four &lt;40 Myr old stars with directly-imaged companions: PZ Tel, AB Pic, 51 Eri, and $κ$ And. Continuum emission at 1.3 mm is undetected for any of the systems. Since these are directly-imaged companions, there is knowledge of their temperatures, masses and locations. These allow for upper limits on the amount of circumplanetary dust to be derived from detailed radiative transfer models. These protolunar disc models consider two disc sizes: 0.4 and 0.04 times the exoplanet's Hill radius. The former is representative of hydrodynamic simulations of circumplanetary discs while the latter a case with significant radial drift of solids. The more compact case is also motivated by the semi-major axis of Callisto, enclosing Jupiter's Galilean satellites. All upper limits fall below the expected amount of dust required to explain regular satellite systems ($10^{-4}$ times the mass of their central planet). Upper limits are compared with viscous evolution and debris disc models. Our analysis suggests that the non detections can be interpreted as evidence of dust growth beyond metre sizes to form moonetesimals in timescales &lt;10 Myr. This sample increases by 50% the number of ALMA non-detections of young companions available in the literature.

=== arXiv:1906.11595v1  [2019-06-27]
TITLE  : Variable dust emission by WC type Wolf-Rayet stars observed in the NEOWISE-R survey
AUTHORS: Peredur M Williams
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stz1784
ABS    : Photometry at 3.4 and 4.6 micron of 128 Population~I WC type Wolf-Rayet stars in the Galaxy and 12 in the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) observed in the WISE NEOWISE-R survey was searched for evidence of circumstellar dust emission and its variation. Infrared spectral energy distributions (SEDs) were assembled, making use of archival r, i, Z and Y photometry to determine reddening and stellar wind levels for the WC stars found in recent IR surveys and lacking optical photometry. From their SEDs, ten apparently non-variable stars were newly identified as dust makers, including three, WR 102-22, WR 110-10 and WR 124-10, having subtype earlier than WC8-9, the first such stars to show this phenomenon. The 11 stars found to show variable dust emission include six new episodic dust-makers, WR 47c, WR 75-11, WR 91-1, WR 122-14 and WR 125-1 in the Galaxy and HD 38030 in the LMC. Of previously known dust makers, NEOWISE-R photometry of WR 19 captured its rise to maximum in 2018, confirming the 10.1-y period, that of WR 125 the beginning of a new episode of dust formation suggesting a period near 28.3~y., while that of HD 36402 covered almost a whole period and forced revision of it to 5.1~y.

=== arXiv:1906.08788v1  [2019-06-20]
TITLE  : Orphaned Exomoons: Tidal Detachment and Evaporation Following an Exoplanet-Star Collision
AUTHORS: Miguel Martinez, Nicholas C. Stone, Brian D. Metzger
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stz2464
ABS    : Gravitational perturbations on an exoplanet from a massive outer body, such as the Kozai-Lidov mechanism, can pump the exoplanet's eccentricity up to values that will destroy it via a collision or strong interaction with its parent star. During the final stages of this process, any exomoons orbiting the exoplanet will be detached by the star's tidal force and placed into orbit around the star. Using ensembles of three and four-body simulations, we demonstrate that while most of these detached bodies either collide with their star or are ejected from the system, a substantial fraction, ~10%, of such "orphaned" exomoons (with initial properties similar to those of the Galilean satellites in our own solar system) will outlive their parent exoplanet. The detached exomoons generally orbit inside the ice line, so that strong radiative heating will evaporate any volatile-rich layers, producing a strong outgassing of gas and dust, analogous to a comet's perihelion passage. Small dust grains ejected from the exomoon may help generate an opaque cloud surrounding the orbiting body but are quickly removed by radiation blow-out. By contrast, larger solid particles inherit the orbital properties of the parent exomoon, feeding an eccentric disk of solids that drains more gradually onto the star via Poynting-Robertson drag, and which could result in longer-timescale dimming of the star. For characteristic exomoon evaporation times of ~ 1e5-1e6 yr, attenuation of the stellar light arising from one or more out-gassing exomoons provides a promising explanation for both the dipping and secular dimming behavior observed from KIC 8462852 (Boyajian's Star).

=== arXiv:1906.08364v2  [2019-06-19]
TITLE  : Analysis of a Century's Worth of AR Scorpii Photometry from DASCH and ASAS-SN
AUTHORS: Erik Peterson, Colin Littlefield, Peter Garnavich
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/ab2ad5
ABS    : AR Scorpii (AR Sco) is a binary star system containing the only known white dwarf (WD) pulsar. Previously reported photometric datasets only provide coverage back to 2005, but we extend the observational baseline for AR Sco back to the beginning of the 20th century by analyzing observations from the Digital Access to a Sky Century at Harvard project (DASCH). We find that the orbital waveform of AR Sco remained constant across that baseline with no significant deviations from its average brightness. This result strongly suggests that the absence of accretion in modern observations is a long-term feature of AR Sco. Additionally, the DASCH light curve provides an opportunity to test an earlier prediction that an obliquity of the WD would result in a precessional period observable in long-term studies of the orbital light curve. The DASCH observations do not indicate the presence of such a period, and we show that previous, inconclusive tests of this hypothesis were insensitive to the existence of a precessional period. Furthermore, the long DASCH baseline enables us to constrain the rate of change of the orbital frequency to $\dotν \lesssim 3.8\times10^{-20}$ Hz s$^{-1}$, constraining the efficacy of magnetic braking as a mechanism of angular-momentum loss in this system. Finally, we discuss how the combination of the orbital waveform's stability, high amplitude, and short period should make it possible to identify additional WD pulsars in all-sky survey data.

=== arXiv:1906.01391v2  [2019-06-04]
TITLE  : ISPY -- NaCo Imaging Survey for Planets around Young stars. Discovery of an M dwarf in the gap between HD 193571 and its debris ring
AUTHORS: Arianna Musso Barcucci, Ralf Launhardt, Grant M. Kennedy, Henning Avenhaus, Stefan S. Brems, Roy van Boekel, Faustine Cantalloube, Anthony Cheetham
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 627, A77 (2019)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201935146
ABS    : Context. The interaction between low-mass companions and the debris discs they reside in is still not fully understood. A debris disc can evolve due to self-stirring, a process in which planetesimals can excite their neighbours to the point of destructive collisions. In addition, the presence of a companion could further stir the disc (companion-stirring). Additional information is necessary to understand this fundamental step in the formation and evolution of a planetary system, and at the moment of writing only a handful of systems are known where a companion and a debris disc have both been detected and studied at the same time. Aims. Our primary goal is to augment the sample of these systems and to understand the relative importance between self-stirring and companion-stirring. Methods. In the course of the VLT/NaCo Imaging Survey for Planets around Young stars (ISPY), we observed HD 193571, an A0 debris disc hosting star at a distance of 68 pc with an age between 60 and 170 Myr. We obtained two sets of observations in L' band and a third epoch in H band using the GPI instrument at Gemini-South. Results. A companion was detected in all three epochs at a projected separation of 11 au (0.17 arcsec), and co-motion was confirmed through proper motion analysis. Given the inferred disc size of 120 au, the companion appears to reside within the gap between the host star and the disc. Comparison between the L' and H band magnitude and evolutionary tracks suggests a mass of 0.31 - 0.39 solar masses . Conclusions. We discovered a previously unknown M-dwarf companion around HD 193571, making it the third low-mass stellar object discovered within a debris disc. A comparison to self- and companion-stirring models suggests that the companion is likely responsible for the stirring of the disc.

=== arXiv:1905.12066v1  [2019-05-28]
TITLE  : Emerging trends in metallicity and lithium properties of debris disc stars
AUTHORS: C. Chavero, R. de la Reza, L. Ghezzi, F. Llorente de Andrés, C. B. Pereira, C. Giuppone, G. Pinzón, .
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stz1496
ABS    : Dwarf stars with debris discs and planets appear to be excellent laboratories to study the core accretion theory of planets formation. These systems are however, insufficiently studied. In this paper we present the main metallicity and lithium abundance properties of these stars together with stars with only debris discs and stars with only planets. Stars without detected planets nor discs are also considered. The analysed sample is formed by main-sequence FGK field single stars. Apart from the basic stellar parameters, we include the use of dusty discs masses. The main results show for the first time that the dust mass of debris disc stars with planets correlate with metallicity. We confirm that these disc dust masses are related to their central stellar masses. Separately, the masses of stars and those of planets also correlate with metallicity. We conclude that two conditions are necessary to form giant planets: to have a sufficient metallicity and also a sufficient protoplanetary mass of gas and dust. The debris discs masses of stars without giant planets do not correlate with metallicity, because they do not fulfil these two conditions. Concerning lithium, by adopting a stellar model for lithium depletion based on a strong interaction between the star and a protoplanetary disc, we found that in agreement with the model predictions, observations indicate that the main lithium depletion occurs during this initial protoplanetary evolution stage. We show that the ultimately lithium depletion is independent of the presence or absence of planets and appears to be only age dependent.

=== arXiv:1905.08097v3  [2019-05-20]
TITLE  : Stable Schwarzschild stars as black-hole mimickers
AUTHORS: R. A. Konoplya, C. Posada, Z. Stuchlík, A. Zhidenko
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. D 100, 044027 (2019)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevD.100.044027
ABS    : The Schwarzschild star is an ultracompact object beyond the Buchdahl limit, which has Schwarzschild geometry outside its surface and positive pressure in the external layer which vanishes at the surface. Recently it has been shown that the Schwarzschild star is stable against spherically symmetric perturbations. Here we study arbitrary axial nonspherical perturbations, and show that the observable quasinormal modes can be as close to the Schwarzschild limit as one wishes, what makes the Schwarzschild star a very good mimicker of a black hole. The decaying time-domain profiles prove that the Schwarzschild star is stable against nonspherical perturbations as well. Another peculiar feature is the absence of echoes at the end of the ringdown. Instead we observe a nonoscillating mode which might belong to the class of algebraically special modes. At asymptotically late times, Schwarzschildian power-law tails dominate in the signal.

=== arXiv:1905.03146v1  [2019-05-08]
TITLE  : Persistence of Technosignatures: A Comment on Lingam and Loeb
AUTHORS: Milan M. Ćirković, Branislav Vukotić, Milan Stojanović
DOI    : 10.1089/ast.2019.2052
ABS    : In a recent paper in this journal, Lingam and Loeb (2018) develop an excellent heuristic for searches for biosignatures vs. technosignatures. We consider two ways in which their approach could be extended and sharpened, with focus on durability of technosignatures. We also note an important consequence of the adopted heuristic which offers strong support to the ideas of the Dysonian SETI.

=== arXiv:1905.02214v1  [2019-05-06]
TITLE  : A new empirical method to estimate the molecular gas mass in galaxies
AUTHORS: Alice Concas, Paola Popesso
DOI    : 10.1093/mnrasl/slz065
ABS    : We find a tight correlation between the dust extinction, traced by the Balmer Decrement (BD$=$H$α$/H$β$), the CO(1-0) line luminosity (L$_{CO}$) and total molecular gas mass (M$_{H2}$) in a sample of $222$ local star-forming galaxies drawn from the xCOLD GASS survey. As expected, the galaxy disk inclination affects the correlation by inducing a saturation of the Balmer decrement on highly inclined galaxies. Once this effect is taken into account, L$_{CO}$ and M$_{H2}$ can be expressed as a function of BD with a scatter of $\sim 0.3$ dex. We do not find any dependence on galaxy size, mass, morphology, star formation activity, and gas metallicity. The correlation disappears if the atomic gas phase is considered. This is likely due to the fact that the region traced by the BD, the stellar disk, is much smaller than the HI disk.

=== arXiv:1905.00370v2  [2019-05-01]
TITLE  : GAMA+KiDS: Alignment of galaxies in galaxy groups and its dependence on galaxy scale
AUTHORS: Christos Georgiou, Nora Elisa Chisari, Maria Cristina Fortuna, Henk Hoekstra, Konrad Kuijken, Benjamin Joachimi, Mohammadjavad Vakili, Maciej Bilicki
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 628, A31 (2019)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201935810
ABS    : Intrinsic galaxy alignments are a source of bias for weak lensing measurements as well as a tool for understanding galaxy formation and evolution. In this work, we measure the alignment of shapes of satellite galaxies, in galaxy groups, with respect to the brightest group galaxy (BGG), as well as alignments of the BGG shape with the satellite positions, using the highly complete Galaxy And Mass Assembly (GAMA) spectroscopic survey and deep imaging from the Kilo Degree Survey. We control systematic errors with dedicated image simulations and measure accurate shapes using the DEIMOS shape measurement method. We find a significant satellite radial alignment signal, which vanishes at large separations from the BGG. We do not identify any strong trends of the signal with galaxy absolute magnitude or group mass. The alignment signal is dominated by red satellites. We also find that the outer regions of galaxies are aligned more strongly than their inner regions, by varying the radial weight employed during the shape measurement process. This behaviour is evident for both red and blue satellites. BGGs are also found to be aligned with satellite positions, with this alignment being stronger when considering the innermost satellites, using red BGGs and the shape of the outer region of the BGG. Lastly, we measure the global intrinsic alignment signal in the GAMA sample for two different radial weight functions and find no significant difference.

=== arXiv:1904.11505v2  [2019-04-25]
TITLE  : The Rise and Fall of the King: The Correlation between FO Aquarii's Low States and the White Dwarf's Spindown
AUTHORS: Colin Littlefield, Peter Garnavich, Mark R. Kennedy, Joseph Patterson, Jonathan Kemp, Robert A. Stiller, Franz-Josef Hambsch, Teofilo Arranz Heras
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ab9197
ABS    : The intermediate polar FO Aquarii (FO Aqr) experienced its first-reported low-accretion states in 2016, 2017, and 2018, and using newly available photographic plates, we identify pre-discovery low states in 1965, 1966, and 1974. The primary focus of our analysis, however, is an extensive set of time-series photometry obtained between 2002 and 2018, with particularly intensive coverage of the 2016-2018 low states. After computing an updated spin ephemeris for the white dwarf (WD), we show that its spin period began to increase in 2014 after having spent 27 years decreasing; no other intermediate polar has experienced a sign change of its period derivative, but FO Aqr has now done so twice. Our central finding is that the recent low states all occurred shortly after the WD began to spin down, even though no low states were reported in the preceding quarter-century, when it was spinning up. Additionally, the system's mode of accretion is extremely sensitive to the mass-transfer rate, with accretion being almost exclusively disk-fed when FO Aqr is brighter than V~14 and substantially stream-fed when it is not. Even in the low states, a grazing eclipse remains detectable, confirming the presence of a disk-like structure (but not necessarily a Keplerian accretion disk). We relate these various observations to theoretical predictions that during the low state, the system's accretion disk dissipates into a non-Keplerian ring of diamagnetic blobs. Finally, a new XMM-Newton observation from a high state in 2017 reveals an anomalously soft X-ray spectrum and diminished X-ray luminosity compared to pre-2016 observations.

=== arXiv:1904.05891v1  [2019-04-11]
TITLE  : The unbiased frequency of planetary signatures around single and binary white dwarfs using ${\it Spitzer}$ and ${\it Hubble}$
AUTHORS: Thomas G. Wilson, Jay Farihi, Boris T. Gänsicke, Andrew Swan
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stz1050
ABS    : This paper presents combined ${\it Spitzer}$ IRAC and ${\it Hubble}$ COS results for a double-blind survey of 195 single and 22 wide binary white dwarfs for infrared excesses and atmospheric metals. The selection criteria include cooling ages in the range 9 to 300 Myr, and hydrogen-rich atmospheres so that the presence of atmospheric metals can be confidently linked to ongoing accretion from a circumstellar disc. The entire sample has infrared photometry, whereas 168 targets have corresponding ultraviolet spectra. Three stars with infrared excesses due to debris discs are recovered, yielding a nominal frequency of $1.5_{-0.5}^{+1.5}$ per cent, while in stark contrast, the fraction of stars with atmospheric metals is $45\pm4$ per cent. Thus, only one out of 30 polluted white dwarfs exhibits an infrared excess at 3-4 $μ$m in IRAC photometry, which reinforces the fact that atmospheric metal pollution is the most sensitive tracer of white dwarf planetary systems. The corresponding fraction of infrared excesses around white dwarfs with wide binary companions is consistent with zero, using both the infrared survey data and an independent assessment of potential binarity for well-established dusty and polluted stars. In contrast, the frequency of atmospheric pollution among the targets in wide binaries is indistinct from apparently single stars, and moreover the multiplicity of polluted white dwarfs in a complete and volume-limited sample is the same as for field stars. Therefore, it appears that the delivery of planetesimal material onto white dwarfs is ultimately not driven by stellar companions, but by the dynamics of planetary bodies.

=== arXiv:1904.04839v2  [2019-04-09]
TITLE  : Astro 2020 Science White Paper: Evolved Planetary Systems around White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: Boris Gaensicke, Martin Barstow, Amy Bonsor, John Debes, Patrick Dufour, Tim Cunningham, Erik Dennihy, Nicola Gentile Fusillo
ABS    : Practically all known planet hosts will evolve into white dwarfs, and large parts of their planetary systems will survive this transition - the same is true for the solar system beyond the orbit of Mars. Spectroscopy of white dwarfs accreting planetary debris provides the most accurate insight into the bulk composition of exo-planets. Ground-based spectroscopic surveys of ~260, 000 white dwarfs detected with Gaia will identify &gt;1000 evolved planetary systems, and high-throughput high-resolution space-based ultraviolet spectroscopy is essential to measure in detail their abundances. So far, evidence for two planetesimals orbiting closely around white dwarfs has been obtained, and their study provides important constraints on the composition and internal structure of these bodies. Major photometric and spectroscopic efforts will be necessary to assemble a sample of such close-in planetesimals that is sufficiently large to establish their properties as a population, and to deduce the architectures of the outer planetary systems from where they originated. Mid-infrared spectroscopy of the dusty disks will provide detailed mineralogical information of the debris, which, in combination with the elemental abundances measured from the white dwarf spectroscopy, will enable detailed physical modelling of the chemical, thermodynamic, and physical history of the accreted material. Flexible multi-epoch infrared observations are essential to determine the physical nature, and origin of the variability observed in many of the dusty disks. Finally, the direct detection of the outer reservoirs feeding material to the white dwarfs will require sensitive mid- and far-infrared capabilities.

=== arXiv:1904.03018v2  [2019-04-05]
TITLE  : Mean field theory of jamming of nonspherical particles
AUTHORS: Harukuni Ikeda, Pierfrancesco Urbani, Francesco Zamponi
JOURNAL: J. Phys. A: Math. Theor 52, 344001 (2019)
DOI    : 10.1088/1751-8121/ab3079
ABS    : Recent computer simulations have uncovered the striking difference between the jamming transition of spherical and non-spherical particles. While systems of spherical particles are isostatic at the jamming point, systems of nonspherical particles are not: the contact number and shear modulus of the former exhibit a square root singularity near jamming, while those of the latter are linearly proportional to the distance from jamming. Furthermore, while our theoretical understanding of jamming of spherical particles is well developed, the same is not true for nonspherical particles. To understand jamming of non-spherical particles, in the previous work [Brito, PNAS 115(46), 111736], we extended the perceptron model, whose SAT/UNSAT transition belongs to the same universality class of jamming of spherical particles, to include additional variables accounting for the rotational degrees of freedom of nonspherical particles. In this paper, we give more detailed investigations of the full scaling behavior of the model near the jamming transition point in both convex and non-convex phases.

=== arXiv:1904.01978v3  [2019-04-03]
TITLE  : Constraining the Hadron-Quark Phase Transition Chemical Potential via Astronomical Observation
AUTHORS: Zhan Bai, Yu-xin Liu
DOI    : 10.1063/1.5117820
ABS    : We investigate the chemical potential and baryon number density of the hadron-quark phase transition in neutron star matter. The hadron matter is described with relativistic mean field theory, and the quark matter is described with the Dyson-Schwinger equation approach of QCD. In order to study the first-order phase transition, we develop the sound speed interpolation scheme to construct the equation of state in the middle density region where the hadron phase and quark phase coexist. The phase transition chemical potential is constrained with the maximum mass, the tidal deformability and the radius of neutrons stars. And the most probable value of the phase transition chemical potential is found.

=== arXiv:1903.12336v2  [2019-03-29]
TITLE  : Determining Hadron-Quark Phase Transition Chemical Potential via Astronomical Observations
AUTHORS: Zhan Bai, Yu-xin Liu
ABS    : We propose a scheme to determine the chemical potential and baryon number density of the hadron-quark phase transition in cold dense strong interaction matter (compact star matter). The hadron matter is described with the relativistic mean field theory, and the quark matter is described with the Dyson-Schwinger equation approach of QCD. To study the first-order phase transition, we take the sound speed as the interpolation objective to construct the equation of state in the middle density region. With the maximum mass, the tidal deformability and the radius of neutron stars being taken as calibration quantities, the phase transition chemical potential is constrained to a quite small range. And the most probable value of the phase transition chemical potential is found.

=== arXiv:1903.11533v1  [2019-03-27]
TITLE  : Ohmic heating of asteroids around magnetic stars
AUTHORS: Benjamin C. Bromley, Scott J. Kenyon
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ab12e9
ABS    : We consider the impact of electromagnetic induction and Ohmic heating on a conducting planetary object that orbits a magnetic star. Power dissipated as heat saps orbital energy. If this heat is trapped by an insulating crust or mantle, interior temperatures increase substantially. We provide a quantitative description of this behavior and discuss the astrophysical scenarios in which it might occur. Magnetic fields around some main-sequence stars and white dwarfs are strong enough to cause the decay of close-in orbits of asteroids and dwarf planets, drawing them through the Roche limit on Myr time scales. We confirm that Ohmic heating around neutron stars is driven by the rotation of the stellar magnetic dipole, not orbital dynamics. In any case, heating can raise interior temperatures of asteroids or dwarf planets on close-in orbits to well above liquidus. Hot material escaping to the surface may lead to volcanic ejections that can obscure the host star (as in the light curve of KIC 8462852) and pollute its atmosphere (as observed with metal-rich white dwarfs). We speculate that mixing of a volatile-rich mantle or crust with material from an induction-heated core may lead to an explosion that could destroy the asteroid prior to tidal break-up.

=== arXiv:1903.10627v2  [2019-03-25]
TITLE  : Extreme Debris Disk Variability -- Exploring the Diverse Outcomes of Large Asteroid Impacts During the Era of Terrestrial Planet Formation
AUTHORS: Kate Y. L. Su, Alan P. Jackson, Andras Gaspar, George H. Rieke, Ruobing Dong, Johan Olofsson, G. M. Kennedy, Zoe M. Leinhardt
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/ab1260
ABS    : The most dramatic phases of terrestrial planet formation are thought to be oligarchic and chaotic growth, on timescales of up to 100-200 Myr, when violent impacts occur between large planetesimals of sizes up to proto-planets. Such events are marked by the production of large amounts of debris as has been observed in some exceptionally bright and young debris disks (termed extreme debris disks). Here we report five years of Spitzer measurements of such systems around two young solar-type stars: ID8 and P1121. The short-term (weekly to monthly) and long-term (yearly) disk variability is consistent with the aftermaths of large impacts involving large asteroid-size bodies. We demonstrate that an impact-produced clump of optically thick dust, under the influence of the dynamical and viewing geometry effects, can produce short-term modulation in the disk light curves. The long-term disk flux variation is related to the collisional evolution within the impact-produced fragments once released into a circumstellar orbit. The time-variable behavior observed in the P1121 system is consistent with a hypervelocity impact prior to 2012 that produced vapor condensates as the dominant impact product. Two distinct short-term modulations in the ID8 system argue for two violent impacts at different times and locations. Its long-term variation is consistent with the collisional evolution of two different populations of impact-produced debris dominated by either vapor condensates or escaping boulders. The bright, variable emission from the dust produced in large impacts from extreme debris disks provides a unique opportunity to study violent events during the era of terrestrial planet formation.

=== arXiv:1903.09213v2  [2019-03-21]
TITLE  : The Weird Detector: Flagging periodic, coherent signals of arbitrary shape in time series photometry
AUTHORS: Adam Wheeler, David Kipping
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stz775
ABS    : By design, model-based approaches for flagging transiting exoplanets in light curves, such as boxed least squares, excel at detecting planets with low S/N at the expense of finding signals that are not well described by the assumed model, such as self-lensing binaries, disintegrating or evaporating planets, or planets with large rings. So far, such signals have typically been found through visual searches by professional or citizen scientists, or by inspection of the photometric power-spectra. We present a nonparametric detection algorithm, for short duty-cycle periodic signals in photometric time series based on phase dispersion minimization. We apply our code to 161,786 Kepler sources and detect 18 new periodic signals consistent with heartbeat binaries/planets, 4 new singly-transiting systems, and 2 new doubly-transiting systems. We show that our code is able to recover the majority of known Kepler objects of interest (KOIs) to high confidence, as well as more unusual events such as Boyajian's star and a comet passing through the Kepler field. Nonparametric signal-flagging techniques, such as the one presented here, will become increasingly valuable with the coming data from TESS and future transit surveys as the volume of data available to us exceeds that which can be feasibly examined manually.

=== arXiv:1903.08503v1  [2019-03-20]
TITLE  : Line Profiles of the Calcium I Resonance Line in Cool Metal-polluted White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: S. Blouin, N. F. Allard, T. Leininger, F. X. Gadéa, P. Dufour
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ab1266
ABS    : Metal-polluted white dwarfs (DZ stars) are characterized by a helium-rich atmosphere contaminated by heavy elements traces originating from accreted rocky planetesimals. As a detailed spectroscopic analysis of those objects can reveal the composition of the accreted debris, there is a great interest in developing accurate DZ atmosphere models. However, the coolest DZ white dwarfs are challenging to model due to the fluidlike density of their atmospheres. Under such extreme conditions, spectral absorption lines are heavily broadened by interactions with neutral helium and it is no longer justified to use the conventional Lorentzian profiles. In this work, we determine the theoretical profiles of the Ca I resonance line (the most prominent spectral line for the coolest DZ white dwarfs) in the dense atmospheres of cool DZ white dwarfs. To do so, we use a unified theory of collisional line profiles and accurate ab initio potential energies and transition dipole moments for the CaHe molecule. We present the resulting profiles for the full range of temperatures and helium densities relevant for the modeling of cool, metal-polluted white dwarfs (from 3000 to 6000 K and from $10^{21}$ to $10^{23}\,{\rm cm}^{-3}$). We also implement these new profiles in our atmosphere models and show that they lead to improved fits to the Ca I resonance line of the coolest DZ white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:1903.06550v1  [2019-03-14]
TITLE  : Searching for Technosignatures: Implications of Detection and Non-Detection
AUTHORS: Jacob Haqq-Misra, Anamaria Berea, Amedeo Balbi, Claudio Grimaldi
ABS    : The search for technosignatures from the Galaxy or the nearby universe raises two main questions: What are the possible characteristics of technosignatures? and How can future searches be optimized to enhance the probability of detection? Addressing these questions requires an interdisciplinary approach, combining i) the study of Anthropocene as a planetary transition and thus a possible proxy also for other planets, ii) the active search for technosignatures in the radio/optical and infrared range, and iii) the statistical modelling of technosignatures and Bayesian inference methods to learn from both detection and non-detection. This strategy (combining modelling and observations) offers the best scientific opportunity in the next decade to discover the possible existence of technological civilizations beyond Earth.

=== arXiv:1902.10180v1  [2019-02-26]
TITLE  : SCOPE: SCUBA-2 Continuum Observations of Pre-protostellar Evolution - Survey Description and Compact Source Catalogue
AUTHORS: D. J. Eden, Tie Liu, Kee-Tae Kim, S. -Y. Liu, K. Tatematsu, J. Di Francesco, K. Wang, Y. Wu
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stz574
ABS    : We present the first release of the data and compact-source catalogue for the JCMT Large Program SCUBA-2 Continuum Observations of Pre-protostellar Evolution (SCOPE). SCOPE consists of 850-um continuum observations of 1235 Planck Galactic Cold Clumps (PGCCs) made with the Submillimetre Common-User Bolometer Array 2 on the James Clerk Maxwell Telescope. These data are at an angular resolution of 14.4 arcsec, significantly improving upon the 353-GHz resolution of Planck at 5 arcmin, and allowing for a catalogue of 3528 compact sources in 558 PGCCs. We find that the detected PGCCs have significant sub-structure, with 61 per cent of detected PGCCs having 3 or more compact sources, with filamentary structure also prevalent within the sample. A detection rate of 45 per cent is found across the survey, which is 95 per cent complete to Planck column densities of $N_{H_{2}}$ $&gt;$ 5 $\times$ 10$^{21}$ cm$^{-2}$. By positionally associating the SCOPE compact sources with YSOs, the star formation efficiency, as measured by the ratio of luminosity to mass, in nearby clouds is found to be similar to that in the more distant Galactic Plane, with the column density distributions also indistinguishable from each other.

=== arXiv:1901.10410v1  [2019-01-29]
TITLE  : Radio-Infrared Correlation for Local Dusty Galaxies and Dusty AGNs from the AKARI All Sky Survey
AUTHORS: A. Solarz, A. Pollo, M. Bilicki, A. Pępiak, T. T. Takeuchi, P. Piątek
DOI    : 10.1093/pasj/psz013
ABS    : We use the new release of the AKARI Far-Infrared all sky Survey matched with the NVSS radio database to investigate the local ($z&lt;0.25$) far infrared-radio correlation (FIRC) of different types of extragalactic sources. To obtain the redshift information for the AKARI FIS sources we crossmatch the catalogue with the SDSS DR8. This also allows us to use emission line properties to divide sources into four categories: i) star-forming galaxies (SFGs), ii) composite galaxies (displaying both star-formation and active nucleus components), iii) Seyfert galaxies, and iv) low-ionization nuclear emission-line region (LINER) galaxies. We find that the Seyfert galaxies have the lowest FIR/radio flux ratios and display excess radio emission when compared to the SFGs. We conclude that FIRC can be used to separate SFGs and AGNs only for the most radio-loud objects.

=== arXiv:1901.08896v1  [2019-01-25]
TITLE  : Connecting planet formation and astrochemistry: Refractory carbon depletion leading to super-stellar C/O in giant planetary atmospheres
AUTHORS: Alex J. Cridland, Christian Eistrup, Ewine F. van Dishoeck
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 627, A127 (2019)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201834378
ABS    : [Abridged] Combining a time-dependent astrochemical model with a model of planet formation and migration, we compute the carbon-to-oxygen ratio (C/O) of a range of planetary embryos starting their formation in the inner solar system (1-3 AU). The volatile and ice abundance of relevant carbon and oxygen bearing molecular species are determined through a complex chemical kinetic code which includes both gas and grain surface chemistry. This is combined with a model for the abundance of the refractory dust grains to compute the total carbon and oxygen abundance in the protoplanetary disk available for incorporation into a planetary atmosphere. We include the effects of the refractory carbon depletion that has been observed in our solar system, and posit two models that would put this missing carbon back into the gas phase. This excess gaseous carbon then becomes important in determining the final planetary C/O because the gas disk now becomes more carbon rich relative to oxygen (high gaseous C/O). One model, where the carbon excess is maintained throughout the lifetime of the disk results in Hot Jupiters that have super-stellar C/O. The other model deposits the excess carbon early in the disk life and allows it to advect with the bulk gas. In this model the excess carbon disappears into the host star within 0.8 Myr, returning the gas disk to its original (sub-stellar) C/O, so the Hot Jupiters all exclusively have sub-stellar C/O. This shows that while the solids will tend to be oxygen rich, Hot Jupiters can have super-stellar C/O if a carbon excess can be maintained by some chemical processing of the dust grains. Whether the carbon and oxygen content of the atmosphere was accreted primarily by gas or solid accretion is heavily dependent on the mass of the atmosphere and where in the disk the growing planet accreted.

=== arXiv:1901.07566v1  [2019-01-22]
TITLE  : The Streams of the Gaping Abyss: A population of entangled stellar streams surrounding the Inner Galaxy
AUTHORS: Rodrigo Ibata, Khyati Malhan, Nicolas Martin
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/ab0080
ABS    : We present the discovery of a large population of stellar streams that surround the inner Galaxy, found in the Gaia DR2 catalog using the new STREAMFINDER algorithm. Here we focus on the properties of eight new high-significance structures found at Heliocentric distances between 1 and 10 kpc and at Galactic latitudes $|b|&gt;20°$, named Slidr, Sylgr, Ylgr, Fimbulthul, Svöl, Fjörm, Gjöll and Leiptr. Spectroscopic measurements of seven of the streams confirm the detections, which are based on Gaia astrometry and photometry alone, and show that these streams are predominantly metal-poor. The sample possesses diverse orbital properties, although most of the streams appear to be debris of inner-halo globular clusters. Many more candidate streams are visible in our maps, but require follow-up spectroscopy to confirm their nature. We also explain in detail the workings of the algorithm, and gauge the incidence of false detections by running the algorithm on a smooth model of the Gaia catalog.

=== arXiv:1901.06582v4  [2019-01-19]
TITLE  : Inferring the parallax of Westerlund 1 from Gaia DR2
AUTHORS: Mojgan Aghakhanloo, Jeremiah W. Murphy, Nathan Smith, John Parejko, Mariangelly Díaz-Rodríguez, Maria R. Drout, Jose H. Groh, Joseph Guzman
JOURNAL: 2020MNRAS.492.2497A
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stz3628
ABS    : Westerlund 1 (Wd1) is potentially the largest star cluster in the Galaxy. That designation critically depends upon the distance to the cluster, yet the cluster is highly obscured, making luminosity-based distance estimates difficult. Using {\it Gaia} Data Release 2 (DR2) parallaxes and Bayesian inference, we infer a parallax of $0.35^{+0.07}_{-0.06}$ mas corresponding to a distance of $2.6^{+0.6}_{-0.4}$ kpc. To leverage the combined statistics of all stars in the direction of Wd1, we derive the Bayesian model for a cluster of stars hidden among Galactic field stars; this model includes the parallax zero-point. Previous estimates for the distance to Wd1 ranged from 1.0 to 5.5 kpc, although values around 5 kpc have usually been adopted. The {\it Gaia} DR2 parallaxes reduce the uncertainty from a factor of 3 to 18\% and rules out the most often quoted value of 5 kpc with 99\% confidence. This new distance allows for more accurate mass and age determinations for the stars in Wd1. For example, the previously inferred initial mass at the main-sequence turn-off was around 40 M$_{\odot}$; the new {\it Gaia} DR2 distance shifts this down to about 22 M$_{\odot}$. This has important implications for our understanding of the late stages of stellar evolution, including the initial mass of the magnetar and the LBV in Wd1. Similarly, the new distance suggests that the total cluster mass is about four times lower than previously calculated.

=== arXiv:1901.00778v1  [2019-01-03]
TITLE  : Physics of Planet Trapping with Applications to HL Tau
AUTHORS: Alex J. Cridland, Ralph E. Pudritz, Matthew Alessi
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stz008
ABS    : We explore planet formation in the HL Tau disk and possible origins of the prominent gaps and rings observed by ALMA. We investigate whether dust gaps are caused by dynamically trapped planetary embryos at the ice lines of abundant volatiles. The global properties of the HL Tau disk (total mass, size) at its current age are used to constrain an evolving analytic disk model describing its temperature and density profiles. By performing a detailed analysis of the planet-disk interaction for a planet near the water ice line including a rigorous treatment of the dust opacity, we confirm that water is sufficiently abundant (1.5x10^-4 molecules per H) to trap planets at its ice line due to an opacity transition. When the abundance of water is reduced by 50% planet trapping disappears. We extend our analysis to other planet traps: the heat transition, dead zone edge, and the CO_2 ice line and find similar trapping. The formation of planets via planetesimal accretion is computed for dynamically trapped embryos at the water ice line, dead zone, and heat transition. The end products orbit in the inner disk (R &lt; 3 AU), unresolved by ALMA, with masses that range between sub-Earth to 5 Jupiter masses. While we find that the dust gaps correspond well with the radial positions of the CO_2 , CH_4 , and CO ice lines, the planetesimal accretion rates at these radii are too small to build large embryos within 1 Myr.

=== arXiv:1812.10161v1  [2018-12-25]
TITLE  : The Breakthrough Listen Search for Intelligent Life: Searching Boyajian's Star for Laser Line Emission
AUTHORS: David Lipman, Howard Isaacson, Andrew P. V. Siemion, Matt Lebofsky, Danny C. Price, David MacMahon, Steve Croft, David DeBoer
DOI    : 10.1088/1538-3873/aafe86
ABS    : Boyajian' s Star (KIC 8462852) has received significant attention due to its unusual periodic brightness fluctuations detected by the Kepler Spacecraft and subsequent ground based observations. Possible explanations for the dips in the photometric measurements include interstellar or circumstellar dust, and it has been speculated that an artificial megastructure could be responsible. We analyze 177 high-resolution spectra of Boyajian's Star in an effort to detect potential laser signals from extraterrestrial civilizations. The spectra were obtained by the Lick Observatory's Automated Planet Finder telescope as part of the Breakthrough Listen Project, and cover the wavelength range of visible light from 374 to 970 nm. We calculate that the APF would be capable of detecting lasers of power greater than approximately 24 MW at the distance of Boyajian's Star, d = 1470 ly. The top candidates from the analysis can all be explained as either cosmic ray hits, stellar emission lines or atmospheric air glow emission lines.

=== arXiv:1812.07582v1  [2018-12-18]
TITLE  : The Fornax 3D project: dust mix and gas properties in the center of early-type galaxy FCC 167
AUTHORS: S. Viaene, M. Sarzi, N. Zabel, L. Coccato, E. M. Corsini, T. A. Davis, P. De Vis, P. T. de Zeeuw
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 622, A89 (2019)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201834465
ABS    : Galaxies continuously reprocess their interstellar material. One can therefore expect changing dust grain properties in galaxies which have followed different evolutionary pathways. Determining the intrinsic dust grain mix of a galaxy helps in reconstructing its evolutionary history. Early-type galaxies occasionally display regular dust lanes in their central regions. Due to the relatively simple geometry and composition of their stellar bodies, these galaxies are ideal to disentangle dust mix variations from geometric effects. We therefore model the various components of such a galaxy (FCC 167). We reconstruct its recent history, and investigate the possible fate of the dust lane. MUSE and ALMA observations reveal a nested ISM structure. An ionised-gas disk pervades the central regions of FCC 167, including those occupied by the main dust lane. Inward of the dust lane, we also find a disk/ring of cold molecular gas where stars are forming and HII regions contribute to the ionised-gas emission. Further in, the gas ionisation points towards an active galactic nucleus and the fuelling of a central supermassive black hole from its surrounding ionised and molecular reservoir. Observational constraints and radiative transfer models suggest the dust and gas are distributed in a ring-like geometry and the dust mix lacks small grains. The derived dust destruction timescales from sputtering in hot gas are short and we conclude that the dust must be strongly self-shielding and clumpy, or will quickly be eroded and disappear. Our findings show how detailed analysis of individual systems can complement statistical studies of dust-lane ETGs.

=== arXiv:1812.07156v1  [2018-12-18]
TITLE  : Systematic Serendipity: A Test of Unsupervised Machine Learning as a Method for Anomaly Detection
AUTHORS: Daniel Giles, Lucianne Walkowicz
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/sty3461
ABS    : Advances in astronomy are often driven by serendipitous discoveries. As survey astronomy continues to grow, the size and complexity of astronomical databases will increase, and the ability of astronomers to manually scour data and make such discoveries decreases. In this work, we introduce a machine learning-based method to identify anomalies in large datasets to facilitate such discoveries, and apply this method to long cadence lightcurves from NASA's Kepler Mission. Our method clusters data based on density, identifying anomalies as data that lie outside of dense regions. This work serves as a proof-of-concept case study and we test our method on four quarters of the Kepler long cadence lightcurves. We use Kepler's most notorious anomaly, Boyajian's Star (KIC 8462852), as a rare `ground truth' for testing outlier identification to verify that objects of genuine scientific interest are included among the identified anomalies. We evaluate the method's ability to identify known anomalies by identifying unusual behavior in Boyajian's Star, we report the full list of identified anomalies for these quarters, and present a sample subset of identified outliers that includes unusual phenomena, objects that are rare in the Kepler field, and data artifacts. By identifying &lt;4% of each quarter as outlying data, we demonstrate that this anomaly detection method can create a more targeted approach in searching for rare and novel phenomena.

=== arXiv:1812.06837v1  [2018-12-17]
TITLE  : High-resolution spectroscopy of Boyajian's star during optical dimming events
AUTHORS: M. J. Martínez González, C. González-Fernández, A. Asensio Ramos, H. Socas Navarro, C. Westendorp Plaza, T. S. Boyajian, J. T. Wright, A. Collier Cameron
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stz850
ABS    : Boyajian's star is an apparently normal main sequence F-type star with a very unusual light curve. The dipping activity of the star, discovered during the Kepler mission, presents deep, asymmetric, and aperiodic events. Here we present high resolution spectroscopic follow-up during some dimming events recorded post-Kepler observations, from ground-based telescopes. We analise data from the HERMES, HARPS-N and FIES spectrographs to characterise the stellar atmosphere and to put some constraints on the hypotheses that have appeared in the literature concerning the occulting elements. The star's magnetism, if existing, is not extreme. The spots on the surface, if present, would occupy 0.02% of the area, at most. The chromosphere, irrespective of the epoch of observation, is hotter than the values expected from radiative equilibrium, meaning that the star has some degree of activity. We find no clear evidence of the interstellar medium nor exocoments being responsible for the dimmings of the light curve. However, we detect at 1-2 sigma level, a decrease of the radial velocity of the star during the first dip recorded after the \emph{\emph{Kepler}} observations. We claim the presence of an optically thick object with likely inclined and high impact parameter orbits that produces the observed Rossiter-McLaughlin effect.

=== arXiv:1812.05614v2  [2018-12-13]
TITLE  : Detections and Constraints on White Dwarf Variability from Time-Series GALEX Observations
AUTHORS: Dominick M. Rowan, Michael A. Tucker, Benjamin J. Shappee, J. J. Hermes
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stz1116
ABS    : We search for photometric variability in more than 23,000 known and candidate white dwarfs, the largest ultraviolet survey compiled for a single study of white dwarfs. We use gPhoton, a publicly available calibration/reduction pipeline, to generate time-series photometry of white dwarfs observed by GALEX. By implementing a system of weighted metrics, we select sources with variability due to pulsations and eclipses. Although GALEX observations have short baselines (&lt; 30 min), we identify intrinsic variability in sources as faint as Gaia G = 20 mag. With our ranking algorithm, we identify 49 new variable white dwarfs (WDs) in archival GALEX observations. We detect 41 new pulsators: 37 have hydrogen-dominated atmospheres (DAVs), including one possible massive DAV, and four are helium-dominated pulsators (DBVs). We also detect eight new eclipsing systems; five are new discoveries, and three were previously known spectroscopic binaries. We perform synthetic injections of the light curve of WD 1145+017, a system with known transiting debris, to test our ability to recover similar systems. We find that the 3σ maximum occurrence rate of WD 1145+017-like transiting objects is &lt; 0.5%.

=== arXiv:1812.01618v1  [2018-12-04]
TITLE  : Shadow Imaging of Transiting Objects
AUTHORS: Emily Sandford, David Kipping
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/aaf565
ABS    : We consider the problem of inferring the shape of a transiting object's silhouette from its light curve alone, without assuming a physical model for the object. We model the object as a grid of pixels which transits the star; each pixel has an opacity, ranging from transparent to opaque, which we infer from the light curve. We explore three interesting degeneracies inherent to this problem, in which markedly different transiting shapes can produce identical light curves: (i) the "flip" degeneracy, by which two pixels transiting at the same impact parameter on opposite sides of the star's horizontal midplane generate the same light curve; (ii) the "arc" degeneracy, by which opacity can be redistributed along the semicircular arc of pixels which undergoes ingress or egress at the same time without consequence to the light curve, and (iii) the "stretch" degeneracy, by which a wide shape moving fast can produce the same light curve as a narrow shape moving more slowly. By understanding these degeneracies and adopting some additional assumptions, we are able to numerically recover informative shadow images of transiting objects, and we explore a number of different algorithmic approaches to this problem. We apply our methods to real data, including the TRAPPIST-1c,e,f triple transit and two dips of Boyajian's Star. We provide Python code to calculate the transit light curve of any grid and, conversely, infer the image grid which generates any light curve in a software package accompanying this paper, EightBitTransit.

=== arXiv:1812.01253v1  [2018-12-04]
TITLE  : R mode oscillations ubiquitous in stars
AUTHORS: Hideyuki Saio
DOI    : 10.5281/zenodo.1912055
ABS    : We discuss properties and examples of r-mode (large scale Rossby wave) oscillations in rotating stars. Motions are nearly toroidal but affected weakly by buoyancy. R modes seem to be excited mechanically in most cases, and ubiquitous in various types of rotating stars;e.g., fast rotating $γ$ Dor stars, spotted stars, eclipsing binary stars, Be stars, and accreting white dwarfs. In the Fourier spectrum of a star, even (i.e., symmetric to the equator) r modes of azimuthal order $m$ appear as a group of frequencies just below $m$ times the rotation frequency. From this property, a rotation frequency can be determined if r modes are detected. We discuss r modes in KIC8462852 (Boyajian's star), KIC9117875 (Am star), KIC6128830 (HgMn star), and the accreting white dwarf in the dwarf nova GW Lib.

=== arXiv:1812.00559v1  [2018-12-03]
TITLE  : The origin of high velocity stars from Gaia and LAMOST
AUTHORS: Cuihua Du, Hefan Li, Heidi Jo Newberg, Yuqin Chen, Jianrong Shi, Zhenyu Wu, Jun Ma
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8213/aaf578
ABS    : Based on the second Gaia data (Gaia DR2) and spectroscopy from the LAMOST Data Release 5, we defined the high-velocity (HiVel) stars sample as those stars with $v_{\mathrm{gc}} &gt; 0.85 v_{\mathrm{esc}}$, and derived the final sample of 24 HiVel stars with stellar astrometric parameters and radial velocities. Most of the HiVel stars are metal-poor and $α$-enhanced. In order to further explore the origin of these HiVel stars, we traced the backwards orbits of each HiVel star in the Galactic potential to derive probability parameters which are used to classify these HiVel stars. Of these, 5 stars are from the tidal debris of disrupted dwarf galaxy and 19 stars are runaway-star candidates which originate from the stellar disk.

=== arXiv:1811.08317v1  [2018-11-20]
TITLE  : A power law decay evolution scenario for polluted single white dwarfs
AUTHORS: Di-Chang Chen, Ji-Lin Zhou, Ji-Wei Xie, Ming Yang, Hui Zhang, Hui-Gen Liu, En-Si Liang, Zhou-Yi Yu
JOURNAL: Nature Astronomy (2018) https://www.nature.com/articles/s41550-018-0609-7
DOI    : 10.1038/s41550-018-0609-7
ABS    : Planetary systems can survive the stellar evolution, as evidenced by the atmospheric metal pollution and dusty disks of single white dwarfs. Recent observations show that 1 to 4 percent of single white dwarfs are accompanied by dusty disks, while the occurrence rate of metal pollution is about 25 to 50 percent . The dusty disks and metal pollution have been associated with accretion of remnant planetary systems around white dwarfs, yet the relation between these two phenomena is still unclear. Here we suggest an evolutionary scenario to link the two observational phenomena. By analyzing a sample of metal polluted white dwarfs, we find that the mass accretion rate onto the white dwarf generally follows a broken power law decay, which matches well with the theoretical prediction, if assuming dust accretion is primarily driven by Poynting-Robertson drag and the dust source is primarily delivered via dynamically falling asteroids perturbed by a Jovian planet. The presence of disks is mainly at the early stage (about 0.1 to 0.7 billion years) of the whole process of metal pollution, which is detectable until about 8 billion years, naturally explaining the fraction (about 2-16 percent) of metal-polluted white dwarfs having dusty disks. The success of this scenario also implies that the configuration of an asteroid belt with an outer gas giant might be common around stars of several solar masses.

=== arXiv:1811.02265v1  [2018-11-06]
TITLE  : VVV-WIT-07: another Boyajian's star or a Mamajek's object?
AUTHORS: Roberto K. Saito, Dante Minniti, Valentin D. Ivanov, Márcio Catelan, Felipe Gran, Raymundo Baptista, Rodolfo Angeloni, Claudio Caceres
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/sty3004
ABS    : We report the discovery of VVV-WIT-07, an unique and intriguing variable source presenting a sequence of recurrent dips with a likely deep eclipse in July 2012. The object was found serendipitously in the near-IR data obtained by the VISTA Variables in the Vía Láctea (VVV) ESO Public Survey. Our analysis is based on VVV variability, multicolor, and proper motion (PM) data. Complementary data from the VVV eXtended survey (VVVX) as well as archive data and spectroscopic follow-up observations aided in the analysis and interpretation of VVV-WIT-07. A search for periodicity in the VVV Ks-band light curve of VVV-WIT-07 results in two tentative periods at P~322 days and P~170 days. Colors and PM are consistent either with a reddened MS star or a pre-MS star in the foreground disk. The near-IR spectra of VVV-WIT-07 appear featureless, having no prominent lines in emission or absorption. Features found in the light curve of VVV-WIT-07 are similar to those seen in J1407 (Mamajek's object), a pre-MS K5 dwarf with a ring system eclipsing the star or, alternatively, to KIC 8462852 (Boyajian's star), an F3 IV/V star showing irregular and aperiodic dips in its light curve. Alternative scenarios, none of which is fully consistent with the available data, are also briefly discussed, including a young stellar object, a T Tauri star surrounded by clumpy dust structure, a main sequence star eclipsed by a nearby extended object, a self-eclipsing R CrB variable star, and even a long-period, high-inclination X-ray binary.

=== arXiv:1810.12198v1  [2018-10-29]
TITLE  : Gravitational waves and core-collapse supernovae
AUTHORS: G. S. Bisnovatyi-Kogan, S. G. Moiseenko
JOURNAL: Physics-Uspekhi 60(8) 843-850(2017)
DOI    : 10.3367/UFNe.2016.11.038112
ABS    : A mechanism of formation of gravitational waves in the Universe is considered for a nonspherical collapse of matter. Nonspherical collapse results are presented for a uniform spheroid of dust and a finite-entropy spheroid. Numerical simulation results on core-collapse supernova explosions are presented for the neutrino and magnetorotational models. These results are used to estimate the dimensionless amplitude of the gravitational wave with a frequency ν~1300 Hz, radiated during the collapse of the rotating core of a pre-supernova with a mass of 1:2M(sun) (calculated by the authors in 2D). This estimate agrees well with many other calculations (presented in this paper) that have been done in 2D and 3D settings and which rely on more exact and sophisticated calculations of the gravitational wave amplitude. The formation of the large-scale structure of the Universe in the Zel'dovich pancake model involves the emission of very long-wavelength gravitational waves. The average amplitude of these waves is calculated from the simulation, in the uniform spheroid approximation, of the nonspherical collapse of noncollisional dust matter, which imitates dark matter. It is noted that a gravitational wave radiated during a core-collapse supernova explosion in our Galaxy has a sufficient amplitude to be detected by existing gravitational wave telescopes.

=== arXiv:1810.00776v1  [2018-10-01]
TITLE  : On the detectability of transiting planets orbiting white dwarfs using LSST
AUTHORS: Jorge Cortes, David M. Kipping
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stz1300
ABS    : White dwarfs are one of the few types of stellar objects for which we know almost nothing about the possible existence of companion planets. Recent evidence for metal contaminated atmospheres, circumstellar debris disks and transiting planetary debris all indicate that planets may be likely. However, white dwarf transit surveys are challenging due to the intrinsic faintness of such objects, the short timescale of the transits and the low transit probabilities due to their compact radii. The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) offers a remedy to these problems as a deep, half-sky survey with fast exposures encompassing approximately 10 million white dwarfs with $r&lt;24.5$ apparent magnitude. We simulate LSST photometric observations of 3.5 million white dwarfs over a ten-year period and calculate the detectability of companion planets with $P&lt;10$ d via transits. We find typical detection rates in the range of $5 \times 10^{-6}$ to $4 \times 10^{-4}$ for Ceres-sized bodies to Earth-sized worlds, yielding $\sim 50$ to $4\,000$ detections for a 100% occurrence rate of each. For terrestrial planets in the continuously habitable zone, we find detection rates of $\sim 10^{-3}$ indicating that LSST would reveal hundreds of such worlds for occurrence rates in the range of 1% to 10%.

=== arXiv:1809.07198v1  [2018-09-19]
TITLE  : Dusty Exoplanetary Debris Disks in the Single-Temperature Blackbody Plane
AUTHORS: E. Dennihy, J. C. Clemens, B. H. Dunlap
ABS    : We present a bulk sample analysis of the metal polluted white dwarfs which also host infrared bright dusty debris disks, known to be direct signatures of an active exoplanetary accretion source. We explore the relative positions of these systems in a single-temperature blackbody plane, defined as the temperature and radius of a single-temperature blackbody as fitted to the infrared excess. We find that the handful of dust systems which also host gaseous debris in emission congregate along the high temperature boundary of the dust disk region in the single-temperature blackbody plane. We discuss interpretations of this boundary and propose the single-temperature blackbody plane selection technique for use in future targeted searches of gaseous emission.

=== arXiv:1809.04882v1  [2018-09-13]
TITLE  : Photometric variability of massive young stellar objects. I
AUTHORS: G. D. C. Teixeira, M. S. N. Kumar, L. Smith, P. W. Lucas, C. Morris, J. Borissova, M. J. P. F. G. Monteiro, A. Caratti o Garatti
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 619, A41 (2018)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201833667
ABS    : The VVV survey has allowed for an unprecedented number of multi-epoch observations of the southern Galactic plane. In a recent paper,13 massive young stellar objects(MYSOs) have already been identified within the highly variable(ΔKs &gt; 1 mag) YSO sample of another published work.This study aims to understand the general nature of variability in MYSOs.We present the first systematic study of variability in a large sample of candidate MYSOs.We examined the data for variability of the putative driving sources of all known Spitzer EGOs and bright 24 μm sources coinciding with the peak of 870 μm detected ATLASGAL clumps, a total of 718 targets. Of these, 190 point sources (139 EGOs and 51 non-EGOs) displayed variability (IQR &gt; 0.05, ΔKs &gt; 0.15 mag). Light-curves(LCs) have been sub-classified into eruptive, dipper, fader, short-term-variable and long-period variable-YSO categories.Lomb-Scargle periodogram analysis of periodic LCs was carried out. 1 - 870 μm spectral energy distributions of the variable sources were fitted with YSO models to obtain representative properties. 41% of the variable sources are represented by &gt; 4Msun objects, and only 6% by &gt; 8Msun objects.The highest-mass objects are mostly non-EGOs,deeply embedded.By placing them on the HR diagram we show that most lower mass,EGO type objects are concentrated on the putative birth-line position, while the luminous non-EGO type objects group around the ZAMS track.Some of the most luminous far infrared sources in the massive clumps and infrared quiet driving sources of EGOs have been missed out by this study owing to an uniform sample selection method.A high rate of detectable variability in EGO targets (139 out of 153 searched) implies that near-infrared variability in MYSOs is closely linked to the accretion phenomenon and outflow activity.

=== arXiv:1809.00693v1  [2018-09-03]
TITLE  : A Reassessment of Families of Solutions to the Puzzle of Boyajian's Star
AUTHORS: Jason T. Wright
JOURNAL: Research Notes of the American Astronomical Society, Volume 2, Issue 1, article id. 16, 2018
DOI    : 10.3847/2515-5172/aaa83e
ABS    : Wright &amp; Sigurdsson (2016) described several families of plausible solutions to the puzzle of Boyajian's Star (Boyajian et al. 2016), and ranked some of them by their subjective plausibility. Since then, theoretical and observational work have altered many families' plausibility, and so in this Research Note I reassess them, including the possibilities of intrinsic variation, intervening ISM or circum-black hole material, and circumstellar material such as exocomets.

=== arXiv:1808.07320v1  [2018-08-22]
TITLE  : Fast spectrophotometry of WD 1145+017
AUTHORS: P. Izquierdo, P. Rodríguez-Gil, B. T. Gänsicke, A. J. Mustill, O. Toloza, P. E. Tremblay, M. Wyatt, P. Chote
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/sty2315
ABS    : WD 1145+017 is currently the only white dwarf known to exhibit periodic transits of planetary debris as well as absorption lines from circumstellar gas. We present the first simultaneous fast optical spectrophotometry and broad-band photometry of the system, obtained with the Gran Telescopio Canarias (GTC) and the Liverpool Telescope (LT), respectively. The observations spanned $5.5$ h, somewhat longer than the $4.5$-h orbital period of the debris. Dividing the GTC spectrophotometry into five wavelength bands reveals no significant colour differences, confirming grey transits in the optical. We argue that absorption by an optically thick structure is a plausible alternative explanation for the achromatic nature of the transits that can allow the presence of small-sized ($\simμ$m) particles. The longest ($87$ min) and deepest ($50$ per cent attenuation) transit recorded in our data exhibits a complex structure around minimum light that can be well modelled by multiple overlapping dust clouds. The strongest circumstellar absorption line, Fe II $λ$5169, significantly weakens during this transit, with its equivalent width reducing from a mean out-of-transit value of $2$ Å to $1$ Å in-transit, supporting spatial correlation between the circumstellar gas and dust. Finally, we made use of the Gaia Data Release 2 and archival photometry to determine the white dwarf parameters. Adopting a helium-dominated atmosphere containing traces of hydrogen and metals, and a reddening $E(B-V)=0.01$ we find $T_\mathrm{eff}=15\,020 \pm 520$ K, $\log g=8.07\pm0.07$, corresponding to $M_\mathrm{WD}=0.63\pm0.05\ \mbox{$\mathrm{M}_{\odot}$}$ and a cooling age of $224\pm30$ Myr.

=== arXiv:1807.07973v1  [2018-07-20]
TITLE  : Chromatic transit light curves of disintegrating rocky planets
AUTHORS: A. R. Ridden-Harper, C. U. Keller, M. Min, R. van Lieshout, I. A. G. Snellen
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 618, A97 (2018)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201731947
ABS    : Context. Kepler observations have revealed a class of short period exoplanets, of which Kepler-1520 b is the prototype, which have comet-like dust tails thought to be the result of small, rocky planets losing mass. The shape and chromaticity of the transits constrain the properties of the dust particles originating from the planet's surface, offering a unique opportunity to probe the composition and geophysics of rocky exoplanets. Aims. We aim to approximate the average Kepler long-cadence light curve of Kepler-1520 b and investigate how the optical thickness and transit cross-section of a general dust tail can affect the observed wavelength dependence and depth of transit light curves. Methods. We developed a new 3D model that ejects sublimating particles from the planet surface to build up a dust tail, assuming it to be optically thin, and used 3D radiative transfer computations that fully treat scattering using the distribution of hollow spheres (DHS) method, to generate transit light curves between 0.45 and 2.5 $μ$m. Results. We show that the transit depth is wavelength independent for optically thick tails, potentially explaining why only some observations indicate a wavelength dependence. From the 3D nature of our simulated tails, we show that their transit cross-sections are related to the component of particle ejection velocity perpendicular to the planet's orbital plane and use this to derive a minimum ejection velocity of 1.2 kms$^{-1}$. To fit the average transit depth of Kepler-1520 b of 0.87%, we require a high dust mas-loss rate of 7 $-$ 80 M$_\oplus$ Gyr$^{-1}$ which implies planet lifetimes that may be inconsistent with the observed sample. Therefore, these mass-loss rates should be considered to be upper limits.

=== arXiv:1807.05802v1  [2018-07-16]
TITLE  : Infrared variability of radio-loud narrow-line Seyfert 1 galaxies
AUTHORS: K. É. Gabányi, A. Moór, S. Frey
ABS    : Most of the radio-loud narrow-line Seyfert 1 (NLS1) galaxies resemble compact steep-spectrum sources. However, the extremely radio-loud ones show blazar-like characteristics, like flat radio spectra, compact radio cores, substantial variability and high brightness temperatures. These objects are thought to be similar to blazars as they possess relativistic jets seen at small angle to the line of sight. This claim has been further supported by the Fermi satellite discovery of gamma-ray emission from a handful of these sources. Using the Wide-Field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) data, we analyzed the mid-infrared variability characteristics of $42$ radio-loud NLS1 at $3.4$ and $4.6\,μ$m. We found that $27$ out of the studied $42$ sources showed variability in at least one of the two infrared bands. In some cases, significant changes in the infrared colors can alter the location of the source in the WISE color-color diagram which might lead to different classification. More than $60$% of the variable sources also showed variability within a $1-1.5$ day interval. Such short time scales argue for a compact emission region like those associated with the jets. This connection is further strengthened by the fact that the brightest $γ$-ray emitters of the sample ($6$ sources), all showed short time scale infrared variability.

=== arXiv:1807.03448v1  [2018-07-10]
TITLE  : Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) Catalog of Periodic Variable Stars
AUTHORS: Xiaodian Chen, Shu Wang, Licai Deng, Richard de Grijs, Ming Yang
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4365/aad32b
ABS    : We have compiled the first all-sky mid-infrared variable-star catalog based on Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) five-year survey data. Requiring more than 100 detections for a given object, 50,282 carefully and robustly selected periodic variables are discovered, of which 34,769 (69%) are new. Most are located in the Galactic plane and near the equatorial poles. A method to classify variables based on their mid-infrared light curves is established using known variable types in the General Catalog of Variable Stars. Careful classification of the new variables results in a tally of 21,427 new EW-type eclipsing binaries, 5654 EA-type eclipsing binaries, 1312 Cepheids, and 1231 RR Lyraes. By comparison with known variables available in the literature, we estimate that the misclassification rate is 5% and 10% for short- and long-period variables, respectively. A detailed comparison of the types, periods, and amplitudes with variables in the Catalina catalog shows that the independently obtained classifications parameters are in excellent agreement. This enlarged sample of variable stars will not only be helpful to study Galactic structure and extinction properties, they can also be used to constrain stellar evolution theory and as potential candidates for the James Webb Space Telescope.

=== arXiv:1806.09911v1  [2018-06-26]
TITLE  : The KIC 8462852 Light Curve From 2015.75 to 2018.18 Shows a Variable Secular Decline
AUTHORS: Bradley E. Schaefer, Rory O. Bentley, Tabetha S. Boyajian, Phillip H. Coker, Shawn Dvorak, Franky Dubois, Emery Erdelyi, Tyler Ellis
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/sty1644
ABS    : The star KIC 8462852 (Boyajian's Star) displays both fast dips of up to 20% on time scales of days, plus long-term secular fading by up to 19% on time scales from a year to a century. We report on CCD photometry of KIC 8462852 from 2015.75 to 2018.18, with 19,176 images making for 1,866 nightly magnitudes in BVRI. Our light curves show a continuing secular decline (by 0.023 +- 0.003 mags in the B-band) with three superposed dips with duration 120-180 days. This demonstrates that there is a continuum of dip durations from a day to a century, so that the secular fading is seen to be by the same physical mechanism as the short-duration Kepler dips. The BVRI light curves all have the same shape, with the slopes and amplitudes for VRI being systematically smaller than in the B-band by factors of 0.77 +- 0.05, 0.50 +- 0.05, and 0.31 +- 0.05. We rule out any hypothesis involving occultation of the primary star by any star, planet, solid body, or optically thick cloud. But these ratios are the same as that expected for ordinary extinction by dust clouds. This chromatic extinction implies dust particle sizes going down to ~0.1 micron, suggesting that this dust will be rapidly blown away by stellar radiation pressure, so the dust clouds must have formed within months. The modern infrared observations were taken at a time when there was at least 12.4% +- 1.3% dust coverage (as part of the secular dimming), and this is consistent with dimming originating in circumstellar dust.

=== arXiv:1805.03290v1  [2018-05-08]
TITLE  : Red supergiant stars in the Large Magellanic Cloud. II. Infrared properties and mid-infrared variability
AUTHORS: Ming Yang, Alceste Z. Bonanos, Bi-Wei Jiang, Jian Gao, Meng-Yao Xue, Shu Wang, Man I Lam, Zoi T. Spetsieri
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 616, A175 (2018)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201832833
ABS    : The characteristics of IR properties and MIR variability of RSGs in the LMC are analyzed based on 12 bands of NIR to MIR co-added data from 2MASS, Spitzer and WISE, and $\sim$6.6 years of MIR time-series data collected by the ALLWISE and NEOWISE-R projects. 773 RSGs candidates were compiled from the literature and verified by using the CMD, SED and MIR variability. About 15\% of valid targets in the $IRAC1-IRAC2$/$IRAC2-IRAC3$ diagram may show PAH emission. We show that arbitrary dereddening Q parameters related to the IRAC4, S9W, WISE3, WISE4, and MIPS24 bands could be constructed based on a precise measurement of MIR interstellar extinction law. Several peculiar outliers in our sample are discussed, in which one outlier might be a RSG right before the explosion or an x-AGB star in the very late evolutionary stage based on the MIR spectrum and photometry. There are 744 identified RSGs in the final sample having both the WISE1- and WISE2-band time-series data. The results show that the MIR variability is increasing along with the increasing of brightness. There is a relatively tight correlation between the MIR variability, MLR, and the warm dust or continuum, where the MIR variability is evident for the targets with $K_S-WISE3&gt;1.0~mag$ and $WISE4&lt;6.5~mag$, while the rest of the targets show much smaller MIR variability. The MIR variability is also correlated with the MLR for which targets with larger variability also show larger MLR with an approximate upper limit of $-6.1~M_\odot/yr^{-1}$. Both the variability and the luminosity may be important for the MLR since the WISE4-band flux is increasing exponentially along with the degeneracy of luminosity and variability. The identified RSG sample has been compared with the theoretical evolutionary models and shown that the discrepancy between observation and evolutionary models can be mitigated by considering both variability and extinction.

=== arXiv:1804.09190v2  [2018-04-24]
TITLE  : Multiple Stellar Fly-Bys Sculpting the Circumstellar Architecture in RW Aurigae
AUTHORS: Joseph E. Rodriguez, Ryan Loomis, Sylvie Cabrit, Thomas J. Haworth, Stefano Facchini, Catherine Dougados, Richard A. Booth, Eric L. N. Jensen
JOURNAL: 2018, ApJ, 859, 150
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/aac08f
ABS    : We present high-resolution ALMA Band 6 and 7 observations of the tidally disrupted protoplanetary disks of the RW Aurigae binary. Our observations reveal the presence of additional tidal streams to the previously observed tidal arm around RW Aur A. The observed configuration of tidal streams surrounding RW Aur A and B is incompatible with a single star--disk tidal encounter, suggesting that the RW Aurigae system has undergone multiple fly-by interactions. We also resolve the circumstellar disks around RW Aur A and B, with CO radii of 58 au and 38 au consistent with tidal truncation, and 2.5 times smaller dust emission radii. The disks appear misaligned by 12$^{\circ}$ or 57$^{\circ}$. Using new photometric observations from the American Association of Variable Star Observers (AAVSO) and All Sky Automated Survey for SuperNovae (ASAS-SN) archives, we have also identified an additional dimming event of the primary that began in late 2017 and is currently ongoing. With over a century of photometric observations, we are beginning to explore the same spatial scales as ALMA.

=== arXiv:1804.08351v2  [2018-04-23]
TITLE  : SETI with Gaia: The observational signatures of nearly complete Dyson spheres
AUTHORS: Erik Zackrisson, Andreas J. Korn, Ansgar Wehrhahn, Johannes Reiter
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/aac386
ABS    : A star enshrouded in a Dyson sphere with high covering fraction may manifest itself as an optically subluminous object with a spectrophotometric distance estimate significantly in excess of its parallax distance. Using this criterion, the Gaia mission will in coming years allow for Dyson-sphere searches that are complementary to searches based on waste-heat signatures at infrared wavelengths. A limited search of this type is also possible at the current time, by combining Gaia parallax distances with spectrophotometric distances from ground-based surveys. Here, we discuss the merits and shortcomings of this technique and carry out a limited search for Dyson-sphere candidates in the sample of stars common to Gaia Data Release 1 and RAVE Data Release 5. We find that a small fraction of stars indeed display distance discrepancies of the type expected for nearly complete Dyson spheres. To shed light on the properties of objects in this outlier population, we present follow-up high-resolution spectroscopy for one of these stars, the late F-type dwarf TYC 6111-1162-1. The spectrophotometric distance of this object is about twice that derived from its Gaia parallax, and there is no detectable infrared excess. While our analysis largely confirms the stellar parameters and the spectrophotometric distance inferred by RAVE, a plausible explanation for the discrepant distance estimates of this object is that the astrometric solution has been compromised by an unseen binary companion, possibly a rather massive white dwarf ($\approx 1\ M_\odot$). This scenario can be further tested through upcoming Gaia data releases.

=== arXiv:1804.07503v1  [2018-04-20]
TITLE  : Young stellar clumps in the interacting systems: Arp305
AUTHORS: Anatoly V. Zasov, Anna S. Saburova, Oleg V. Egorov, Viktor L. Afanasiev
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/sty1017
ABS    : We present the results of optical long-slit spectral observations of interacting system Arp305 carried out at the 6m telescope BTA at the SAO RAS: the radial variation of gas kinematics and oxygen abundance. This study continues the series of spectral observations of tidal debris in the interacting galaxies. Here we pay special attention to the star-forming region between the interacting galaxies - a tidal dwarf galaxy (TDG) candidate. This star-forming system appears to be gravitationally bound or close to this condition. We show that TDG is metal poor in comparison to the parental galaxy. It can indicate that either the origin of star-forming gas of TDG was very far from the centre of parent galaxy or its gas has been diluted by the accretion of metal poor intergalactic gas. Nevertheless the region of the brightest emission clump in TDG where a current star formation takes place reveals a noticeable colour excess evidencing a local gas concentration. We pay attention that TDG is situated in the region of intersection of two gas flows and is in a process of formation probably caused by the collision of these flows. Low velocity difference between TDG, NGC 4017 and the gaseous bridge between them evidences that the lifetime of TDG is restricted by the time of its fall back onto the parent galaxy.

=== arXiv:1804.01997v1  [2018-04-05]
TITLE  : Transiting Disintegrating Planetary Debris around WD 1145+017
AUTHORS: Andrew Vanderburg, Saul A. Rappaport
DOI    : 10.1007/978-3-319-55333-7_37
ABS    : More than a decade after astronomers realized that disrupted planetary material likely pollutes the surfaces of many white dwarf stars, the discovery of transiting debris orbiting the white dwarf WD 1145+017 has opened the door to new explorations of this process. We describe the observational evidence for transiting planetary material and the current theoretical understanding (and in some cases lack thereof) of the phenomenon.

=== arXiv:1804.02271v2  [2018-03-26]
TITLE  : Role of stellar physics in regulating the critical steps for life
AUTHORS: Manasvi Lingam, Abraham Loeb
JOURNAL: International Journal of Astrobiology 18 (2019) 527-546
DOI    : 10.1017/S1473550419000016
ABS    : We use the critical step model to study the major transitions in evolution on Earth. We find that a total of five steps represents the most plausible estimate, in agreement with previous studies, and use the fossil record to identify the potential candidates. We apply the model to Earth-analogs around stars of different masses by incorporating the constraints on habitability set by stellar physics including the habitable zone lifetime, availability of ultraviolet radiation for prebiotic chemistry, and atmospheric escape. The critical step model suggests that the habitability of Earth-analogs around M-dwarfs is significantly suppressed. The total number of stars with planets containing detectable biosignatures of microbial life is expected to be highest for K-dwarfs. In contrast, we find that the corresponding value for intelligent life (technosignatures) should be highest for solar-mass stars. Thus, our work may assist in the identification of suitable targets in the search for biosignatures and technosignatures.

=== arXiv:1803.06972v1  [2018-03-19]
TITLE  : Taxonomy and Jargon in SETI as an Interdisciplinary Field of Study
AUTHORS: Jason T. Wright
ABS    : While SETI is often thought of as a part of radio astronomy with optical SETI, artifact SETI, METI, and other approaches to finding intelligent life considered to be allied fields, SETI is better understood as an interdisciplinary field with many subfields, approaches, and components. In particular, Robert Bradbury has argued for a broad view of SETI between two extremes: "orthodox SETI," or radio communication SETI, and a "Dysonian Approach" that searches for the extreme effects of alien life on its environment. Here, I build on these ideas and attempt to organize the terminology and efforts of SETI within a single framework for SETI as an interdisciplinary and multipronged approach.

=== arXiv:1803.06384v1  [2018-03-16]
TITLE  : Star formation toward the H~II region IRAS 10427-6032
AUTHORS: Kaushar Vaidya, Souradeep Bhattacharya, Vatsal Panwar, Manash R. Samal, Wen-Ping Chen, Devendra K. Ojha
DOI    : 10.1016/j.newast.2018.02.008
ABS    : The formation and properties of star clusters formed at the edges of H II regions are poorly known. We study stellar content, physical conditions, and star formation processes around a relatively unknown young H II region IRAS 10427-6032, located in the southern outskirts of the Carina Nebula. We make use of near-IR data from VISTA, mid-IR from Spitzer and WISE, far-IR from Herschel, sub-mm from ATLASGAL, and 843 MHz radio-continuum data. Using multi-band photometry, we find a total of 5 Class I and 29 Class II young stellar object (YSO) candidates, most of which newly identified, in the 5'$\times$5' region centered on the IRAS source position. Modeling of the spectral energy distribution for selected YSO candidates using radiative transfer models shows that most of these candidates are intermediate mass YSOs in their early evolutionary stages. A majority of the YSO candidates are found to be coincident with the cold dense clump at the western rim of the H II region. Lyman continuum luminosity calculation using radio emission indicates the spectral type of the ionizing source to be earlier than B0.5-B1. We identified a candidate massive star possibly responsible for the H II region with an estimated spectral type B0-B0.5. The temperature and column density maps of the region constructed by performing pixel-wise modified blackbody fits to the thermal dust emission using the far-IR data show a high column density shell-like morphology around the H II region, and low column density (0.6 $\times$ 10$^{22}$ cm$^{-2}$) and high temperature ($\sim$21 K) matter within the H II region. Based on the morphology of the region in the ionized and the molecular gas, and the comparison between the estimated timescales of the H II region and the YSO candidates in the clump, we argue that the enhanced star-formation at the western rim of the H II region is likely due to compression by the ionized gas.

=== arXiv:1803.03584v1  [2018-03-09]
TITLE  : Pre-MAP Search for Transiting Objects Orbiting White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: Aislynn Wallach, Brett M. Morris, Doug Branton, Teagan O'Reilly, Brittany Platt, Ada Beale, Andrew Yetter, Katie Reil
ABS    : Metal pollution in white dwarf atmospheres may be the accreted remnants of planetary objects. After the discovery of disintegrating planetary objects transiting WD 1145+017 (Vanderburg et al. 2015), undergraduates in the University of Washington's Pre- Major in Astronomy Program (Pre-MAP) were inspired to collect photometry of the brightest white dwarfs to hunt for similar transiting objects around other metal-polluted white dwarfs. Prior surveys have yet to make a detection of a transiting planet orbiting a white dwarf, yet white dwarfs are still an attractive target for searches of small, rocky planetary material. Since a typical white dwarf is Earth-sized, transits of Earth-sized planets could have depths &gt;50%, so even low S/N photometry has a chance at discovering transiting material. We identified bright, northern, metal-polluted white dwarfs in the SDSS DR10 white dwarf catalog, and observed five targets with the Astrophysical Research Consortium Small Aperture Telescope (ARCSAT) 0.5-meter telescope at Apache Point Observatory. The ARCSAT photometry had sufficient precision to detect Moon-sized objects or larger at short orbital periods, though no such planets were detected for these targets. We look forward to surveys which may find planets orbiting white dwarfs, such as NASA's TESS, ESA's PLATO, and the Evryscope.

=== arXiv:1803.03299v1  [2018-03-08]
TITLE  : Proper Motion of the Faint Star near KIC 8462852 (Boyajian's Star) - Not a Binary System
AUTHORS: Dan P. Clemens, Kush Maheshwari, Rosha Jagani, J. Montgomery, A. M. El Batal, T G. Ellis, J. T. Wright
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8213/aab492
ABS    : A faint star located 2 arcsec from KIC 8462852 was discovered in Keck 10 m adaptive optics imaging in the $JHK$ near-infrared (NIR) in 2014 by Boyajian et al. (2016). The closeness of the star to KIC 8462852 suggested the two could constitute a binary, which might have implications for the cause of the brightness dips seen by {\it Kepler} (Boyajian et al. (2016) and in ground-based optical studies Boyajian et al. (2018). Here, NIR imaging in 2017 using the Mimir instrument resolved the pair and enabled measuring their separation. The faint star had moved $67 \pm 7$ milliarcsec (mas) relative to KIC 8462852 since 2014. The relative proper motion of the faint star is $23.9 \pm 2.6$ mas yr$^{-1}$, for a tangential velocity of $45 \pm 5$ km s$^{-1}$ if it is at the same 390 pc distance as KIC 8462852. Circular velocity at the 750 AU current projected separation is $1.5$ km s$^{-1}$, hence the star pair cannot be bound.

=== arXiv:1803.01943v1  [2018-03-05]
TITLE  : KIC 8462852: Maria Mitchell Observatory Photographic Photometry 1922 to 1991
AUTHORS: Michael Castelaz, Thurburn Barker
ABS    : A new study of the long-term photometric behavior of the the unusual star KIC 8462852 (Boyajian's Star) has been carried out using archival photographic plates from 1922-1991 taken at the Maria Mitchell Observatory (MMO). We find five episodes of sudden, several day, decreases in magnitude occurring in 1935, 1966, 1978, and two in 1980. Episodes of sudden increase in magnitude appear to occur in 1967 and 1977. Inspection of archival light curves of KIC 8462852 from two previous studies based on the Harvard and the Sonneberg plate collections finds apparent corresponding events to these observed episodes in the MMO light curve. Also, a general trend of $0.12\pm0.02$ magnitudes per century decrease is observed in the MMO light curve, significant, but less than the trend of 0.164$\pm$0.013 observed in the Harvard light curve.

=== arXiv:1803.00072v1  [2018-02-28]
TITLE  : Analysis of the Herschel DEBRIS Sun-like star sample
AUTHORS: B. Sibthorpe, G. M. Kennedy, M. C. Wyatt, J. -F. B. C. Matthews, G. Duchene
JOURNAL: 2018MNRAS.475.3046S
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stx3188
ABS    : This paper presents a study of circumstellar debris around Sun-like stars using data from the Herschel DEBRIS Key Programme. DEBRIS is an unbiased survey comprising the nearest ~90 stars of each spectral type A-M. Analysis of the 275 F-K stars shows that excess emission from a debris disc was detected around 47 stars, giving a detection rate of 17.1+2.6-2.3 per cent, with lower rates for later spectral types. For each target a blackbody spectrum was fitted to the dust emission to determine its fractional luminosity and temperature. The derived under- lying distribution of fractional luminosity versus blackbody radius in the population showed that most detected discs are concentrated at f ~ 10^-5 and at temperatures corresponding to blackbody radii 7-40 AU, which scales to ~40 AU for realistic dust properties (similar to the current Kuiper belt). Two outlying populations are also evident; five stars have exceptionally bright emission ( f &gt; 5x10^-5), and one has unusually hot dust &lt; 4 AU. The excess emission distributions at all wavelengths were fitted with a steady-state evolution model, showing these are compatible with all stars being born with a narrow belt that then undergoes collisional grinding. However, the model cannot explain the hot dust systems - likely originating in transient events - and bright emission systems - arising potentially from atypically massive discs or recent stirring. The emission from the present-day Kuiper belt is predicted to be close to the median of the population, suggesting that half of stars have either depleted their Kuiper belts (similar to the Solar System), or had a lower planetesimal formation efficiency.

=== arXiv:1802.03214v1  [2018-02-09]
TITLE  : Vector-Interaction-Enhanced Bag Model
AUTHORS: Mateusz Cierniak, Thomas Klähn, Tobias Fischer, Niels-Uwe Bastian
JOURNAL: Universe 2018, 4(2), 30
DOI    : 10.3390/universe4020030
ABS    : A commonly applied quark matter model in astrophysics is the thermodynamic bag model (tdBAG). The original MIT bag model approximates the effect of quark confinement, but does not explicitly account for the breaking of chiral symmetry, an important property of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). It further ignores vector repulsion. The vector-interaction-enhanced bag model (vBag) improves the tdBAG approach by accounting for both dynamical chiral symmetry breaking and repulsive vector interactions. The latter is of particular importance to studies of dense matter in beta-equilibriumto explain the two solar mass maximum mass constraint for neutron stars. The model is motivated by analyses of QCD based Dyson-Schwinger equations (DSE), assuming a simple quark-quark contact interaction. Here, we focus on the study of hybrid neutron star properties resulting from the application of vBag and will discuss possible extensions.

=== arXiv:1802.00464v3  [2018-02-01]
TITLE  : Fast and Slow Precession of Gaseous Debris Disks Around Planet-Accreting White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: Ryan Miranda, Roman R. Rafikov
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/aab9a2
ABS    : Spectroscopic observations of some metal-rich white dwarfs (WDs), believed to be polluted by planetary material, reveal the presence of compact gaseous metallic disks orbiting them. The observed variability of asymmetric, double-peaked emission line profiles in about half of such systems could be interpreted as the signature of precession of an eccentric gaseous debris disk. The variability timescales --- from decades down to $1.4$ yr (recently inferred for the debris disk around HE 1349--2305) --- are in rough agreement with the rate of general relativistic (GR) precession in the test particle limit. However, it has not been demonstrated that this mechanism can drive such a fast, coherent precession of a radially extended (out to $1 R_\odot$) gaseous disk mediated by internal stresses (pressure). Here we use the linear theory of eccentricity evolution in hydrodynamic disks to determine several key properties of eccentric modes in gaseous debris disks around WDs. We find a critical dependence of both the precession period and radial eccentricity distribution of the modes on the inner disk radius, $r_\mathrm{in}$. For small inner radii, $r_\mathrm{in} \lesssim (0.2 - 0.4) R_\odot$, the modes are GR-driven, with periods of $\approx 1 - 10$ yr. For $r_\mathrm{in} \gtrsim (0.2 - 0.4) R_\odot$, the modes are pressure-dominated, with periods of $\approx 3 - 20$ yr. Correspondence between the variability periods and inferred inner radii of the observed disks is in general agreement with this trend. In particular, the short period of HE 1349--2305 is consistent with its small $r_\mathrm{in}$. Circum-WD debris disks may thus serve as natural laboratories for studying the evolution of eccentric gaseous disks.

=== arXiv:1801.07265v2  [2018-01-22]
TITLE  : Galaxy Bispectrum from Massive Spinning Particles
AUTHORS: Azadeh Moradinezhad Dizgah, Hayden Lee, Julian B. Muñoz, Cora Dvorkin
DOI    : 10.1088/1475-7516/2018/05/013
ABS    : Massive spinning particles, if present during inflation, lead to a distinctive bispectrum of primordial perturbations, the shape and amplitude of which depend on the masses and spins of the extra particles. This signal, in turn, leaves an imprint in the statistical distribution of galaxies; in particular, as a non-vanishing galaxy bispectrum, which can be used to probe the masses and spins of these particles. In this paper, we present for the first time a new theoretical template for the bispectrum generated by massive spinning particles, valid for a general triangle configuration. We then proceed to perform a Fisher-matrix forecast to assess the potential of two next-generation spectroscopic galaxy surveys, EUCLID and DESI, to constrain the primordial non-Gaussianity sourced by these extra particles. We model the galaxy bispectrum using tree-level perturbation theory, accounting for redshift-space distortions and the Alcock-Paczynski effect, and forecast constraints on the primordial non-Gaussianity parameters marginalizing over all relevant biases and cosmological parameters. Our results suggest that these surveys would potentially be sensitive to any primordial non-Gaussianity with an amplitude larger than $f_{\rm NL}\approx 1$, for massive particles with spins 2, 3, and 4. Interestingly, if non-Gaussianities are present at that level, these surveys will be able to infer the masses of these spinning particles to within tens of percent. If detected, this would provide a very clear window into the particle content of our Universe during inflation.

=== arXiv:1801.02559v3  [2018-01-08]
TITLE  : Aspects of Black Hole Physics and Formation of Super-massive Black Holes from Ultra-light Dark Bosons
AUTHORS: Patrick Das Gupta, Fazlu Rahman
JOURNAL: The Physical Universe, eds. S. M. Wagh, S. D. Maharaj &amp; G. Chon (2018, Published by Central India Research Institute, Nagpur, India)
ABS    : First, we verify that the physical parameters estimated for the four directly detected gravitational wave (GW) events involving coalescence of binary black holes (BHs) indeed uphold the second law of BH thermodynamics, strengthening further the case for BH physics. Non-spherical gravitational collapse leading to BH formation may entail very high GW luminosities during the final phase of implosion, reaching non-negligible fraction of Dyson luminosity $\sim c^5/G $. Most galaxies harbor supermassive black holes (SMBHs) in their nuclear regions. Several bright quasars detected at redshifts $\gtrsim$ 6 are powered by accreting SMBHs of mass $\gtrsim 10^9 M_\odot$ when the universe was only $\sim 10^9$ yrs old. We posit that creation of SMBHs occurs due to collapse (on dynamical time scales $\sim 10^8$ yrs) of ultra-light bosonic dark matter (DM) particles that have undergone Bose-Einstein condensation. Furthermore, oscillations in DM Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs) triggered by tidal forces in interacting galaxies can lead to bursts of star formation in the galactic nuclei because of frequent collisions of gas clouds due to changing gravitational field. We buttress our proposal by first employing simple but tangible physical arguments, and then by making use of Gross-Pitaevskii equation to study the formation of rotating SMBHs having mass $\gtrsim 10^9 M_\odot$. We also make simple estimates of GW amplitude as well as luminosity ensuing from the time varying configuration of BECs, constituted by the ultra-light dark bosons, and remark on the possibility of detecting such GWs using Pulsar Timing Arrays.

=== arXiv:1801.02419v2  [2018-01-08]
TITLE  : Galactic cold cores IX. Column density structures and radiative transfer modelling
AUTHORS: M. Juvela, J. Malinen, J. Montillaud, V. -M. Pelkonen, I. Ristorcelli, L. V. Toth
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 614, A83 (2018)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201630304
ABS    : The Galactic Cold Cores (GCC) project has made Herschel observations of interstellar clouds where Planck detected compact sources of cold dust emission. Our aim is to characterise the structure of the clumps and their parent clouds. We also examine the accuracy to which the structure of dense clumps can be determined from submillimetre data. We use standard statistical methods to characterise the GCC fields. Clumps are extracted using column density thresholding and we construct for each field a three-dimensional radiative transfer (RT) model. These are used to estimate the relative radiation field intensities, clump stability, and the uncertainty of column density estimates. We examine the radial column density profiles of the clumps. In the GCC fields, the structure noise follows the relations previously established at larger scales. The fractal dimension has no significant dependence on column density and the values D = 1.25 +- 0.07 are only slightly lower than in typical molecular clouds. The column density PDFs exhibit large variations, e.g. in the case of externally compressed clouds. At scales r&gt;0.1 pc, the radial column density distributions of the clouds follow an average relation of N~r^{-1}. In spite of a great variety of clump morphology, clumps tend to follow a similar N~r^{-1} relation below r~0.1 pc. RT calculations indicate only factor of 2.5 variation in the local radiation field intensity. The fraction of gravitationally bound clumps increases significantly in regions with A_V &gt; 5 mag but most bound objects appear to be pressure-confined. The GCC host clouds have statistical properties similar to general molecular clouds. The gravitational stability, peak column density, and clump orientation are connected to the cloud background while most other statistics (e.g. D and radial profiles) are insensitive to the environment.

=== arXiv:1801.00732v1  [2018-01-02]
TITLE  : The First Post-Kepler Brightness Dips of KIC 8462852
AUTHORS: Tabetha S. Boyajian, Roi Alonso, Alex Ammerman, David Armstrong, A. Asensio Ramos, K. Barkaoui, Thomas G. Beatty, Z. Benkhaldoun
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8213/aaa405
ABS    : We present a photometric detection of the first brightness dips of the unique variable star KIC 8462852 since the end of the Kepler space mission in 2013 May. Our regular photometric surveillance started in October 2015, and a sequence of dipping began in 2017 May continuing on through the end of 2017, when the star was no longer visible from Earth. We distinguish four main 1-2.5% dips, named "Elsie," "Celeste," "Skara Brae," and "Angkor", which persist on timescales from several days to weeks. Our main results so far are: (i) there are no apparent changes of the stellar spectrum or polarization during the dips; (ii) the multiband photometry of the dips shows differential reddening favoring non-grey extinction. Therefore, our data are inconsistent with dip models that invoke optically thick material, but rather they are in-line with predictions for an occulter consisting primarily of ordinary dust, where much of the material must be optically thin with a size scale &lt;&lt;1um, and may also be consistent with models invoking variations intrinsic to the stellar photosphere. Notably, our data do not place constraints on the color of the longer-term "secular" dimming, which may be caused by independent processes, or probe different regimes of a single process.

=== arXiv:1801.00720v1  [2018-01-02]
TITLE  : Non-grey dimming events of KIC 8462852 from GTC spectrophotometry
AUTHORS: H. J. Deeg, R. Alonso, D. Nespral, Tabetha Boyajian
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 610, L12 (2018)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201732453
ABS    : We report ground-based spectrophotometry of KIC 8462852, during its first dimming events since the end of the Kepler mission. The dimmings show a clear colour-signature, and are deeper in visual blue wavelengths than in red ones. The flux loss' wavelength dependency can be described with an Ångström absorption coefficient of $2.19\pm0.45$, which is compatible with absorption by optically thin dust with particle sizes on the order of 0.0015 to 0.15 $μ$m. These particles would be smaller than is required to be resistant against blow-out by radiation pressure when close to the star. During occultation events, these particles must be replenished on time-scales of days. If dust is indeed the source of KIC 8462852's dimming events, deeper dimming events should show more neutral colours, as is expected from optically thick absorbers.

=== arXiv:1712.09393v2  [2017-12-26]
TITLE  : A SEA BASS on the exoplanet HD209458b
AUTHORS: Giuseppe Morello
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/aadda4
ABS    : We present here the first application of Stellar and Exoplanetary Atmospheres Bayesian Analysis Simultaneous Spectroscopy (SEA BASS) on real datasets. SEA BASS is a scheme that enables the simultaneous derivation of four-coefficient stellar limb-darkening profiles, transit depths, and orbital parameters from exoplanetary transits at multiple wavelengths. It relies on the wavelength-independence of the system geometry and on the reduced limb-darkening effect in the infrared. This approach has been introduced by Morello et al. (2017) (without the SEA BASS acronym), who discuss several tests on synthetic datasets. Here, we (1) improve on the original algorithm by using multiple Spitzer/InfraRed Array Camera passbands and a more effective set of geometric parameters, (2) demonstrate its ability with Hubble Space Telescope/Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph datasets, by (3) measuring the HD209458 stellar limb-darkening profile over multiple passbands in the 290-570 nm range with sufficient precision to rule out some theoretical models that have been adopted previously in theliterature, and (4) simultaneously extracting the transmission spectrum of the exoplanet atmosphere. The higher photometric precision of the next-generation instruments, such as those onboard the James Webb Space Telescope, will enable modeling the star-planet systems with unprecedented detail, and increase the importance of SEA BASS for avoiding the potential biases introduced by inaccurate stellar limb-darkening models.

=== arXiv:1712.06399v1  [2017-12-18]
TITLE  : Early phases in the stellar and substellar formation and evolution: Infrared and submillimeter data in the Barnard 30 dark cloud
AUTHORS: D. Barrado, I. de Gregorio-Monsalvo, N. Huélamo, M. Morales-Calderón, A. Bayo, A. Palau, M. T. Ruiz, P. Rivière-Marichalar
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 612, A79 (2018)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201527938
ABS    : The early evolutionary stage of brown dwarfs are not very well characterized, specially during the embedded phase. To gain insight into the dominant formation mechanism of very low-mass objects and brown dwarfs, we conducted deep observations at 870$μ$m with the LABOCA bolometer at the APEX telescope. Our goal was to identify young sub-mm sources in the Barnard 30 dark cloud. We complemented these data with multi-wavelength observations from the optical to the far-IR and. As a result, we have identified 34 submm sources and a substantial number of possible and probable Barnard 30 members within each individual APEX/LABOCA beam. They can be classified in three distinct groups. First, 15 out of these 34 have a clear optical or IR counterpart to the submm peak and nine of them are potential proto-BDs candidates. Moreover, a substantial number of them could be multiple systems. A second group of 13 sources comprises candidate members with significant infrared excesses located away from the central submm emission. All of them include brown dwarf candidates, some displaying IR excess, but their association with submm emission is unclear. In addition, we have found six starless cores and, based on the total dust mass estimate, three might be pre-substellar (or pre-BDs) cores. Finally, the complete characterization of our APEX/LABOCA sources, focusing on those detected at 24 and/or 70 $μ$m, indicates that in our sample of 34 submm sources there are, at least: two WTTs, four CTTs, five young stellar objects (YSOs), eight proto-BD candidates (with another three dubious cases), and one Very Low Luminosity object (VeLLO).

=== arXiv:1712.04948v1  [2017-12-13]
TITLE  : The GALEX View of "Boyajian's Star" (KIC 8462852)
AUTHORS: James. R. A. Davenport, Kevin R. Covey, Riley W. Clarke, Zachery Laycock, Scott W. Fleming, Tabetha S. Boyajian, Benjamin T. Montet, Bernie Shiao
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/aaa413
ABS    : The enigmatic star KIC 8462852, informally known as "Boyajian's Star", has exhibited unexplained variability from both short timescale (days) dimming events, and years-long fading in the Kepler mission. No single physical mechanism has successfully explained these observations to date. Here we investigate the ultraviolet variability of KIC 8462852 on a range of timescales using data from the GALEX mission that occurred contemporaneously with the Kepler mission. The wide wavelength baseline between the Kepler and GALEX data provides a unique constraint on the nature of the variability. Using 1600 seconds of photon-counting data from four GALEX visits spread over 70 days in 2011, we find no coherent NUV variability in the system on 10-100 second or months timescales. Comparing the integrated flux from these 2011 visits to the 2012 NUV flux published in the GALEX-CAUSE Kepler survey, we find a 3% decrease in brightness for KIC 8462852. We find this level of variability is significant, but not necessarily unusual for stars of similar spectral type in the GALEX data. This decrease coincides with the secular optical fading reported by Montet &amp; Simon (2016). We find the multi-wavelength variability is somewhat inconsistent with typical interstellar dust absorption, but instead favors a R$_V$ = 5.0 $\pm$ 0.9 reddening law potentially from circumstellar dust.

=== arXiv:1712.06637v1  [2017-12-12]
TITLE  : Reddened Dimming of Boyajian's Star Supports Internal Storage of Its "Missing" Flux
AUTHORS: Peter Foukal
JOURNAL: 2017 Res. Notes AAS 1 52
DOI    : 10.3847/2515-5172/aaa130
ABS    : Two recent short term dimmings of KIC 8462852 (Boyajian's Star) exhibit clear reddening in the B, r' and i' photometric passbands. We show that the intensity ratios of the three pass bands agree well with cooling of an approximately 6800 K black body by about 30K. This agreement, together with other recent findings on the timing and longer term dimmings of this star, support our previous argument that the star's photometric behavior is caused by internal storage of impeded convective flux, rather than by external sources of obscuration such the ISM or circumstellar material.

=== arXiv:1711.10612v2  [2017-11-28]
TITLE  : Recent Photometric Monitoring of KIC 8462852, the Detection of a Potential Repeat of the Kepler Day 1540 Dip and a Plausible Model
AUTHORS: R. Bourne, B. L. Gary, A. Plakhov
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/sty097
ABS    : This paper presents V- and g'-band observations of the F2V star KIC 8462852, which exhibited enigmatic fade patterns in Kepler mission data. We introduce a transit simulation model for interpretation of these fades, and use it to interpret an August 2017 dip as a repeat of the Kepler day 1540 dip (D1540). We suggest the August 2017 and D1540 dips may be caused by a brown dwarf and an associated ring system in a 1601-day elliptical orbit. Transiting icy moons of the proposed brown dwarf, sublimating near periapsis like comets, could provide an explanation for the significant dips observed by Kepler, as well as the recent May to October 2017 dips and the long term variation in flux detected by Simon et al. (2017). Whereas the presence of such a ring structure is attractive for its ability to explain short term fade events, we do not address how such a ring system can be created and maintained. If our speculation is correct, a brightening of about 1-2 percent should occur during October to November 2017. In addition, this scenario predicts that a set of dimming events, similar to those in 2013 (Kepler) and in 2017 (reported here), can be expected to repeat during October 2021 to January 2022 and a repeat of D1540 should occur on 27 December 2021.

=== arXiv:1711.09331v1  [2017-11-26]
TITLE  : Hypostatic jammed packings of frictionless nonspherical particles
AUTHORS: Kyle VanderWerf, Weiwei Jin, Mark D. Shattuck, Corey S. O'Hern
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. E 97, 012909 (2018)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevE.97.012909
ABS    : We perform computational studies of static packings of a variety of nonspherical particles including circulo-lines, circulo-polygons, ellipses, asymmetric dimers, and dumbbells to determine which shapes form hypostatic versus isostatic packings and to understand why hypostatic packings of nonspherical particles can be mechanically stable despite having fewer contacts than that predicted from naïve constraint counting. To generate highly accurate force- and torque-balanced packings of circulo-lines and -polygons, we developed an interparticle potential that gives continuous forces and torques as a function of the particle coordinates. We show that the packing fraction and coordination number at jamming onset obey a master-like form for all of the nonspherical particle packings we studied when plotted versus the particle asphericity ${\cal A}$, which is proportional to the ratio of the squared perimeter to the area of the particle. Further, the eigenvalue spectra of the dynamical matrix for packings of different particle shapes collapse when plotted at the same ${\cal A}$. For hypostatic packings of nonspherical particles, we verify that the number of "quartic" modes along which the potential energy increases as the fourth power of the perturbation amplitude matches the number of missing contacts relative to the isostatic value. In addition, we calculate the principal curvatures of the inequality constraints for each contact in circulo-line packings and identify specific types of contacts with inequality constraints that possess convex curvature. These contacts can constrain multiple degrees of freedom and allow hypostatic packings of nonspherical particles to be mechanically stable.

=== arXiv:1711.08122v2  [2017-11-22]
TITLE  : Discovery of 21 New Changing-look AGNs in Northern Sky
AUTHORS: Qian Yang, Xue-Bing Wu, Xiaohui Fan, Linhua Jiang, Ian McGreer, Jinyi Shangguan, Su Yao, Bingquan Wang
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/aaca3a
ABS    : The rare case of changing-look (CL) AGNs, with the appearance or disappearance of broad Balmer emission lines within a few years, challenges our understanding of the AGN unified model. We present a sample of 21 new CL AGNs at $0.08&lt;z&lt;0.58$, which doubles the number of such objects known to date. These new CL AGNs were discovered by several ways, from (1) repeat spectra in the SDSS, (2) repeat spectra in the Large Sky Area Multi-Object Fiber Spectroscopic Telescope (LAMOST) and SDSS, and (3) photometric variability and new spectroscopic observations. We use the photometric data from surveys, including the SDSS imaging survey, the Pan-STARRS1, the DESI Legacy imaging survey, the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE), the Catalina Real-time Transient Survey, and the Palomar Transient Factory. The estimated upper limits of transition timescale of the CL AGNs in this sample spans from 0.9 to 13 years in the rest frame. The continuum flux in the optical and mid-infrared becomes brighter when the CL AGNs turn on, or vice versa. Variations of more than 0.2 mag in $W1$ band were detected in 15 CL AGNs during the transition. The optical and mid-infrared variability is not consistent with the scenario of variable obscuration in 10 CL AGNs at more than $3σ$ confidence level. We confirm a bluer-when-brighter trend in the optical. However, the mid-infrared WISE colors $W1-W2$ become redder when the objects become brighter in the $W1$ band, possibly due to a stronger hot dust contribution in the $W2$ band when the AGN activity becomes stronger. The physical mechanism of type transition is important for understanding the evolution of AGNs.

=== arXiv:1711.07472v1  [2017-11-20]
TITLE  : KIC 8462852: Potential repeat of the Kepler day 1540 dip in August 2017
AUTHORS: Rafik Bourne, Bruce Gary
ABS    : We report 33 V-band observations by the Hereford Arizona Observatory (HAO) of the enigmatic star KIC 8462852 during the two week period 3-17 August 2017. We find a striking resemblance of these observations to the Kepler day 1540 dip with HAO observations tracking the Kepler light curve (adjusted for egress symmetry). A possible explanation of this potential repeat transit is a brown dwarf and extensive ring system in a 1601-day eccentric orbit. We suggest this object may be detectable through radial velocity observations in October and November 2017, with an amplitude of ~ 1-2 kms-1.

=== arXiv:1711.04205v1  [2017-11-11]
TITLE  : KIC 8462852 Brightness Pattern Repeating Every 1600 Days
AUTHORS: Bruce Gary, Rafik Bourne
ABS    : Observations of KIC 8462852 (aka Boyajian's Star) reveal a yearlong fade pattern that is remarkably similar to the fade pattern derived from Kepler mission observations. The ground-based observations reported here can be described as a gradual fade that ended in late 2016 with the beginning of a yearlong U-shaped fade of 1.1 percent. Near the end of this U-shaped fade a series of very brief dips occurred. The Kepler data exhibit a similar pattern 1600 days earlier, except with an abrupt end of observations before the U-shape recovery. Observations lasting many years are needed, especially during our predicted repeat of the U-shape and short dip pattern in 2021.

=== arXiv:1711.03490v2  [2017-11-09]
TITLE  : Debris Disc Constraints on Planetesimal Formation
AUTHORS: Alexander V. Krivov, Aljoscha Ide, Torsten Löhne, Anders Johansen, Jürgen Blum
JOURNAL: MNRAS v. 474, 2564-2575 (2018)
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stx2932
ABS    : Two basic routes for planetesimal formation have been proposed over the last few decades. One is a classical "slow-growth" scenario. Another one is particle concentration models, in which small pebbles are concentrated locally and then collapse gravitationally to form planetesimals. Both types of models make certain predictions for the size spectrum and internal structure of newly-born planetesimals. We use these predictions as input to simulate collisional evolution of debris discs left after the gas dispersal. The debris disc emission as a function of a system's age computed in these simulations is compared with several Spitzer and Herschel debris disc surveys around A-type stars. We confirm that the observed brightness evolution for the majority of discs can be reproduced by classical models. Further, we find that it is equally consistent with the size distribution of planetesimals predicted by particle concentration models - provided the objects are loosely bound "pebble piles" as these models also predict. Regardless of the assumed planetesimal formation mechanism, explaining the brightest debris discs in the samples uncovers a "disc mass problem." To reproduce such discs by collisional simulations, a total mass of planetesimals of up to ~1000 Earth masses is required, which exceeds the total mass of solids available in the protoplanetary progenitors of debris discs. This may indicate that stirring was delayed in some of the bright discs, that giant impacts occurred recently in some of them, that some systems may be younger than previously thought, or that non-collisional processes contribute significantly to the dust production.

=== arXiv:1711.02940v2  [2017-11-08]
TITLE  : Unstable low-mass planetary systems as drivers of white dwarf pollution
AUTHORS: Alexander J Mustill, Eva Villaver, Dimitri Veras, Boris T Gänsicke, Amy Bonsor
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/sty446
ABS    : At least 25% of white dwarfs show atmospheric pollution by metals, sometimes accompanied by detectable circumstellar dust/gas discs or (in the case of WD 1145+017) transiting disintegrating asteroids. Delivery of planetesimals to the white dwarf by orbiting planets is a leading candidate to explain these phenomena. Here, we study systems of planets and planetesimals undergoing planet-planet scattering triggered by the star's post-main sequence mass loss, and test whether this can maintain high rates of delivery over the several Gyr that they are observed. We find that low-mass planets (Earth to Neptune mass) are efficient deliverers of material and can maintain the delivery for Gyr. Unstable low-mass planetary systems reproduce the observed delayed onset of significant accretion, as well as the slow decay in accretion rates at late times. Higher-mass planets are less efficient, and the delivery only lasts a relatively brief time before the planetesimal populations are cleared. The orbital inclinations of bodies as they cross the white dwarf's Roche limit are roughly isotropic, implying that significant collisional interactions of asteroids, debris streams and discs can be expected. If planet-planet scattering is indeed responsible for the pollution of white dwarfs, many such objects, and their main-sequence progenitors, can be expected to host (currently undetectable) super-Earth planets on orbits of several au and beyond.

=== arXiv:1711.00151v2  [2017-11-01]
TITLE  : Spectral correlations in Anderson insulating wires
AUTHORS: M. Marinho, T. Micklitz
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. B 97, 041406 (2018)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevB.97.041406
ABS    : We calculate the spectral level-level correlation function of Anderson insulating wires for all three Wigner-Dyson classes. A measurement of its Fourier transform, the spectral form factor, is within reach of state-of-the-art cold atom quantum quench experiments, and we find good agreement with recent numerical simulations of the latter. Our derivation builds on a representation of the level-level correlation function in terms of a local generating function which may prove useful in other contexts.

=== arXiv:1710.10314v1  [2017-10-27]
TITLE  : Elevated temperature dependence of the anisotropic visible-to-ultraviolet dielectric function of monoclinic beta-Ga2O3
AUTHORS: A. Mock, J. VanDerslice, R. Korlacki, J. A. Woollam, M. Schubert
DOI    : 10.1063/1.5010936
ABS    : We report on the temperature dependence of the dielectric tensor elements of $n$-type conductive $β$-Ga$_2$O$_3$ from 22$^\circ$C-500$^\circ$C in the spectral range of 1.5~eV--6.4~eV. We present the temperature dependence of the excitonic and band-to-band transition energies and their eigenpolarization vector orientations. We utilize a Bose-Einstein analysis of the temperature dependence of the observed transition energies and reveal electron coupling with average phonon temperature in excellent agreement with the average over all longitudinal phonon plasmon coupled modes reported previously [M. Schubert~\textit{et al.}, Phys. Rev. B \textbf{93}, 125209 (2016)]. We also report a linear temperature dependence of the wavelength independent Cauchy expansion coefficient for the anisotropic below-band-gap monoclinic indices of refraction.

=== arXiv:1710.07103v1  [2017-10-19]
TITLE  : Unbiased large spectroscopic surveys of galaxies selected by SPICA using dust bands
AUTHORS: H. Kaneda, D. Ishihara, S. Oyabu, M. Yamagishi, T. Wada, L. Armus, M. Baes, V. Charmandaris
DOI    : 10.1017/pasa.2017.56
ABS    : The mid-infrared (IR) range contains many spectral features associated with large molecules and dust grains such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and silicates. These are usually very strong compared to fine-structure gas lines, and thus valuable in studying the spectral properties of faint distant galaxies. In this paper, we evaluate the capability of low-resolution mid-IR spectroscopic surveys of galaxies that could be performed by SPICA. The surveys are designed to address the question how star formation and black hole accretion activities evolved over cosmic time through spectral diagnostics of the physical conditions of the interstellar/circumnuclear media in galaxies. On the basis of results obtained with Herschel far-IR photometric surveys of distant galaxies and Spitzer and AKARI near- to mid-IR spectroscopic observations of nearby galaxies, we estimate the numbers of the galaxies at redshift z &gt; 0.5, which are expected to be detected in the PAH features or dust continuum by a wide (10 deg^2) or deep (1 deg^2) blind survey, both for a given observation time of 600 hours. As by-products of the wide blind survey, we also expect to detect debris disks, through the mid-IR excess above the photospheric emission of nearby main-sequence stars, and we estimate their number. We demonstrate that the SPICA mid-IR surveys will efficiently provide us with unprecedentedly large spectral samples, which can be studied further in the far-IR with SPICA.

=== arXiv:1710.05929v2  [2017-10-16]
TITLE  : Modelling the KIC8462852 light curves: compatibility of the dips and secular dimming with an exocomet interpretation
AUTHORS: M. C. Wyatt, R. van Lieshout, G. M. Kennedy, T. S. Boyajian
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stx2713
ABS    : This paper shows how the dips and secular dimming in the KIC8462852 light curve can originate in circumstellar material distributed around a single elliptical orbit (e.g., exocomets). The expected thermal emission and wavelength dependent dimming is derived for different orbital parameters and geometries, including dust that is optically thick to stellar radiation, and for a size distribution of dust with realistic optical properties. We first consider dust distributed evenly around the orbit, then show how to derive its uneven distribution from the optical light curve and to predict light curves at different wavelengths. The fractional luminosity of an even distribution is approximately the level of dimming times stellar radius divided by distance from the star at transit. Non-detection of dust thermal emission for KIC8462852 thus provides a lower limit on the transit distance to complement the 0.6au upper limit imposed by 0.4day dips. Unless the dust distribution is optically thick, the putative 16% century-long secular dimming must have disappeared before the WISE 12micron measurement in 2010, and subsequent 4.5micron observations require transits at &gt;0.05au. However, self-absorption of thermal emission removes these constraints for opaque dust distributions. The passage of dust clumps through pericentre is predicted to cause infrared brightening lasting 10s of days and dimming during transit, such that total flux received decreases at wavelengths &lt;5micron, but increases to potentially detectable levels at longer wavelengths. We suggest that lower dimming levels than seen for KIC8462852 are more common in the Galactic population and may be detected in future transit surveys.

=== arXiv:1710.05606v2  [2017-10-16]
TITLE  : Massive Graviton Geons
AUTHORS: Katsuki Aoki, Kei-ichi Maeda, Yosuke Misonoh, Hirotada Okawa
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. D 97, 044005 (2018)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevD.97.044005
ABS    : We find vacuum solutions such that massive gravitons are confined in a local spacetime region by their gravitational energy in asymptotically flat spacetimes in the context of the bigravity theory. We call such self-gravitating objects massive graviton geons. The basic equations can be reduced to the Schrödinger-Poisson equations with the tensor "wavefunction" in the Newtonian limit. We obtain a non-spherically symmetric solution with $j=2,\ell=0$ as well as a spherically symmetric solution with $j=0,\ell=2$ in this system where $j$ is the total angular momentum quantum number and $\ell$ is the orbital angular momentum quantum number, respectively. The energy eigenvalue of the Schrödinger equation in the non-spherical solution is smaller than that in the spherical solution. We then study the perturbative stability of the spherical solution and find that there is an unstable mode in the quadrupole mode perturbations which may be interpreted as the transition mode to the non-spherical solution. The results suggest that the non-spherically symmetric solution is the ground state of the massive graviton geon. The massive graviton geons may decay in time due to emissions of gravitational waves but this timescale can be quite long when the massive gravitons are non-relativistic and then the geons can be long-lived. We also argue possible prospects of the massive graviton geons: applications to the ultralight dark matter scenario, nonlinear (in)stability of the Minkowski spacetime, and a quantum transition of the spacetime.

=== arXiv:1710.05000v3  [2017-10-13]
TITLE  : The year-long flux variations in Boyajian's star are asymmetric or aperiodic
AUTHORS: Michael Hippke, Daniel Angerhausen
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8213/aaab44
ABS    : We combine and calibrate publicly available data for Boyajian's star including photometry from ASAS (SN, V, I), Kepler, Gaia, SuperWASP, and citizen scientist observations (AAVSO, HAO and Burke-Gaffney). Precise (mmag) photometry covers the years 2006-2017. We show that the year-long flux variations with an amplitude of ~4% can not be explained with cyclical symmetric or asymmetric models with periods shorter than ten years. If the dips are transits, their period must exceed ten years, or their structure must evolve significantly during each 4-year long cycle.

=== arXiv:1710.02526v2  [2017-10-06]
TITLE  : Time-resolved WISE/NEOWISE Coadds
AUTHORS: A. M. Meisner, D. Lang, D. J. Schlegel
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-3881/aacbcd
ABS    : We have used the first ~3 years of 3.4 micron (W1) and 4.6 micron (W2) observations from the WISE and NEOWISE missions to create a full-sky set of time-resolved coadds. As a result of the WISE survey strategy, a typical sky location is visited every six months and is observed during 12 or more exposures per visit, with these exposures spanning a ~1 day time interval. We have stacked the exposures within such ~1 day intervals to produce one coadd per band per visit -- that is, one coadd every six months at a given position on the sky in each of W1 and W2. For most parts of the sky we have generated six epochal coadds per band, with one visit during the fully cryogenic WISE mission, one visit during NEOWISE, and then, after a 33 month gap, four more visits during the NEOWISE-Reactivation mission phase. These coadds are suitable for studying long-timescale mid-infrared variability and measuring motions to ~1.3 magnitudes fainter than the single-exposure detection limit. In most sky regions, our coadds span a 5.5 year time period and therefore provide a &gt;10x enhancement in time baseline relative to that available for the AllWISE catalog's apparent motion measurements. As such, the signature application of these new coadds is expected to be motion-based identification of relatively faint brown dwarfs, especially those cold enough to remain undetected by Gaia.

=== arXiv:1710.01081v4  [2017-10-03]
TITLE  : A 1574-day periodicity of transits orbiting KIC 8462852
AUTHORS: Gary Sacco, Linh Ngo, Julien Modolo
ABS    : Observations of the main sequence F3 V star KIC 8462852 (also known as Boyajian's star) revealed extreme aperiodic dips in flux up to 20% during the four years of the Kepler mission. Smaller dips (&lt; 2%) were also observed with ground-based telescopes between May and September 2017. We investigated possible correlation between recent dips and the major dips in the last 100 days of the Kepler mission. We compared Kepler light curve data, 2017 data from two observatories (TFN, OGG) which are part of the Las Cumbres Observatory (LCO) network and Sternberg observatory archival data, and determined that observations are consistent with a 1,574-day (4.31 year) periodicity of a transit (or group of transits) orbiting Boyajian's star within the habitable zone. It is unknown if transits that have produced other major dips as observed during the Kepler mission (e.g. D792) share the same orbital period. Nevertheless, the proposed periodicity is a step forward in guiding future observation efforts.

=== arXiv:1709.09675v1  [2017-09-27]
TITLE  : WIRED for EC: New White Dwarfs with $\textit{WISE}$ Infrared Excesses and New Classification Schemes from the Edinburgh-Cape Blue Object Survey
AUTHORS: E. Dennihy, J. C. Clemens, John H. Debes, B. H. Dunlap, D. Kilkenny, P. C. O'Brien, J. T. Fuchs
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/aa8ef2
ABS    : We present a simple method for identifying candidate white dwarf systems with dusty exoplanetary debris based on a single temperature blackbody model fit to the infrared excess. We apply this technique to a sample of Southern Hemisphere white dwarfs from the recently completed Edinburgh-Cape Blue Object Survey and identify four new promising dusty debris disk candidates. We demonstrate the efficacy of our selection method by recovering three of the four $\textit{Spitzer}$ confirmed dusty debris disk systems in our sample. Further investigation using archival high resolution imaging shows $\textit{Spitzer}$ data of the un-recovered fourth object is likely contaminated by a line-of-sight object that either led to a mis-classification as a dusty disk in the literature or is confounding our method. Finally, in our diagnostic plot we show that dusty white dwarfs which also host gaseous debris lie along a boundary of our dusty debris disk region, providing clues to the origin and evolution of these especially interesting systems.

=== arXiv:1709.06061v1  [2017-09-18]
TITLE  : Optical Polarimetry of KIC 8462852 in May-August 2017
AUTHORS: I. A Steele, C. M. Copperwheat, H. E. Jermak, G. M. Kennedy, G. P. Lamb
DOI    : 10.1093/mnrasl/slx145
ABS    : We present optical polarimetry in the period May-August 2017 of the enigmatic "dipping" star KIC 8462852. During that period three ~1% photometric dips were reported by other observers. We measured the average absolute polarization of the source, and find no excess or unusual polarization compared to a nearby comparison star. We place tight upper limits on any change in the degree of polarization of the source between epochs in- and out-of-dip of &lt;0.1% (8500-Ang.) and &lt;0.2% (7050-Ang. and 5300-Ang.). How our limits are interpreted depends on the specific model being considered. If the whole stellar disk were covered by material with an optical depth of ~0.01 then the fractional polarisation introduced by this material must be less than 10-20%. While our non-detection does not constrain the comet scenario, it predicts that even modest amounts of dust that have properties similar to Solar System comets may be detectable. We note that the sensitivity of our method scales with the depth of the dip. Should a future ~20% photometric dip be observed (as was previously detected by Kepler) our method would constrain any induced polarization associated with any occulting material to 0.5-1.0%.

=== arXiv:1709.01187v4  [2017-09-04]
TITLE  : Planck's view on the spectrum of the Sunyaev-Zeldovich effect
AUTHORS: Jens Erler, Kaustuv Basu, Jens Chluba, Frank Bertoldi
JOURNAL: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 2018 476 (3): 3360-3381
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/sty327
ABS    : We present a detailed analysis of the stacked frequency spectrum of a large sample of galaxy clusters using Planck data, together with auxiliary data from the AKARI and IRAS missions. Our primary goal is to search for the imprint of relativistic corrections to the thermal Sunyaev-Zeldovich effect (tSZ) spectrum, which allow to measure the temperature of the intracluster medium. We remove Galactic and extragalactic foregrounds with a matched filtering technique, which is validated using simulations with realistic mock data sets. The extracted spectra show the tSZ signal at high significance and reveal an additional far-infrared (FIR) excess, which we attribute to thermal emission from the galaxy clusters themselves. This excess FIR emission from clusters is accounted for in our spectral model. We are able to measure the tSZ relativistic corrections at $2.2σ$ by constraining the mean temperature of our cluster sample to $4.4^{+2.1}_{-2.0} \, \mathrm{keV}$. We repeat the same analysis on a subsample containing only the 100 hottest clusters, for which we measure the mean temperature to be $6.0^{+3.8}_{-2.9} \, \mathrm{keV}$, corresponding to $2.0σ$. The temperature of the emitting dust grains in our FIR model is constrained to $\simeq 20 \, \mathrm{K}$, consistent with previous studies. Control for systematic biases is done by fitting mock clusters, from which we also show that using the non-relativistic spectrum for SZ signal extraction will lead to a bias in the integrated Compton parameter $Y$, which can be up to 14% for the most massive clusters. We conclude by providing an outlook for the upcoming CCAT-prime telescope, which will improve upon Planck with lower noise and better spatial resolution.

=== arXiv:1708.09394v1  [2017-08-30]
TITLE  : Multi-band photometry and spectroscopy of an all-sky sample of bright white dwarfs
AUTHORS: R. Raddi, N. P. Gentile Fusillo, A. F. Pala, J. J. Hermes, B. T. Gaensicke, P. Chote, M. A. Hollands, A. Henden
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stx2243
ABS    : The upcoming NASA Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) will obtain space-based uninterrupted light curves for a large sample of bright white dwarfs distributed across the entire sky, providing a very rich resource for asteroseismological studies and the search for transits from planetary debris. We have compiled an all-sky catalogue of ultraviolet, optical, and infrared photometry as well as proper motions, which we propose as an essential tool for the preliminary identification and characterisation of potential targets. We present data for 1864 known white dwarfs and 305 high-probability white dwarf candidates brighter than 17 mag. We describe the spectroscopic follow-up of 135 stars, of which 82 are white dwarfs and 25 are hot subdwarfs. The new confirmed stars include six pulsating white dwarf candidates (ZZ Cetis), and nine white dwarf binaries with a cool main-sequence companion. We identify one star with a spectroscopic distance of only 25 pc from the Sun. Around the time TESS is launched, we foresee that all white dwarfs in this sample will have trigonometric parallaxes measured by the ESA Gaia mission next year.

=== arXiv:1708.07822v2  [2017-08-25]
TITLE  : Where Is the Flux Going? The Long-Term Photometric Variability of Boyajian's Star
AUTHORS: Joshua D. Simon, Benjamin J. Shappee, G. Pojmanski, Benjamin T. Montet, C. S. Kochanek, Jennifer van Saders, T. W. -S. Holoien, Arne A. Henden
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.853:77,2018
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/aaa0c1
ABS    : We present ~800 days of photometric monitoring of Boyajian's Star (KIC 8462852) from the All-Sky Automated Survey for Supernovae (ASAS-SN) and ~4000 days of monitoring from the All Sky Automated Survey (ASAS). We show that from 2015 to the present the brightness of Boyajian's Star has steadily decreased at a rate of 6.3 +/- 1.4 mmag yr^-1, such that the star is now 1.5% fainter than it was in February 2015. Moreover, the longer time baseline afforded by ASAS suggests that Boyajian's Star has also undergone two brightening episodes in the past 11 years, rather than only exhibiting a monotonic decline. We analyze a sample of ~1000 comparison stars of similar brightness located in the same ASAS-SN field and demonstrate that the recent fading is significant at &gt;99.4% confidence. The 2015-2017 dimming rate is consistent with that measured with Kepler data for the time period from 2009 to 2013. This long-term variability is difficult to explain with any of the physical models for the star's behavior proposed to date.

=== arXiv:1708.07556v2  [2017-08-24]
TITLE  : Extinction and the Dimming of KIC 8462852
AUTHORS: Huan Y. A. Meng, George Rieke, Franky Dubois, Grant Kennedy, Massimo Marengo, Michael Siegel, Kate Su, Nicolas Trueba
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/aa899c
ABS    : To test alternative hypotheses for the behavior of KIC 8462852, we obtained measurements of the star over a wide wavelength range from the UV to the mid-infrared from October 2015 through December 2016, using Swift, Spitzer and at AstroLAB IRIS. The star faded in a manner similar to the long-term fading seen in Kepler data about 1400 days previously. The dimming rate for the entire period reported is 22.1 +\- 9.7 milli-mag/yr in the Swift wavebands, with amounts of 21.0 +\- 4.5 mmag in the groundbased B measurements, 14.0 +\- 4.5 mmag in V, and 13.0 +\- 4.5 in R, and a rate of 5.0 +\- 1.2 mmag/yr averaged over the two warm Spitzer bands. Although the dimming is small, it is seen at &gt;= 3 sigma by three different observatories operating from the UV to the IR. The presence of long-term secular dimming means that previous SED models of the star based on photometric measurements taken years apart may not be accurate. We find that stellar models with T_{eff} = 7000 - 7100 K and A_V ~ 0.73 best fit the Swift data from UV to optical. These models also show no excess in the near-simultaneous Spitzer photometry at 3.6 and 4.5 microns, although a longer wavelength excess from a substantial debris disk is still possible (e.g., as around Fomalhaut). The wavelength dependence of the fading favors a relatively neutral color (i.e., R_V &gt;= 5, but not flat across all the bands) compared with the extinction law for the general ISM (R_V = 3.1), suggesting that the dimming arises from circumstellar material.

=== arXiv:1708.04600v4  [2017-08-15]
TITLE  : Anomalous light curves of young tilted exorings
AUTHORS: Mario Sucerquia, Jaime A. Alvarado-Montes, Vanesa Ramírez, Jorge I. Zuluaga
JOURNAL: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters, Volume 472, Issue 1, 21 November 2017, Pages L120-L124
DOI    : 10.1093/mnrasl/slx151
ABS    : Despite the success of discovering transiting exoplanets, several recently observed objects (e.g. KIC-8462852, J1407 and PDS-110) exhibit unconventional transit signals, whose appropriate interpretation in terms of a spherical single body has been challenging, if not impossible. In the aforementioned examples the presence of a ring-like structure has been proposed for explaining the unusual data. Thus, in this paper we delve into the dynamics of a tilted exoring disturbed by a third close companion, and the role that the Lidov-Kozai mechanism may have to explain irregular and anomalous transit signals of ringed planets, as well as the ring's early stages. To that end, we performed numerical simulations and semi-analytical calculations to assess the ring's dynamical and morphological properties, and their related transit observables. We found that tilted ringed structures undergo short-term changes in shape and orientation that are manifested as strong variations of transit depth and contact times, even between consecutive eclipses. Any detected anomaly in transit characteristics may lead to a miscalculation of the system's properties (planetary radius, semi-major axis, stellar density and others). Moreover, oscillating ring-like structures may account for the strangeness of some light-curve features in already known and future discovered exoplanets.

=== arXiv:1708.02433v1  [2017-08-08]
TITLE  : Two-flavor hybrid stars with the Dyson-Schwinger quark model
AUTHORS: J. -B. Wei, H. Chen, H. -J Schulze
DOI    : 10.1088/1674-1137/41/11/115101
ABS    : We study the properties of two-flavor quark matter in the Dyson-Schwinger model and investigate the possible consequences for hybrid neutron stars, with particular regard to the two-solar-mass limit. We find that with some extreme values of the model parameters, the mass fraction of two-flavor quark matter in heavy neutron stars can be as high as 30 percent and the possible energy release during the conversion from nucleonic neutron stars to hybrid stars can reach $10^{52}\;$erg.

=== arXiv:1707.03828v2  [2017-07-12]
TITLE  : On the Progenitor of the Type Ic Supernova 2012fh
AUTHORS: Samson A. Johnson, C. S. Kochanek, S. M. Adams
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stx2170
ABS    : Little is observationally known about the progenitors of Type Ibc supernovae (SNe) or the typical activity of SNe progenitors in their final years. Here, we analyze deep Large Binocular Telescope imaging data spanning the 4 years before and after the Type Ic SN 2012fh using difference imaging. We place 1$σ$ upper limits on the detection of the progenitor star at $M_R&gt;-4.0$, $M_V&gt;-3.8$, $M_B&gt;-3.1$, and $M_U&gt;-3.8$ mag. These limits are the tightest placed on a Type Ic SNe and they largely rule out single star evolutionary models in favor of a binary channel as the origin of this SN. We also constrain the activity of the progenitor to be small on an absolute scale, with the RMS $UBVR$ optical variability $&lt;2500L_\odot$ and long-term dimming or brightening trends $&lt;1000L_\odot/\text{year}$ in all four bands.

=== arXiv:1707.02686v3  [2017-07-10]
TITLE  : Mid-infrared variability of changing-look AGN
AUTHORS: Zhenfeng Sheng, Tinggui Wang, Ning Jiang, Chenwei Yang, Lin Yan, Liming Dou, Bo Peng
JOURNAL: The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 846:L7 (7pp), 2017 September 1
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8213/aa85de
ABS    : It is known that some active galactic nuclei (AGNs) transited from type 1 to type 2 or vice versa. There are two explanations for the so-called changing look AGNs: one is the dramatic change of the obscuration along the line-of-sight, the other is the variation of accretion rate. In this paper, we report the detection of large amplitude variations in the mid-infrared luminosity during the transitions in 10 changing look AGNs using WISE and newly released NEOWISE-R data. The mid-infrared light curves of 10 objects echoes the variability in the optical band with a time lag expected for dust reprocessing. The large variability amplitude is inconsistent with the scenario of varying obscuration, rather supports the scheme of dramatic change in the accretion rate.

=== arXiv:1707.02175v3  [2017-07-07]
TITLE  : Exoplanets and SETI
AUTHORS: Jason T. Wright
DOI    : 10.1007/978-3-319-55333-7_186
ABS    : The discovery of exoplanets has both focused and expanded the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. The consideration of Earth as an exoplanet, the knowledge of the orbital parameters of individual exoplanets, and our new understanding of the prevalence of exoplanets throughout the galaxy have all altered the search strategies of communication SETI efforts, by inspiring new "Schelling points" (i.e. optimal search strategies for beacons). Future efforts to characterize individual planets photometrically and spectroscopically, with imaging and via transit, will also allow for searches for a variety of technosignatures on their surfaces, in their atmospheres, and in orbit around them. In the near-term, searches for new planetary systems might even turn up free-floating megastructures.

=== arXiv:1706.08977v1  [2017-06-27]
TITLE  : A Millimeter Continuum Size-Luminosity Relationship for Protoplanetary Disks
AUTHORS: Anjali Tripathi, Sean M. Andrews, Tilman Birnstiel, David J. Wilner
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/aa7c62
ABS    : We present a sub-arcsecond resolution survey of the 340 GHz dust continuum emission from 50 nearby protoplanetary disks, based on new and archival observations with the Submillimeter Array. The observed visibility data were modeled with a simple prescription for the radial surface brightness profile. The results were used to extract intuitive, empirical estimates of the emission "size" for each disk, $R_{\rm eff}$, defined as the radius that encircles a fixed fraction of the total continuum luminosity, $L_{\rm mm}$. We find a significant correlation between the sizes and luminosities, such that $R_{\rm eff} \propto L_{\rm mm}^{0.5}$, providing a confirmation and quantitative characterization of a putative trend that was noted previously. This correlation suggests that these disks have roughly the same average surface brightness interior to their given effective radius, ~0.2 Jy arcsec$^{-2}$ (or 8 K in brightness temperature). The same trend remains, but the 0.2dex of dispersion perpendicular to this relation essentially disappears, when we account for the irradiation environment of each disk with a crude approximation of the dust temperatures based on the stellar host luminosities. We consider two (not mutually exclusive) explanations for the origin of this size-luminosity relationship. Simple models of the growth and migration of disk solids can account for the observed trend for a reasonable range of initial conditions, but only on timescales that are much shorter than the nominal ages present in the sample. An alternative scenario invokes optically thick emission concentrated on unresolved scales, with filling factors of a few tens of percent, that are perhaps manifestations of localized particle traps.

=== arXiv:1706.01218v1  [2017-06-05]
TITLE  : SONS: The JCMT legacy survey of debris discs in the submillimetre
AUTHORS: Wayne S. Holland, Brenda C. Matthews, Grant M. Kennedy, Jane S. Greaves, Mark C. Wyatt, Mark Booth, Pierre Bastien, Geoff Bryden
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stx1378
ABS    : Debris discs are evidence of the ongoing destructive collisions between planetesimals, and their presence around stars also suggests that planets exist in these systems. In this paper, we present submillimetre images of the thermal emission from debris discs that formed the SCUBA-2 Observations of Nearby Stars (SONS) survey, one of seven legacy surveys undertaken on the James Clerk Maxwell telescope between 2012 and 2015. The overall results of the survey are presented in the form of 850 microns (and 450 microns, where possible) images and fluxes for the observed fields. Excess thermal emission, over that expected from the stellar photosphere, is detected around 49 stars out of the 100 observed fields. The discs are characterised in terms of their flux density, size (radial distribution of the dust) and derived dust properties from their spectral energy distributions. The results show discs over a range of sizes, typically 1-10 times the diameter of the Edgeworth-Kuiper Belt in our Solar System. The mass of a disc, for particles up to a few millimetres in size, is uniquely obtainable with submillimetre observations and this quantity is presented as a function of the host stars' age, showing a tentative decline in mass with age. Having doubled the number of imaged discs at submillimetre wavelengths from ground-based, single dish telescope observations, one of the key legacy products from the SONS survey is to provide a comprehensive target list to observe at high angular resolution using submillimetre/millimetre interferometers (e.g., ALMA, SMA).

=== arXiv:1705.10361v2  [2017-05-29]
TITLE  : Primordial Black-Hole and Macroscopic Dark-Matter Constraints with LISA
AUTHORS: Florian Kuhnel, Glenn D. Starkman, Katherine Freese, Andrew Matas
ABS    : The detectability of gravitational waves originating from primordial black holes or other large macroscopic dark-matter candidates inspiraling into Sagittarius ${\rm A}^{\!*}$ is investigated. It is shown that LISA should be a formidable machine to detect the stochastic signal from the accumulated collection of such objects that have been gravitationally captured by Sgr$\,{\rm A}^{\!*}$, provided they have masses above $\sim 10^{-20}\,M_{\odot}$. This is especially so, if they are the main component of the dark matter, and the dark-matter density at Sagittarius ${\rm A}^{\!*}$ exceeds its value in the solar-neighborhood. Notably, the window of mass that is unconstrained by various gravitational lensing arguments and observations, $2 \times 10^{20}\,{\rm g} \leq m_{\rm DM} \leq 4 \times 10^{24}\,{\rm g}$, will be accessible. Forecasts are derived for the event rates and signal strengths as a function of dark-matter mass, assuming that the dark-matter candidates are not tidally disrupted during the inspiral. This is certainly the case for primordial black holes, and it shown that it is also very likely the case for candidate objects of nuclear density.

=== arXiv:1705.10346v1  [2017-05-29]
TITLE  : Periodic Eclipses of the Young Star PDS 110 Discovered with WASP and KELT Photometry
AUTHORS: H. P. Osborn, J. E. Rodriguez, M. A. Kenworthy, G. M. Kennedy, E. E. Mamajek, C. E. Robinson, C. C. Espaillat, D. J. Armstrong
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stx1249
ABS    : We report the discovery of eclipses by circumstellar disc material associated with the young star PDS 110 in the Ori OB1a association using the SuperWASP and KELT surveys. PDS 110 (HD 290380, IRAS 05209-0107) is a rare Fe/Ge-type star, a ~10 Myr-old accreting intermediate-mass star showing strong infrared excess (L$_{\rm IR}$/L$_{\rm bol}$ ~ 0.25). Two extremely similar eclipses with a depth of ~30\% and duration ~25 days were observed in November 2008 and January 2011. We interpret the eclipses as caused by the same structure with an orbital period of $808\pm2$ days. Shearing over a single orbit rules out diffuse dust clumps as the cause, favouring the hypothesis of a companion at ~2AU. The characteristics of the eclipses are consistent with transits by an unseen low-mass (1.8-70M$_{Jup}$) planet or brown dwarf with a circum-secondary disc of diameter ~0.3 AU. The next eclipse event is predicted to take place in September 2017 and could be monitored by amateur and professional observatories across the world.

=== arXiv:1705.08427v3  [2017-05-23]
TITLE  : KIC 8462852: Will the Trojans return in 2021?
AUTHORS: Fernando J. Ballesteros, Pablo Arnalte-Mur, Alberto Fernandez-Soto, Vicent J. Martinez
DOI    : 10.1093/mnrasl/slx105
ABS    : KIC 8462852 stood out among more than 100,000 stars in the Kepler catalogue because of the strange features of its light curve: a wide, asymmetric dimming taking up to 15 per cent of the light at D793 and a period of multiple, narrow dimmings happening approximately 700 days later. Several models have been proposed to account for this abnormal behaviour, most of which require either unlikely causes or a finely-tuned timing. We aim at offering a relatively natural solution, invoking only phenomena that have been previously observed, although perhaps in larger or more massive versions. We model the system using a large, ringed body whose transit produces the first dimming and a swarm of Trojan objects sharing its orbit that causes the second period of multiple dimmings. The resulting orbital period is $T\approx12$ years, with a semi-major axis $a\approx6$ au. Our model allows us to make two straightforward predictions: we expect the passage of a new swarm of Trojans in front of the star starting during the early months of 2021, and a new transit of the main object during the first half of 2023.

=== arXiv:1705.08377v2  [2017-05-23]
TITLE  : Can Dips of Boyajian's Star be Explained by Circumsolar Rings?
AUTHORS: J. I. Katz
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stx1876
ABS    : Could the dips of "Boyajian's Star" (KIC 8462852) have been caused by matter in our Solar System? The interval between periods of deep dips is nearly twice the orbital period of the Kepler satellite. I consider heliocentric obscuring rings in the outer Solar System that graze the line of sight to the star once per orbit of Kepler. The hypothesis predicts that future dips may be observed from Earth during windows separated by a year, although their detailed structure depends on the distribution of particles along the ring. Dips observed at terrestrial sites separated by &gt; 1000 km in a direction perpendicular to the Earth's orbital motion may be uncorrelated.

=== arXiv:1705.06182v1  [2017-05-17]
TITLE  : Exploring the In-Medium Momentum Dependence of the Dynamical Quark Mass
AUTHORS: Mateusz Cierniak, Thomas Klähn
ABS    : We review the two standard equations of states based on the Nambu-Jona-Lasinio (NJL) model and the thermodynamic bag (tdBag) model for dense, cold quark matter from a perspective based on the Dyson-Schwinger (DS) formalism. A different, but technically not more complicated approximation reproduces the model of Munczek and Nemirovsky (MN) which accounts in a simplified way for chiral symmetry breaking and confinement as a dynamic process rooted in the momentum dependence of QCD model gap solutions. We review the mass gap solutions for the MN model in the chiral limit and sketch the behavior of mass gap solutions for finite bare quark masses at finite chemical potential.

=== arXiv:1705.04142v3  [2017-05-11]
TITLE  : Are the Dyson rings around pulsars detectable?
AUTHORS: Z. Osmanov
DOI    : 10.1017/S1473550417000155
ABS    : In the previous paper (Osmanov 2016) (henceforth Paper-I) we have extended the idea of Freeman Dyson and have shown that a supercivilization has to use ring-like megastructures around pulsars instead of a spherical shell. In this work we reexamine the same problem in the observational context and we show that facilities of modern IR telescopes (VLTI and WISE) might efficiently monitor the nearby zone of the solar system and search for the IR Dyson-rings up to distances of the order of $0.2$kpc, corresponding to the current highest achievable angular resolution, $0.001$mas. In this case the total number of pulsars in the observationally reachable area is about $64\pm 21$. We show that pulsars from the distance of the order of $\sim 1$kpc are still visible for WISE as point-like sources but in order to confirm that the object is the neutron star, one has to use the UV telescopes, which at this moment cannot provide enough sensitivity.

=== arXiv:1704.00070v3  [2017-03-31]
TITLE  : An explanation of the missing flux from Boyajian's mysterious star
AUTHORS: Peter Foukal
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8213/aa740f
ABS    : A previously unremarked star in the constellation Cygnus has,in the past year,become known as the most mysterious star in our Galaxy.Boyajian's star exhibits puzzling episodes of sporadic deep dimming discovered in photometry with the Kepler Mission. Proposed explanations have focused on its obscuration by colliding exoplanets, exocomets, and even intervention of alien intelligence. These hypotheses have considered only phenomena external to the star because the radiative flux missing in the dimmings was believed to exceed the star's storage capacity.We point out that modeling variations in solar luminosity indicates that convective stars can store the required fluxes. It also suggests explanations for a reported time profile asymmetry of the short,deep dimmings and for a slower,decadal scale dimming reported from archival and Kepler photometry. Our findings favor a broader range of explanations of Boyajian's star, that may produce new insights into stellar magnetoconvection.

=== arXiv:1703.07799v1  [2017-03-22]
TITLE  : The Physical Nature of Subdwarf A Stars: White Dwarf Impostors
AUTHORS: Warren R. Brown, Mukremin Kilic, A. Gianninas
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/aa67e4
ABS    : We address the physical nature of subdwarf A-type (sdA) stars and their possible link to extremely low mass (ELM) white dwarfs (WDs). The two classes of objects are confused in low-resolution spectroscopy. However, colors and proper motions indicate that sdA stars are cooler and more luminous, and thus larger in radius, than published ELM WDs. We demonstrate that surface gravities derived from pure hydrogen models suffer a systematic ~1 dex error for sdA stars, likely explained by metal line blanketing below 9000 K. A detailed study of five eclipsing binaries with radial velocity orbital solutions and infrared excess establishes that these sdA stars are metal-poor ~1.2 Msun main sequence stars with ~0.8 Msun companions. While WDs must exist at sdA temperatures, only ~1% of a magnitude-limited sdA sample should be ELM WDs. We conclude that the majority of sdA stars are metal-poor A-F type stars in the halo, and that recently discovered pulsating ELM WD-like stars with no obvious radial velocity variations may be SX Phe variables, not pulsating WDs.

=== arXiv:1703.05762v2  [2017-03-16]
TITLE  : Searching for Exoplanets Around X-Ray Binaries with Accreting White Dwarfs, Neutron Stars, and Black Holes
AUTHORS: Nia Imara, Rosanne Di Stefano
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/aab903
ABS    : We recommend that the search for exoplanets around binary stars be extended to include X-ray binaries in which the accretor is a white dwarf, neutron star, or black hole. We present a novel idea for detecting planets bound to such mass transfer binaries: we propose that the X-ray light curves of these binaries be inspected for signatures of transiting planets. X-ray transits may be the only way to detect planets around some systems, while providing a complementary approach to optical and/or radio observations in others. Any planets associated with X-ray binaries must be in stable orbits. We consider the range of allowable separations and find that orbital periods can be hours or longer, while transit durations extend upward from about a minute for Earth-radius planets in very close orbits, to hours for Jupiter-radius planets in wider orbits. The search for planets around mass transfer binaries could begin at once with existing X-ray observations of these systems. If and when a planet is detected around an X-ray binary, the size and mass of the planet may be readily measured, and it may also be possible to study the transmission and absorption of X-rays through its atmosphere. Finally, a noteworthy application of our proposal is that the same technique could be used to search for signals from extraterrestrial intelligence. If an advanced exocivilization placed a Dyson sphere or similar structure in orbit around the accretor of an X-ray binary in order to capture energy, such an artificial structure might cause detectable transits in the X-ray light curve.

=== arXiv:1703.04544v2  [2017-03-13]
TITLE  : WISE J080822.18-644357.3 - a 45 Myr-old accreting M dwarf hosting a primordial disc
AUTHORS: Simon J. Murphy, Eric E. Mamajek, Cameron P. M. Bell
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/sty471
ABS    : WISE J080822.18$-$644357.3 was recently identified as a new M dwarf debris disc system and a candidate member of the 45 Myr-old Carina association. Given that the strength of its infrared excess ($L_{\rm IR}/L_{\rm \star}\simeq 0.1$) appears to be more consistent with a young protoplanetary disc, we present the first optical spectra of the star and reassess its evolutionary and membership status. We find WISE J0808-6443 to be a Li-rich M5 star with strong H$α$ emission ($-125 &lt; \textrm{EW} &lt; -65$ Å over 4 epochs) whose strength and broad width are consistent with accretion at a low level ($\sim$10$^{-10}$ $M_{\odot}$ yr$^{-1}$) from its disc. The spectral energy distribution of the star is consistent with a primordial disc and is well-fit using a two-temperature blackbody model with $T_{\rm inner}\simeq$ 1100 K and $T_{\rm outer}\simeq$ 240 K. AllWISE multi-epoch photometry shows the system exhibits significant variability in the 3.4 $μ$m and 4.6 $μ$m bands. We calculate an improved proper motion based on archival astrometry, and combined with a new radial velocity, the kinematics of the star are consistent with membership in Carina at a kinematic distance of $90\pm9$ pc. The spectroscopic and photometric data are consistent with WISE J0808-6443 being a $\sim$0.1 $M_{\odot}$ Classical T-Tauri star and one of the oldest known accreting M-type stars. These results provide further evidence that the upper limit on the lifetimes of gas-rich discs - and hence the timescales to form and evolve protoplanetary systems - around the lowest mass stars may be longer than previously recognised, or some mechanism may be responsible for regenerating short-lived discs at later stages of pre-main sequence evolution.

=== arXiv:1703.02522v3  [2017-03-07]
TITLE  : Identification of Young Stellar Variables with KELT for K2 I: Campaign 13 Taurus Dippers and Rotators
AUTHORS: Joseph E. Rodriguez, Megan Ansdell, Ryan J. Oelkers, Phillip A. Cargile, Eric Gaidos, Ann Marie Cody, Daniel J. Stevens, Garrett Somers
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/aa8c78
ABS    : One of the most well-studied young stellar associations, Taurus-Auriga, will be observed by the extended Kepler mission, K2, in the spring of 2017. K2 Campaign 13 (C13) will be a unique opportunity to study many stars in this young association at high photometric precision and cadence. Using observations from the Kilodegree Extremely Little Telescope (KELT) survey, we identify "dippers", stochastic variables, and periodic variables among K2 C13 target stars. This release of the KELT data (lightcurve data in e-tables) provides the community with long-time baseline observations to assist in the understanding of the more exotic variables in the association. Transient-like phenomena on timescales of months to years are known characteristics in the light curves of young stellar objects, making contextual pre- and post-K2 observations critical to understanding their underlying processes. We are providing a comprehensive set of the KELT light curves for known Taurus-Auriga stars in K2 C13. The combined data sets from K2 and KELT should permit a broad array of investigations related to star formation, stellar variability, and protoplanetary environments.

=== arXiv:1703.01930v1  [2017-03-06]
TITLE  : The SCUBA-2 Ambitious Sky Survey: a catalogue of beam-sized sources in the Galactic longitude range 120 to 140
AUTHORS: Will Nettke, Douglas Scott, Andy Gibb, Mark Thompson, Antonio Chrysostomou, A. Evans, Tracey Hill, Tim Jenness
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stx339
ABS    : The SCUBA-2 Ambitious Sky Survey (SASSy) is composed of shallow 850-$\umu$m imaging using the Sub-millimetre Common-User Bolometer Array 2 (SCUBA-2) on the James Clerk Maxwell Telescope. Here we describe the extraction of a catalogue of beam-sized sources from a roughly $120\,{\rm deg}^2$ region of the Galactic plane mapped uniformly (to an rms level of about 40\,mJy), covering longitude 120\degr\,$&lt;$\,\textit{l}\,$&lt;$\,140\degr\ and latitude $\abs{\textit{b}}$\,$&lt;$\,2.9\degr. We used a matched-filtering approach to increase the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio in these noisy maps and tested the efficiency of our extraction procedure through estimates of the false discovery rate, as well as by adding artificial sources to the real images. The primary catalogue contains a total of 189 sources at 850\,$\umu$m, down to a S/N threshold of approximately 4.6. Additionally, we list 136 sources detected down to ${\rm S/N}=4.3$, but recognise that as we go lower in S/N, the reliability of the catalogue rapidly diminishes. We perform follow-up observations of some of our lower significance sources through small targeted SCUBA-2 images, and list 265 sources detected in these maps down to ${\rm S/N}=5$. This illustrates the real power of SASSy: inspecting the shallow maps for regions of 850-$\umu$m emission and then using deeper targeted images to efficiently find fainter sources. We also perform a comparison of the SASSy sources with the Planck Catalogue of Compact Sources and the \textit{IRAS} Point Source Catalogue, to determine which sources discovered in this field might be new, and hence potentially cold regions at an early stage of star formation.

=== arXiv:1703.00015v1  [2017-02-28]
TITLE  : A stellar census of the nearby, young 32 Orionis group
AUTHORS: Cameron P. M. Bell, Simon J. Murphy, Eric E. Mamajek
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stx535
ABS    : The 32 Orionis group was discovered almost a decade ago and despite the fact that it represents the first northern, young (age ~ 25 Myr) stellar aggregate within 100 pc of the Sun ($d \simeq 93$ pc), a comprehensive survey for members and detailed characterisation of the group has yet to be performed. We present the first large-scale spectroscopic survey for new (predominantly M-type) members of the group after combining kinematic and photometric data to select candidates with Galactic space motion and positions in colour-magnitude space consistent with membership. We identify 30 new members, increasing the number of known 32 Ori group members by a factor of three and bringing the total number of identified members to 46, spanning spectral types B5 to L1. We also identify the lithium depletion boundary (LDB) of the group, i.e. the luminosity at which lithium remains unburnt in a coeval population. We estimate the age of the 32 Ori group independently using both isochronal fitting and LDB analyses and find it is essentially coeval with the β Pictoris moving group, with an age of $24\pm4$ Myr. Finally, we have also searched for circumstellar disc hosts utilising the AllWISE catalogue. Although we find no evidence for warm, dusty discs, we identify several stars with excess emission in the WISE W4-band at 22 μm. Based on the limited number of W4 detections we estimate a debris disc fraction of $32^{+12}_{-8}$ per cent for the 32 Ori group.

=== arXiv:1702.07682v2  [2017-02-24]
TITLE  : Polluting White Dwarfs with Perturbed Exo-Comets
AUTHORS: Ilaria Caiazzo, Jeremy S. Heyl
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stx1036
ABS    : We present a model to account for the observed debris disks around young white dwarfs and the presence of metal-lines in their spectra. Stellar evolution models predict that the mass-loss on the AGB will be pulsed; furthermore, observations indicate that the bulk of the mass-loss occurs on the AGB. In this case, if the progenitors of the white dwarfs had remnants of planetary formation like the Sun's Oort cloud or the Kuiper Belt and a planet lying within that cloud or nearby, we find that up to 2% of the planetesimals will fall either into planet-crossing orbits or into chaotic regions after the mass-loss, depending on the location and mass of the planet (from Mars to Neptune). This yields a sufficient mass of comets that can be scattered toward the star, form a debris disk and pollute the atmosphere.

=== arXiv:1702.06542v1  [2017-02-21]
TITLE  : Trace hydrogen in helium atmosphere white dwarfs as a possible signature of water accretion
AUTHORS: Nicola Pietro Gentile Fusillo, Boris T. Gänsicke, Jay Farihi, Detlev Koester, Matthias R. Schreiber, Anna F. Pala
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stx468
ABS    : A handful of white dwarfs with helium-dominated atmospheres contain exceptionally large masses of hydrogen in their convection zones, with the metal-polluted white dwarf GD 16 being one of the earliest recognised examples. We report the discovery of a similar star: the white dwarf coincidentally named GD 17. We obtained medium-resolution spectroscopy of both GD 16 and GD 17 and calculated abundances and accretion rates of photospheric H, Mg, Ca, Ti, Fe and Ni. The metal abundance ratios indicate that the two stars recently accreted debris which is Mg-poor compared to the composition of bulk Earth. However, unlike the metal pollutants, H never diffuses out of the atmosphere of white dwarfs and we propose that the exceptionally high atmospheric H content of GD 16 and GD 17 ($2.2\times 10^{24}$g and $2.9\times 10^{24}$g respectively) could result from previous accretion of water bearing planetesimals. Comparing the detection of trace H and metal pollution among 729 helium atmosphere white dwarfs, we find that the presence of H is nearly twice as common in metal-polluted white dwarfs compared to their metal-free counterparts. This highly significant correlation indicates that, over the cooling age of the white dwarfs, at least some fraction of the H detected in many He atmospheres (including GD 16 and GD 17) is accreted alongside metal pollutants, where the most plausible source is water. In this scenario, water must be common in systems with rocky planetesimals.

=== arXiv:1702.05483v2  [2017-02-17]
TITLE  : Once in a blue moon: detection of 'bluing' during debris transits in the white dwarf WD1145+017
AUTHORS: N. Hallakoun, S. Xu, D. Maoz, T. R. Marsh, V. D. Ivanov, V. S. Dhillon, M. C. P. Bours, S. G. Parsons
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stx924
ABS    : The first transiting planetesimal orbiting a white dwarf was recently detected in K2 data of WD1145+017 and has been followed up intensively. The multiple, long, and variable transits suggest the transiting objects are dust clouds, probably produced by a disintegrating asteroid. In addition, the system contains circumstellar gas, evident by broad absorption lines, mostly in the u'-band, and a dust disc, indicated by an infrared excess. Here we present the first detection of a change in colour of WD1145+017 during transits, using simultaneous multi-band fast-photometry ULTRACAM measurements over the u'g'r'i'-bands. The observations reveal what appears to be 'bluing' during transits; transits are deeper in the redder bands, with a u'-r' colour difference of up to ~-0.05 mag. We explore various possible explanations for the bluing. 'Spectral' photometry obtained by integrating over bandpasses in the spectroscopic data in- and out-of-transit, compared to the photometric data, shows that the observed colour difference is most likely the result of reduced circumstellar absorption in the spectrum during transits. This indicates that the transiting objects and the gas share the same line-of-sight, and that the gas covers the white dwarf only partially, as would be expected if the gas, the transiting debris, and the dust emitting the infrared excess, are part of the same general disc structure (although possibly at different radii). In addition, we present the results of a week-long monitoring campaign of the system.

=== arXiv:1702.05123v1  [2017-02-16]
TITLE  : Infrared observations of white dwarfs and the implications for the accretion of dusty planetary material
AUTHORS: Amy Bonsor, Jay Farihi, Mark C. Wyatt, Rik van Lieshout
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stx425
ABS    : Infrared excesses around metal polluted white dwarfs have been associated with the accretion of dusty, planetary material. This work analyses the available infrared data for an unbiased sample of white dwarfs and demonstrates that no more than 3.3% can have a wide, flat, opaque dust disc, extending to the Roche radius, with a temperature at the disc inner edge of $T_{in} = 1,400$K, the standard model for the observed excesses. This is in stark contrast to the incidence of pollution of about 30%. We present four potential reasons for the absence of an infrared excess in polluted white dwarfs, depending on their stellar properties and inferred accretion rates: i) their dust discs are opaque, but narrow, thus evading detection if more than 85% of polluted white dwarfs have dust discs narrower than $δr&lt; 0.04r$, ii) their dust discs have been fully consumed, which only works for the oldest white dwarfs with sinking timescales longer than hundreds of years, iii) their dust is optically thin, which can supply low accretion rates of $&lt;10^7 $gs$^{-1}$ if dominated by PR-drag, and higher accretion rates, if inwards transport of material is enhanced, for example due to the presence of gas, iv) their accretion is supplied by a pure gas disc, which could result from the sublimation of optically thin dust for T* &gt; 20, 000K. Future observations sensitive to faint infrared excesses or the presence of gas, can test the scenarios presented here, thereby better constraining the nature of the material fuelling accretion in polluted white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:1701.05439v1  [2017-01-19]
TITLE  : Nonspherical armoured bubble vibration
AUTHORS: G Prabhudesai, I Bihi, F Zoueshtiagh, J Jose, M Baudoin
DOI    : 10.1039/b000000x
ABS    : In this paper, we study the dynamics of cylindrical armoured bubbles excited by mechanical vibrations. A step by step transition from cylindrical to spherical shape is reported as the intensity of the vibration is increased, leading to a reduction of the bubble surface and a dissemination of the excess particles. We demonstrate through energy balance that nonspherical armoured bubbles constitute a metastable state. The vibration instills the activation energy necessary for the bubble to return to its least energetic stable state: a spherical armoured bubble. At this point, particle desorption can only be achieved through higher amplitude of excitation required to overcome capillary retention forces. Nonspherical armoured bubbles open perspectives for tailored localized particle dissemination with limited excitation power.

=== arXiv:1612.07332v2  [2016-12-21]
TITLE  : Secular Dimming of KIC 8462852 Following its Consumption of a Planet
AUTHORS: Brian D. Metzger, Ken J. Shen, Nicholas C. Stone
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stx823
ABS    : The Kepler-field star KIC 8462852, an otherwise apparently ordinary F3 main-sequence star, showed several highly unusual dimming events of variable depth and duration. Adding to the mystery was the discovery that KIC 8462852 faded by 14% from 1890 to 1989, as well as by another 3% over the 4 year Kepler mission. Following an initial suggestion by Wright &amp; Sigurdsson, we propose that the secular dimming behavior is the result of the inspiral of a planetary body or bodies into KIC 8462852, which took place ~10 to 1e4 years ago (depending on the planet mass). Gravitational energy released as the body inspirals into the outer layers of the star caused a temporary and unobserved brightening, from which the stellar flux is now returning to the quiescent state. The transient dimming events could then be due to obscuration by planetary debris from an earlier partial disruption of the same inspiraling bodies, or due to evaporation and out-gassing from a tidally detached moon system. Alternatively, the dimming events could arise from a large number of bodies comet- or planetesimal-mass bodies placed onto high eccentricity orbits by the same mechanism (e.g. Lidov-Kozai oscillations due to the outer M-dwarf companion) responsible for driving the more massive planets into KIC 8462852. The required high occurrence rate of KIC 8462852-like systems which have undergone recent major planet inspiral event(s) is the greatest challenge to the model, placing large lower limits on the mass of planetary systems surrounding F stars and/or requiring an unlikely probability to catch KIC 8462852 in its current state.

=== arXiv:1612.03907v1  [2016-12-12]
TITLE  : A Transient Transit Signature Associated with the Young Star RIK-210
AUTHORS: Trevor J. David, Erik A. Petigura, Lynne A. Hillenbrand, Ann Marie Cody, Andrew Collier Cameron, John R. Stauffer, B. J. Fulton, Howard T. Isaacson
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/835/2/168
ABS    : We find transient, transit-like dimming events within the K2 time series photometry of the young star RIK-210 in the Upper Scorpius OB association. These dimming events are variable in depth, duration, and morphology. High spatial resolution imaging revealed the star is single, and radial velocity monitoring indicated that the dimming events can not be due to an eclipsing stellar or brown dwarf companion. Archival and follow-up photometry suggest the dimming events are transient in nature. The variable morphology of the dimming events suggests they are not due to a single, spherical body. The ingress of each dimming event is always shallower than egress, as one would expect for an orbiting body with a leading tail. The dimming events are periodic and synchronous with the stellar rotation. However, we argue it is unlikely the dimming events could be attributed to anything on the stellar surface based on the observed depths and durations. Variable obscuration by a protoplanetary disk is unlikely on the basis that the star is not actively accreting and lacks the infrared excess associated with an inner disk. Rather, we explore the possibilities that the dimming events are due to magnetospheric clouds, a transiting protoplanet surrounded by circumplanetary dust and debris, eccentric orbiting bodies undergoing periodic tidal disruption, or an extended field of dust or debris near the corotation radius.

=== arXiv:1612.03170v3  [2016-12-11]
TITLE  : Security of a single-state semi-quantum key distribution protocol
AUTHORS: Wei Zhang, Daowen Qiu, Paulo Mateus
ABS    : Semi-quantum key distribution protocols are allowed to set up a secure secret key between two users. Compared with their full quantum counterparts, one of the two users is restricted to perform some "classical" or "semi-quantum" operations, which makes them easily realizable by using less quantum resource. However, the semi-quantum key distribution protocols mainly rely on a two-way quantum channel. The eavesdropper has two opportunities to intercept the quantum states transmitted in the quantum communication stage. It may allow the eavesdropper to get more information and make the security analysis more complicated. In the past ten years, many semi-quantum key distribution protocols have been proposed and proved to be robust. But there are few works concerned about their unconditional security. It is doubted that how secure the semi-quantum ones are and how much noise can they tolerate to establish a secure secret key. In this paper, we prove the unconditional security of a single-state semi-quantum key distribution protocol proposed by $Zou$ et al. in [Phys. Rev. A. 79]. We present a complete proof from information theory aspect by deriving a lower bound of the protocol's key rate in the asymptotic scenario. Using this bound, we figure out an error threshold value such that all error rates are less than this threshold value, the secure secret key can be established between the legitimate users definitely. Otherwise, the users should abort the protocol. we make an illustration of the protocol under the circumstance of the reverse quantum channel is a depolarizing one with parameter $q$. Additionally, we compare the error threshold value with some full quantum protocols and several existing semi-quantum ones whose unconditional security proofs have been provided recently.

=== arXiv:1612.00333v3  [2016-12-01]
TITLE  : Discovery of a low-mass companion inside the debris ring surrounding the F5V star HD206893
AUTHORS: Julien Milli, Pascale Hibon, Valentin Christiaens, Elodie Choquet, Mickael Bonnefoy, Grant M. Kennedy, Mark C. Wyatt, Olivier Absil
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 597, L2 (2017)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201629908
ABS    : Uncovering the ingredients and the architecture of planetary systems is a very active field of research that has fuelled many new theories on giant planet formation, migration, composition, and interaction with the circumstellar environment. We aim at discovering and studying new such systems, to further expand our knowledge of how low-mass companions form and evolve. We obtained high-contrast H-band images of the circumstellar environment of the F5V star HD206893, known to host a debris disc never detected in scattered light. These observations are part of the SPHERE High Angular Resolution Debris Disc Survey (SHARDDS) using the InfraRed Dual-band Imager and Spectrograph (IRDIS) installed on VLT/SPHERE. We report the detection of a source with a contrast of 3.6x10^{-5} in the H-band, orbiting at a projected separation of 270 milliarcsecond or 10 au, corresponding to a mass in the range 24 to 73 Mjup for an age of the system in the range 0.2 to 2 Gyr. The detection was confirmed ten months later with VLT/NaCo, ruling out a background object with no proper motion. A faint extended emission compatible with the disc scattered light signal is also observed. The detection of a low-mass companion inside a massive debris disc makes this system an analog of other young planetary systems such as beta Pictoris, HR8799 or HD95086 and requires now further characterisation of both components to understand their interactions.

=== arXiv:1611.09858v1  [2016-11-29]
TITLE  : The Complete Infrared View of Active Galactic Nuclei from the 70-month Swift/BAT Catalog
AUTHORS: Kohei Ichikawa, Claudio Ricci, Yoshihiro Ueda, Kenta Matsuoka, Yoshiki Toba, Taiki Kawamuro, Benny Trakhtenbrot, Michael J. Koss
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/835/1/74
ABS    : We systematically investigate the near- (NIR) to far-infrared (FIR) photometric properties of a nearly complete sample of local active galactic nuclei (AGN) detected in the Swift/Burst Alert Telescope (BAT) all-sky ultra hard X-ray (14-195 keV) survey. Out of 606 non-blazar AGN in the Swift/BAT 70-month catalog at high galactic latitude of $|b|&gt;10^{\circ}$, we obtain IR photometric data of 604 objects by cross-matching the AGN positions with catalogs from the WISE, AKARI, IRAS, and Herschel infrared observatories. We find a good correlation between the ultra-hard X-ray and mid-IR (MIR) luminosities over five orders of magnitude ($41 &lt; \log (L_{14-195}/{\rm erg}~{\rm s}^{-1})&lt; 46$). Informed by previous measures of the intrinsic spectral energy distribution of AGN, we find FIR pure-AGN candidates whose FIR emission is thought to be AGN-dominated with low starformation activity. We demonstrate that the dust covering factor decreases with the bolometric AGN luminosity, confirming the luminosity-dependent unified scheme. We also show that the completeness of the WISE color-color cut in selecting Swift/BAT AGN increases strongly with 14-195 keV luminosity.

=== arXiv:1611.08368v1  [2016-11-25]
TITLE  : A physically inspired model of Dip d792 and d1519 of the Kepler light curve seen at KIC8462852
AUTHORS: Eduard Heindl
ABS    : The star KIC 8462852 shows a very unusual and hard to comprehend light curve. The dip d7922 absorbs 16% of the starlight. The light curve is unusually smooth but the very steep edges make it hard to find a simple natural explanation by covering due to comets or other well-known planetary objects. We describe a mathematical approximation to the light curve, which is motivated by a physically meaningful event of a large stellar beam which generates an orbiting cloud. The data might fit to the science fiction idea of star lifting, a mining technology that could extract star matter. We extend the model to d1519 and d1568 using multiple beams and get an encouraging result that fits essential parts of the dips but misses other parts of the measured flux. We recommend further exploration of this concept with refined models.

=== arXiv:1611.08130v1  [2016-11-24]
TITLE  : Influence of broken flavor and C and P symmetry on the quark propagator
AUTHORS: Axel Maas, Walid Ahmed Mian
DOI    : 10.1140/epja/i2017-12211-0
ABS    : Embedding QCD into the standard model breaks various symmetries of QCD explicitly, especially C and P. While these effects are usually perturbatively small, they can be amplified in extreme environments like merging neutron stars or by the interplay with new physics. To correctly treat these cases requires fully backcoupled calculations. To pave the way for later investigations of hadronic physics, we study the QCD quark propagator coupled to an explicit breaking. This substantially increases the tensor structure even for this simplest correlation function. To cope with the symmetry structure, and covering all possible quark masses, from the top quark mass to the chiral limit, we employ Dyson-Schwinger equations. While at weak breaking the qualitative effects have similar trends as in perturbation theory, even moderately strong breakings lead to qualitatively different effects, non-linearly amplified by the strong interactions.

=== arXiv:1611.07416v1  [2016-11-22]
TITLE  : A WISE-based search for debris discs amongst M-dwarfs in nearby, young, moving groups
AUTHORS: Alex S. Binks, Robin D. Jeffries
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stx838
ABS    : We present a search for debris discs amongst M-dwarf members of nearby, young (5-150 Myr) moving groups (MGs) using infrared (IR) photometry, primarily from the Wide Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE). A catalogue of 100 MG M-dwarfs that have suitable WISE data is compiled and 19 of these are found to have significant IR excess emission at 22$μ$m. Our search is likely to be complete for discs where the ratio of flux from the disc to flux from the star $f_{\rm d}/f_{*} &gt; 10^{-3}$. The spectral energy distributions are supplemented with 2MASS photometry and data at longer wavelengths and fitted with simple disc models to characterise the IR excesses. There is a bimodal distribution -- twelve targets have $W1-W4 &gt; 3$, corresponding to $f_{\rm d}/f_{*} &gt; 0.02$ and are likely to be gas-rich, primordial discs. The remaining seven targets have $W1-W4 &lt; 1$ ($f_{\rm d}/f_{*} \lesssim 10^{-3}$) and include three objects with previously known or suspected debris discs and four new debris disc candidates that are all members of the Beta Pic MG. All of the IR excesses are identified in stars that are likely members of MGs with age $&lt; 30$ Myr. The detected debris disc frequency falls from 13 to 5 per cent to $&lt; 7$ per cent (at 95 per cent confidence) for objects younger or older than 30 Myr respectively. This provides evidence for the evolution of debris discs on this timescale and does not support models where the maximum of debris disc emission occurs much later in lower-mass stars.

=== arXiv:1611.04622v1  [2016-11-14]
TITLE  : Clumpy dust clouds and extended atmosphere of the AGB star W Hya revealed with VLT/SPHERE-ZIMPOL and VLTI/AMBER II. Time variations between pre-maximum and minimum light
AUTHORS: Keiichi Ohnaka, Gerd Weigelt, Karl-Heinz Hofmann
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 597, A20 (2017)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201629761
ABS    : Our recent visible polarimetric images of the well-studied AGB star W Hya taken at pre-maximum light (phase 0.92) with VLT/SPHERE-ZIMPOL have revealed clumpy dust clouds close to the star at ~2 Rstar. We present second-epoch SPHERE-ZIMPOL observations of W Hya at minimum light (phase 0.54) in the continuum (645, 748, and 820 nm), in the Halpha line (656.3 nm), and in the TiO band (717 nm) as well as high-spectral resolution long-baseline interferometric observations in 2.3 micron CO lines with the AMBER instrument at the Very Large Telescope Interferometer (VLTI). The high-spatial resolution polarimetric images have allowed us to detect clear time variations in the clumpy dust clouds as close as 34--50~mas (1.4--2.0 Rstar) to the star. We detected the formation of a new dust cloud and the disappearance of one of the dust clouds detected at the first epoch. The Halpha and TiO emission extends to ~150 mas (~6 Rstar), and the Halpha images reveal time variations. The degree of linear polarization is higher at minimum light (13--18%) than that at pre-maximum light. The power-law-type limb-darkened disk fit to the AMBER data in the continuum results in a limb-darkened disk diameter of 49.1+/-1.5 mas and a limb-darkening parameter of 1.16+/-0.49, indicating that the atmosphere is more extended with weaker limb-darkening compared to pre-maximum light. Our Monte Carlo radiative transfer modeling suggests the predominance of small (0.1 micron) grains of Al2O3, Mg2SiO4, and MgSiO3 at minimum light, in marked contrast to the predominance of large (0.5 micron) grains at pre-maximum light. The variability phase dependence of the grain size implies that small grains might just have started to form at minimum light in the wake of a shock, while the pre-maximum light phase might have corresponded to the phase of efficient grain growth.

=== arXiv:1611.03762v2  [2016-11-11]
TITLE  : Bright Metal-Poor Stars from the Hamburg/ESO Survey. II. A Chemodynamical Analysis
AUTHORS: Timothy C. Beers, Vinicius M. Placco, Daniela Carollo, Silvia Rossi, Young Sun Lee, Anna Frebel, John E. Norris, Sarah Dietz
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/835/1/81
ABS    : We obtain estimates of stellar atmospheric parameters for a previously published sample of 1777 relatively bright (9 &lt; B &lt; 14) metal-poor candidates from the Hamburg/ESO Survey. The original Frebel et al. analysis of these stars was only able to derive estimates of [Fe/H] and [C/Fe] for a subset of the sample, due to limitations in the methodology then available. A new spectroscopic analysis pipeline has been used to obtain estimates of Teff, log g, [Fe/H], and [C/Fe] for almost the entire dataset. This sample is very local - about 90% of the stars are located within 0.5 kpc of the Sun. We consider the chemodynamical properties of these stars in concert with a similarly local sample of stars from a recent analysis of the Bidelman &amp; MacConnell 'weak-metal' candidates by Beers et al. We use this combined sample to identify possible members of the suggested halo stream of stars by Helmi et al. and Chiba &amp; Beers, as well as stars that may be associated with stripped debris from the putative parent dwarf of the globular cluster Omega Centauri, suggested to exist by previous authors. We identify a clear increase in the cumulative frequency of carbon-enhanced metal-poor (CEMP) stars with declining metallicity, as well as an increase in the fraction of CEMP stars with distance from the Galactic plane, consistent with previous results. We also identify a relatively large number of CEMP stars with kinematics consistent with the metal-weak thick-disk population, with possible implications for its origin.

=== arXiv:1611.01371v1  [2016-11-04]
TITLE  : TYC 8241 2652 1 and the case of the disappearing disk: no smoking gun yet
AUTHORS: Hans Moritz Günther, Stefan Kraus, Carl Melis, Michel Curé, Tim Harries, Michael Ireland, Samer Kanaan, Katja Poppenhaeger
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 598, A82 (2017)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201629008
ABS    : TYC 8241 2652 1 is a young star that showed a strong mid-infrared (mid-IR, 8-25 mu) excess in all observations before 2008 consistent with a dusty disk. Between 2008 and 2010 the mid-IR luminosity of this system dropped dramatically by at least a factor of 30 suggesting a loss of dust mass of an order of magnitude or more. We aim to constrain possible models including removal of disk material by stellar activity processes, the presence of a binary companion, or other explanations suggested in the literature. We present new X-ray observations, optical spectroscopy, near-IR interferometry, and mid-IR photometry of this system to constrain its parameters and further explore the cause of the dust mass loss. In X-rays TYC 8241 2652 1 has all properties expected from a young star: Its luminosity is in the saturation regime and the abundance pattern shows enhancement of O/Fe. The photospheric Ha line is filled with a weak emission feature, indicating chromospheric activity consistent with the observed level of coronal emission. Interferometry does not detect a companion and sets upper limits on the companion mass of 0.2, 0.35, 0.1 and 0.05 M_sun at projected physical separations of 0.1-4 AU,4-5 AU, 5-10 AU, and 10-30 AU, respectively (assuming a distance of 120.9 pc). Our mid-IR measurements, the first of the system since 2012, are consistent with the depleted dust level seen after 2009. The new data confirms that stellar activity is unlikely to destroy the dust in the disk and shows that scenarios where either TYC 8241 2652 1 heats the disk of a binary companion or a potential companion heats the disk of TYC 8241 2652 1 are unlikely.

=== arXiv:1610.08303v2  [2016-10-26]
TITLE  : Violent environment of the inner disk of RW Aur A probed by the 2010 and 2015 dimming events
AUTHORS: S. Facchini, C. F. Manara, P. C. Schneider, C. J. Clarke, J. Bouvier, G. Rosotti, R. Booth, T. J. Haworth
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 596, A38 (2016)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201629607
ABS    : RW Aur is a young binary system showing strong signatures of a recent tidal encounter between the circumprimary disk and the secondary star. The primary star has recently undergone two major dimming events ($Δ$mag $\approx$ 2 in V-band), whose origin is still under debate. To shed light on the mechanism leading to the dimming events, we study the extinction properties, accretion variability, and gas kinematics using absorption lines from the material obscuring star RW Aur A. We compare our moderate resolution X-Shooter spectra of the dim state of RW Aur A with other spectral observations. In particular, we analyse archival high resolution UVES spectra obtained during the bright state of the system, in order to track the evolution of the spectral properties across the second dimming event. The spectrum obtained during the dim state shows narrow absorption lines in the Na and K optical doublets, where the former is saturated. With a velocity of -60 km/s these lines indicate that during the dim state the disk wind is either enhanced, or significantly displaced into the line of sight. The photometric evolution across the dimming event shows a gray extinction, and is correlated with a significant reduction of the EW of all photospheric lines. Emission lines tracing accretion do not vary significantly across the dimming. We conclude that the dimming event is related to a major perturbation on the inner disk. We suggest that the inner disk is occulting (most of) the star, and thus its photosphere, but is not occulting the accretion regions within a few stellar radii. Since observations of the outer disk indicate that the disk is modestly inclined (45 - 60 deg), we propose that the inner disk might be warped by a yet unseen (sub-)stellar companion, which may also explain the 2.77 day periodic variability of the spectral lines.

=== arXiv:1610.08016v1  [2016-10-25]
TITLE  : Does a Differentiated, Carbonate-Rich, Rocky Object Pollute the White Dwarf SDSSJ104341.53+085558.2?
AUTHORS: Carl Melis, P. Dufour
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/834/1/1
ABS    : We present spectroscopic observations of the dust- and gas-enshrouded, polluted, single white dwarf star SDSSJ104341.53+085558.2 (hereafter SDSSJ1043+0855). Hubble Space Telescope Cosmic Origins Spectrograph far-ultraviolet spectra combined with deep Keck HIRES optical spectroscopy reveal the elements C, O, Mg, Al, Si, P, S, Ca, Fe, and Ni and enable useful limits for Sc, Ti, V, Cr, and Mn in the photosphere of SDSSJ1043+0855. From this suite of elements we determine that the parent body being accreted by SDSSJ1043+0855 is similar to the silicate Moon or the outer layers of Earth in that it is rocky and iron-poor. Combining this with comparison to other heavily polluted white dwarf stars, we are able to identify the material being accreted by SDSSJ1043+0855 as likely to have come from the outermost layers of a differentiated object. Furthermore, we present evidence that some polluted white dwarfs (including SDSSJ1043+0855) allow us to examine the structure of differentiated extrasolar rocky bodies. Enhanced levels of carbon in the body polluting SDSSJ1043+0855 relative to the Earth-Moon system can be explained with a model where a significant amount of the accreted rocky minerals took the form of carbonates; specifically, through this model the accreted material could be up to 9% calcium-carbonate by mass.

=== arXiv:1610.03219v1  [2016-10-11]
TITLE  : The High Rate of the Boyajian's Star Anomaly as a Phenomenon
AUTHORS: Brian C. Lacki
ABS    : Boyajian's Star (KIC 8462852) undergoes mysterious, irregular eclipses that aren't yet explained. It also appears to have dimmed over a time of several years, possibly decades. I show that Kepler's detection of a phenomenon with a duration of t_anom is only expected if it occurs at a mean rate of &gt;~ 30 Gyr^(-1) (t_anom / 100 yr)^(-1) for each Kepler target and K2 star. If true, the phenomenon occurs hundreds of times during the lifespan of its host stars. Obscuration by the interstellar medium remains a plausible explanation, since it doesn't actually affect the host star. An intervening cloud is consistent with the lack of an observed submillimeter excess but would be abnormally dilute.

=== arXiv:1610.02936v1  [2016-10-10]
TITLE  : Quark Propagator with electroweak interactions in the Dyson-Schwinger approach
AUTHORS: Walid Ahmed Mian, Axel Maas
DOI    : 10.1051/epjconf/201713705015
ABS    : Motivated by the non-negligible dynamical backcoupling of the electroweak interactions with the strong interaction during neutron star mergers, we study the effects of the explicit breaking of C, P and flavor symmetry on the strong sector. The quark propagator is the simplest object which encodes the consequences of these breakings. To asses the impact, we study the influence of especially parity violation on the propagator for various masses. For this purpose the functional methods in form of Dyson-Schwinger-Equations are employed. We find that explicit isospin breaking leads to a qualitative change of behavior even for a slight explicit breaking, which is in contrast to the expectations from perturbation theory. Our results thus suggest that non-perturbative backcoupling effects could be larger than expected.

=== arXiv:1611.06096v1  [2016-10-10]
TITLE  : Long-Term Prospects: Mitigation of Supernova and Gamma-Ray Burst Threat to Intelligent Beings
AUTHORS: Milan M. Cirkovic, Branislav Vukotic
DOI    : 10.1016/j.actaastro.2016.10.005
ABS    : We consider global catastrophic risks due to cosmic explosions (supernovae, magnetars and gamma-ray bursts) and possible mitigation strategies by humans and other hypothetical intelligent beings. While by their very nature these events are so huge to daunt conventional thinking on mitigation and response, we wish to argue that advanced technological civilizations would be able to develop efficient responses in the domain of astroengineering within their home planetary systems. In particular, we suggest that construction of shielding swarms of small objects/particles confined by electromagnetic fields could be one way of mitigating the risk of cosmic explosions and corresponding ionizing radiation surges. Such feats of astroengineering could, in principle, be detectable from afar by advanced Dysonian SETI searches.

=== arXiv:1609.09290v3  [2016-09-29]
TITLE  : Sonneberg plate photometry for Boyajian's Star in two passbands
AUTHORS: Michael Hippke, Peter Kroll, Frank Matthei, Daniel Angerhausen, Taavi Tuvikene, Keivan G. Stassun, Elena Roshchina, Tatyana Vasileva
JOURNAL: 2016 ApJ 837 85
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/aa615d
ABS    : The F3 main sequence star KIC 8462852 (Boyajian's Star) showed deep (up to 20%) day-long brightness dips of unknown cause during the 4 years of the Kepler mission. A 0.164 mag (16%) dimming between 1890 and 1990 was claimed, based on the analysis of photographic plates from the Harvard Observatory. We have gathered an independent set of historic plates from Sonneberg Observatory, Germany, covering the years 1934-1995. With 861 magnitudes in B, and 397 magnitudes in V, we find the star to be of constant brightness within 0.03 mag per century (3%). Consistent outcomes are found using by-eye estimates of the best 119 plates. Results are supported by data from Sternberg Observatory, Moscow, which show the star as constant between 1895 and 1995. The previously claimed century-long dimming is inconsistent with our results at the 5-sigma level, however the recently reported modest dimming of 3% in the Kepler data is not inconsistent with our data. We find no periodicities or shorter trends within our limits of 5% per 5-year bin, but note a possible dimming event on 24 Oct 1978.

=== arXiv:1609.05667v1  [2016-09-19]
TITLE  : The disappearing act: A dusty wind eclipsing RW Aur
AUTHORS: I. Bozhinova, A. Scholz, G. Costigan, O. Lux, C. J. Davis, T. Ray, N. F. Boardman, K. L. Hay
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stw2327
ABS    : RW Aur is a young binary star that experienced a deep dimming in 2010-11 in component A and a second even deeper dimming from summer 2014 to summer 2016. We present new unresolved multi-band photometry during the 2014-16 eclipse, new emission line spectroscopy before and during the dimming, archive infrared photometry between 2014-15, as well as an overview of literature data. Spectral observations were carried out with the Fibre-fed RObotic Dual-beam Optical Spectrograph on the Liverpool Telescope. Photometric monitoring was done with the Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network and James Gregory Telescope. Our photometry shows that RW Aur dropped in brightness to R = 12.5 in March 2016. In addition to the long-term dimming trend, RW Aur is variable on time scales as short as hours. The short-term variation is most likely due to an unstable accretion flow. This, combined with the presence of accretion-related emission lines in the spectra suggest that accretion flows in the binary system are at least partially visible during the eclipse. The equivalent width of [O I] increases by a factor of ten in 2014, coinciding with the dimming event, confirming previous reports. The blue-shifted part of the $Hα$ profile is suppressed during the eclipse. In combination with the increase in mid-infrared brightness during the eclipse reported in the literature and seen in WISE archival data, and constraints on the geometry of the disk around RW Aur A we arrive at the conclusion that the obscuring screen is part of a wind emanating from the inner disk.

=== arXiv:1609.05492v1  [2016-09-18]
TITLE  : A first view with GAIA on KIC 8462852 - distance estimates and a comparison to other F stars
AUTHORS: Michael Hippke, Daniel Angerhausen
ABS    : Distance estimates from Gaia parallax and expected luminosities are compared for KIC 8462852. Gaia DR1 yields a parallax of $2.55\pm0.31$mas, that is a distance of $391.4\substack{+53.6 \\ -42.0}$pc, or $391.4\substack{+122.1 \\ -75.2}$pc including systematic uncertainty. The distance estimate based on the absolute magnitude of an F3V star and measured reddening is $\sim454\pm35$pc. Both estimates agree within $&lt;1σ$, which only excludes some of the most extreme theorized scenarios for KIC 8462852. Future Gaia data releases will determine the distance to within 1% and thus allow for the determination a precise absolute luminosity.

=== arXiv:1609.04032v3  [2016-09-13]
TITLE  : Photometric and astrometric vagaries of the enigma star KIC 8462852
AUTHORS: Valeri V Makarov, Alexey Goldin
JOURNAL: 2016ApJ...833...78M
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/833/1/78
ABS    : We apply a PCA-based pre-whitening method to the entire collection of main Kepler mission long-cadence data for KIC 8462852 spanning four years. This technique removes the correlated variations of instrumental origin in both the detected light curves and astrometry, resolving intrinsic changes in flux and image position of less than 100 ppm and 1 mas, respectively. Beside the major dips in the light curve during mission quarters 8 and 16, when the flux dropped by up to 20%, we confirm multiple smaller dips across the time span of observation with amplitudes ranging from 0.1% to 7%. A variation of flux with a period of 0.88 d and a half-amplitude of approximately 90 ppm is confirmed in the PCA-cleaned data. We find that the phase of the wave is steady over the entire 15-month interval. We confidently detect a weak variability-induced motion (VIM) effect in the cleaned astrometric trajectories, when the moment-based centroids shift synchronously with the flux dips by up to 0.0008 pixels on the detector. The inconsistent magnitude and direction of VIM effects within the same quarter point at more than one source of photometric variability in the blended image. The 0.88 d periodicity comes from a different source, not from the target star KIC 8462852. We discuss a possible interpretation of the bizarre properties of the source as a swarm of interstellar junk (comets and planetoids) crossing the line of sight to the star and its optical companions at approximately 7 mas per year.

=== arXiv:1609.03505v2  [2016-09-12]
TITLE  : Families of Plausible Solutions to the Puzzle of Boyajian's Star
AUTHORS: Jason T. Wright, Steinn Sigurdsson
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8205/829/1/L3
ABS    : Good explanations for the unusual light curve of Boyajian's Star have been hard to find. Recent results by Montet &amp; Simon lend strength and plausibility to the conclusion of Schaefer that in addition to short-term dimmings, the star also experiences large, secular decreases in brightness on decadal timescales. This, combined with a lack of long-wavelength excess in the star's spectral energy distribution, strongly constrains scenarios involving circumstellar material, including hypotheses invoking a spherical cloud of artifacts. We show that the timings of the deepest dimmings appear consistent with being randomly distributed, and that the star's reddening and narrow sodium absorption is consistent with the total, long-term dimming observed. Following Montet &amp; Simon's encouragement to generate alternative hypotheses, we attempt to circumscribe the space of possible explanations with a range of plausibilities, including: a cloud in the outer solar system, structure in the ISM, natural and artificial material orbiting Boyajian's Star, an intervening object with a large disk, and variations in Boyajian's Star itself. We find the ISM and intervening disk models more plausible than the other natural models.

=== arXiv:1609.02859v1  [2016-09-09]
TITLE  : Spectral energy distribution simulations of a possible ring structure around the young, red brown dwarf G196-3B
AUTHORS: Olga V. Zakhozhay, María Rosa Zapatero Osorio, Víctor J. S. Béjar, Yann Boehler
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stw2308
ABS    : The origin of the very red optical and infrared colours of intermediate-age ($\sim$10 - 500 Myr) L-type dwarfs remains unknown. It has been suggested that low-gravity atmospheres containing large amounts of dust may account for the observed reddish nature. We explored an alternative scenario by simulating protoplanetary and debris discs around G196-3B, which is an L3 young brown dwarf with a mass of $\sim 15$ $M_{\rm Jup}$ and an age in the interval 20 - 300 Myr. The best-fit solution to G196-3B's photometric spectral energy distribution from optical wavelengths through 24 $μ$m corresponds to the combination of an unreddened L3 atmosphere ($T_{\rm eff} \approx 1870$~K) and a warm ($\approx$ 1280 K), narrow ($\approx$ 0.07 - 0.11 R$_{\odot}$) debris disc located at very close distances ($\approx$ 0.12 - 0.20 R$_{\odot}$) from the central brown dwarf. This putative, optically thick, dusty belt, whose presence is compatible with the relatively young system age, would have a mass $\ge 7\times 10^{-10}$ M$_{\oplus}$ comprised of sub-micron/micron characteristic dusty particles with temperatures close to the sublimation threshold of silicates. Considering the derived global properties of the belt and the disc-to-brown dwarf mass ratio, the dusty ring around G196-3B may resemble the rings of Neptune and Jupiter, except for its high temperature and thick vertical height ($\approx 6 \times 10^3$ km). Our inferred debris disc model is able to reproduce G196-3B's spectral energy distribution to a satisfactory level of achievement.

=== arXiv:1609.02563v1  [2016-09-08]
TITLE  : Mass and eccentricity constraints on the planetary debris orbiting the white dwarf WD 1145+017
AUTHORS: Pol Gurri, Dimitri Veras, Boris T. Gänsicke
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stw2293
ABS    : Being the first of its kind, the white dwarf WD 1145+017 exhibits a complex system of disintegrating debris which offers a unique opportunity to study its disruption process in real time. Even with plenty of transit observations there are no clear constraints on the masses or eccentricities of such debris. Using $N$-body simulations we show that masses greater than approximately $10^{20}$ kg (a tenth of the mass of Ceres) or orbits that are not nearly circular ($\mathrm{eccentricity}&gt;10^{-3}$) dramatically increase the chances of the system becoming unstable within two years, which would contrast with the observational data over this timespan. We also provide a direct comparison between transit phase shifts detected in the observations and by our numerical simulations.

=== arXiv:1609.01734v2  [2016-09-06]
TITLE  : Linking long-term planetary $N$-body simulations with periodic orbits: application to white dwarf pollution
AUTHORS: Kyriaki I. Antoniadou, Dimitri Veras
JOURNAL: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 463, Issue 4, p.4108-4120 (2016)
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stw2264
ABS    : Mounting discoveries of debris discs orbiting newly-formed stars and white dwarfs (WDs) showcase the importance of modeling the long-term evolution of small bodies in exosystems. WD debris discs are in particular thought to form from very long-term (0.1-5.0 Gyr) instability between planets and asteroids. However, the time-consuming nature of $N$-body integrators which accurately simulate motion over Gyrs necessitates a judicious choice of initial conditions. The analytical tools known as \textit{periodic orbits} can circumvent the guesswork. Here, we begin a comprehensive analysis directly linking periodic orbits with $N$-body integration outcomes with an extensive exploration of the planar circular restricted three-body problem (CRTBP) with an outer planet and inner asteroid near or inside of the $2$:$1$ mean motion resonance. We run nearly 1000 focused simulations for the entire age of the Universe (14 Gyr) with initial conditions mapped to the phase space locations surrounding the unstable and stable periodic orbits for that commensurability. In none of our simulations did the planar CRTBP architecture yield a long-timescale ($\gtrsim 0.25$% of the age of the Universe) asteroid-star collision. The pericentre distance of asteroids which survived beyond this timescale ($\approx 35$ Myr) varied by at most about 60%. These results help affirm that collisions occur too quickly to explain WD pollution in the planar CRTBP $2$:$1$ regime, and highlight the need for further periodic orbit studies with the eccentric and inclined TBP architectures and other significant orbital period commensurabilities.

=== arXiv:1608.08993v1  [2016-08-31]
TITLE  : Transmission spectroscopy of the inflated exoplanet WASP-52b, and evidence for a bright region on the stellar surface
AUTHORS: J. Kirk, P. J. Wheatley, T. Louden, S. P. Littlefair, C. M. Copperwheat, D. J. Armstrong, T. R. Marsh, V. S. Dhillon
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stw2205
ABS    : We have measured the transmission spectrum of the extremely inflated hot Jupiter WASP-52b using simultaneous photometric observations in SDSS u', g' and a filter centred on the sodium doublet (NaI) with the ULTRACAM instrument mounted on the 4.2m William Herschel Telescope. We find that Rayleigh scattering is not the dominant source of opacity within the planetary atmosphere and find a transmission spectrum more consistent with wavelength-independent opacity such as from clouds. We detect an in-transit anomaly that we attribute to the presence of stellar activity and find that this feature can be more simply modelled as a bright region on the stellar surface akin to Solar faculae rather than spots. A spot model requires a significantly larger planet/star radius ratio than that found in previous studies. Our results highlight the precision that can be achieved by ground-based photometry with errors in the scaled planetary radii of less than one atmospheric scale height, comparable to HST observations.

=== arXiv:1608.04384v1  [2016-08-15]
TITLE  : A subtle IR excess associated with a young White Dwarf in the Edinburgh-Cape Blue Object Survey
AUTHORS: E. Dennihy, John H. Debes, B. H. Dunlap, P. Dufour, Johanna K. Teske, J. C. Clemens
DOI    : 10.3847/0004-637X/831/1/31
ABS    : We report the discovery of a subtle infrared excess associated with the young white dwarf EC\,05365--4749 at 3.35 and 4.6\,$μ$m. Follow-up spectroscopic observations are consistent with a hydrogen atmosphere white dwarf of effective temperature 22\,800\,K and log [\emph{g} (\,cm\,s$^{-2}$) ] = 8.19. High resolution spectroscopy reveals atmospheric metal pollution with logarithmic abundances of [Mg/H] = --5.36 and [Ca/H] = --5.75, confirming the white dwarf is actively accreting from a metal-rich source with an intriguing abundance pattern. We find that the infrared excess is well modeled by a flat, opaque debris disk, though disk parameters are not well constrained by the small number of infrared excess points. We further demonstrate that relaxing the assumption of a circular dusty debris disk to include elliptical disks expands the widths of acceptable disks, adding an alternative interpretation to the subtle infrared excesses commonly observed around young white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:1608.01316v2  [2016-08-03]
TITLE  : KIC 8462852 Faded Throughout the Kepler Mission
AUTHORS: Benjamin T. Montet, Joshua D. Simon
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8205/830/2/L39
ABS    : KIC 8462852 is a superficially ordinary main sequence F star for which Kepler detected an unusual series of brief dimming events. We obtain accurate relative photometry of KIC 8462852 from the Kepler full frame images, finding that the brightness of KIC 8462852 monotonically decreased over the four years it was observed by Kepler. Over the first ~1000 days, KIC 8462852 faded approximately linearly at a rate of 0.341 +/- 0.041%/yr, for a total decline of 0.9%. KIC 8462852 then dimmed much more rapidly in the next ~200 days, with its flux dropping by more than 2%. For the final ~200 days of Kepler photometry the magnitude remained approximately constant, although the data are also consistent with the decline rate measured for the first 2.7 yr. Of a sample of 193 nearby comparison stars and 355 stars with similar stellar parameters, none exhibit the rapid decline by 2% or the cumulative fading by 3% of KIC 8462852. Moreover, of these comparison stars, only one changes brightness as quickly as the 0.341%/yr measured for KIC 8462852 during the first three years of the Kepler mission. We examine whether the rapid decline could be caused by a cloud of transiting circumstellar material, finding while such a cloud could evade detection in sub-mm observations, the transit ingress and duration cannot be explained by a simple cloud model. Moreover, this model cannot account for the observed longer-term dimming. No known or proposed stellar phenomena can fully explain all aspects of the observed light curve.

=== arXiv:1607.07455v1  [2016-07-25]
TITLE  : DM Ori: A Young Star Occulted by a Disturbance in its Protoplanetary Disk
AUTHORS: Joseph E. Rodriguez, Keivan G. Stassun, Phillip Cargile, Benjamin J. Shappee, Robert J. Siverd, Joshua Pepper, Michael B. Lund, Christopher S. Kochanek
DOI    : 10.3847/0004-637X/831/1/74
ABS    : In some planet formation theories, protoplanets grow gravitationally within a young star's protoplanetary disk, a signature of which may be a localized disturbance in the disk's radial and/or vertical structure. Using time-series photometric observations by the Kilodegree Extremely Little Telescope South (KELT-South) project and the All-Sky Automated Survey for SuperNovae (ASAS-SN), combined with archival observations, we present the discovery of two extended dimming events of the young star, DM Ori. This young system faded by $\sim$1.5 mag from 2000 March to 2002 August and then again in 2013 January until 2014 September (depth $\sim$1.7 mag). We constrain the duration of the 2000-2002 dimming to be $&lt;$ 860 days, and the event in 2013-2014 to be $&lt;$ 585 days, separated by $\sim$12.5 years. A model of the spectral energy distribution (SED) indicates a large infrared excess consistent with an extensive circumstellar disk. Using basic kinematic arguments, we propose that DM Ori is likely being periodically occulted by a feature (possibly a warp or perturbation) in its circumstellar disk. In this scenario, the occulting feature is located $&gt;$6 AU from the host star, moving at $\sim$14.6 km/s, and is $\sim$4.9 AU in width. This localized structure may indicate a disturbance such as may be caused by a protoplanet early in its formation.

=== arXiv:1607.06810v1  [2016-07-22]
TITLE  : Another one grinds the dust: Variability of the planetary debris disc at the white dwarf SDSS J104341.53+085558.2
AUTHORS: Christopher J. Manser, Boris T. Gaensicke, Detlev Koester, Thomas R. Marsh, John Southworth
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stw1760
ABS    : We report nine years of optical spectroscopy of the metal-polluted white dwarf SDSS J104341.53+085558.2, which presents morphological variations of the line profiles of the 8600 Å Ca II triplet emission from the gaseous component of its debris disc. Similar changes in the shape of the Ca II triplet have also been observed in two other systems that host a gaseous disc, and are likely related to the same mechanism. We report the Mg, Si, and Ca abundances of the debris detected in the photosphere of SDSS J1043+0855, place upper limits on O and Fe, and derive an accretion rate of (2.5 - 12)x$10^8$ g/s, consistent with those found in other systems with detected debris discs. The Mg/Si ratio and the upper limit on the Fe/Si ratio of the accreted material broadly agree with those found for the crust of the Earth. We also review the range of variability observed among white dwarfs with planetary debris discs.

=== arXiv:1607.03754v1  [2016-07-09]
TITLE  : Herschel Observations of Dusty Debris Disks
AUTHORS: Laura Vican, Adam Schneider, Geoff Bryden, Carl Melis, B. Zuckerman, Joseph Rhee, Inseok Song
DOI    : 10.3847/1538-4357/833/2/263
ABS    : We present results from two Herschel observing programs using the Photodetector Array Camera and Spectrometer. During three separate campaigns, we obtained Herschel data for 24 stars at 70, 100, and 160 microns. We chose stars that were already known or suspected to have circumstellar dust based on excess infrared emission previously measured with IRAS or Spitzer, and used Herschel to examine long-wavelength properties of the dust. Fifteen stars were found to be uncontaminated by background sources, and possess infrared emission most likely due to a circumstellar debris disk. We analyzed the properties of these debris disks to better understand the physical mechanisms responsible for dust production and removal. Seven targets were spatially resolved in the Herschel images. Based on fits to their spectral energy distributions, nine disks appear to have two temperature components. Of these nine, in three cases, the warmer dust component is likely the result of a transient process rather than a steady state collisional cascade. The dust belts at four stars are likely stirred by an unseen planet, and merit further investigation.

=== arXiv:1606.05187v1  [2016-06-16]
TITLE  : Origin and evolution of two-component debris discs and an application to the q$^1$ Eridani system
AUTHORS: Christian Schüppler, Alexander V. Krivov, Torsten Löhne, Mark Booth, Florian Kirchschlager, Sebastian Wolf
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stw1456
ABS    : Many debris discs reveal a two-component structure, with an outer Kuiper-belt analogue and a warm inner component whose origin is still a matter of debate. One possibility is that warm emission stems from an "asteroid belt" closer in to the star. We consider a scenario in which a set of giant planets is formed in an initially extended planetesimal disc. These planets carve a broad gap around their orbits, splitting up the disc into the outer and the inner belts. After the gas dispersal, both belts undergo collisional evolution in a steady-state regime. This scenario is explored with detailed collisional simulations involving realistic physics to describe a long-term collisional depletion of the two-component disc. We find that the inner disc may be able to retain larger amounts of material at older ages than thought before on the basis of simplified analytic models. We show that the proposed scenario is consistent with a suite of thermal emission and scattered light observational data for a bright two-temperature debris disc around a nearby solar-type star q$^1$ Eridani. This implies a Solar System-like architecture of the system, with an outer massive "Kuiper belt", an inner "asteroid belt", and a few Neptune- to Jupiter-mass planets in between.

=== arXiv:1605.09022v1  [2016-05-29]
TITLE  : Phonon singularities on volt-ampere curves of niobium point contacts
AUTHORS: I. K. Yanson, N. L. Bobrov, L. F. Rybal'chenko, V. V. Fisun
JOURNAL: Solid State Communications, Vol 50, No 6, 515, (1984)
DOI    : 10.1016/0038-1098(84)90319-3
ABS    : The volt-ampere curves and their second derivatives were studied for niobium point contacts at low temperatures in the voltage range corresponding to the characteristic phonon energies. It was found that while for the dirty contacts in the normal state no PC spectra of phonons could be detected, in the superconducting state there were singularities in the I-V curves corresponding to maxima either in the first or in the second derivatives. The singularities observed were due to the energy dependence of the excess current. We suppose that the origin of these singularities is due to the inelastic transitions of electrons between chemical potentials of Cooper pairs at both sides of the contact, which differ in energy by $eV$. These transitions are possible if $ξ\left(0 \right)\gtrsim d \sim{Λ_{\varepsilon}}$ ($ξ(0)$ being the coherence length, $d$, the contact diameter, ${Λ_{\varepsilon}}={{({{l}_{i}}\cdot {{l}_{\varepsilon}})}^{1/2}}$, where ${{l}_{i}}$ and ${{l}_{\varepsilon}}$ being the elastic and inelastic electron mean free paths, respectively).

=== arXiv:1605.05837v1  [2016-05-19]
TITLE  : Incidence of debris discs around FGK stars in the solar neighbourhood
AUTHORS: B. Montesinos, C. Eiroa, A. V. Krivov, J. P. Marshall, G. L. Pilbratt, R. Liseau, A. Mora, J. Maldonado
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 593, A51 (2016)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201628329
ABS    : Debris discs are a consequence of the planet formation process and constitute the fingerprints of planetesimal systems. Their solar system's counterparts are the asteroid and Edgeworth-Kuiper belts. The aim of this paper is to provide robust numbers for the incidence of debris discs around FGK stars in the solar neighbourhood. The full sample of 177 FGK stars with d&lt;20 pc proposed for the DUNES survey is presented. Herschel/PACS observations at 100 and 160 micron complemented with data at 70 micron, and at 250, 350 and 500 micron SPIRE photometry, were obtained. The 123 objects observed by the DUNES collaboration were presented in a previous paper. The remaining 54 stars, shared with the DEBRIS consortium and observed by them, and the combined full sample are studied in this paper. The incidence of debris discs per spectral type is analysed and put into context together with other parameters of the sample, like metallicity, rotation and activity, and age. The subsample of 105 stars with d&lt;15 pc containing 23 F, 33 G and 49 K stars, is complete for F stars, almost complete for G stars and contains a substantial number of K stars to draw solid conclusions on objects of this spectral type. The incidence rates of debris discs per spectral type 0.26 (6 objects with excesses out of 23 F stars), 0.21 (7 out of 33 G stars) and 0.20 (10 out of 49 K stars), the fraction for all three spectral types together being 0.22 (23 out of 105 stars). Uncertainties corresponding to a 95% confidence level are given in the text for all these numbers. The medians of the upper limits of L_dust/L_* for each spectral type are 7.8E-7 (F), 1.4E-6 (G) and 2.2E-6 (K); the lowest values being around 4.0E-7. The incidence of debris discs is similar for active (young) and inactive (old) stars. The fractional luminosity tends to drop with increasing age, as expected from collisional erosion of the debris belts.

=== arXiv:1605.03990v2  [2016-05-12]
TITLE  : Torsional optomechanics of a levitated nonspherical nanoparticle
AUTHORS: Thai M. Hoang, Yue Ma, Jonghoon Ahn, Jaehoon Bang, F. Robicheaux, Zhang-Qi Yin, Tongcang Li
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 123604 (2016)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.117.123604
ABS    : An optically levitated nanoparticle in vacuum is a paradigm optomechanical system for sensing and studying macroscopic quantum mechanics. While its center-of-mass motion has been investigated intensively, its torsional vibration has only been studied theoretically in limited cases. Here we report the first experimental observation of the torsional vibration of an optically levitated nonspherical nanoparticle in vacuum. We achieve this by utilizing the coupling between the spin angular momentum of photons and the torsional vibration of a nonspherical nanoparticle whose polarizability is a tensor. The torsional vibration frequency can be one order of magnitude higher than its center-of-mass motion frequency, which is promising for ground state cooling. We propose a simple yet novel scheme to achieve ground state cooling of its torsional vibration with a linearly-polarized Gaussian cavity mode. A levitated nonspherical nanoparticle in vacuum will also be an ultrasensitive nanoscale torsion balance with a torque detection sensitivity on the order of $10^{-29} ~\mathrm{N}\cdot \mathrm{m}/\sqrt{\mathrm{ Hz}}$ under realistic conditions.

=== arXiv:1605.02760v1  [2016-05-09]
TITLE  : The Stability of F-star Brightness on Century Timescales
AUTHORS: Michael B. Lund, Joshua Pepper, Keivan G. Stassun, Michael Hippke, Daniel Angerhausen
ABS    : The century-long photometric record of the DASCH project provides a unique window into the variability of stars normally considered to be photometrically inactive. In this paper, we look for long-term trends in the brightness of F stars, with particular attention to KIC 8462852,an F3 main sequence star that has been identified as significant short-term variability according to Kepler observations. Although a simple search for variability suggests long-term dimming of a number of F stars, we find that such trends are artifacts of the 'Menzel Gap' in the DASCH data. That includes the behavior of KIC 8462852, which we believe is consistent with constant flux over the full duration of observations. We do, however, present a selection of F stars that do have significant photometric trends, even after systematics are taken into account.

=== arXiv:1604.07403v1  [2016-04-25]
TITLE  : The Correlation Between Metallicity and Debris Disk mass
AUTHORS: Andras Gaspar, George H. Rieke, Nicholas Ballering
DOI    : 10.3847/0004-637X/826/2/171
ABS    : We find that the initial dust masses in planetary debris disks are correlated with the metallicities of their central stars. We compiled a large sample of systems, including Spitzer, the Herschel DUNES and DEBRIS surveys, and WISE debris disk candidates. We also merged 33 metallicity catalogs to provide homogeneous [Fe/H] and $σ_{[Fe/H]}$ values. We analyzed this merged sample, including 222 detected disks (74 warm and 148 cold) around a total of 187 systems (some with multiple components) and 440 disks with only upper limits (125 warm and 315 cold), around a total of 360 systems. The disk dust masses at a common early evolutionary point in time were determined using our numerical disk evolutionary code, evolving a unique model for each of the 662 disks backward to an age of 1 Myr. We find that disk-bearing stars seldom have metallicities less than [Fe/H] = -0.2 and that the distribution of warm component masses lacks examples with large mass around stars of low metallicity ([Fe/H] &lt; -0.085). Previous efforts to find a correlation have been largely unsuccessful; the primary improvements supporting our result are: 1.) basing the study on dust masses, not just infrared excess detections; 2.) including upper limits on dust mass in a quantitative way; 3.) accounting for the evolution of debris disk excesses as systems age; 4.) accounting fully for the range of uncertainties in metallicity measurements; and 5.) having a statistically large enough sample.

=== arXiv:1604.07405v2  [2016-04-25]
TITLE  : Simultaneous infrared and optical observations of the transiting debris cloud around WD 1145+017
AUTHORS: G. Zhou, L. Kedziora-Chudczer, J. Bailey, J. P. Marshall, D. D. R. Bayliss, C. Stockade, P. Nelson, T. G. Tan
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stw2286
ABS    : We present multi-wavelength photometric monitoring of WD 1145+017, a white dwarf exhibiting periodic dimming events interpreted to be the transits of orbiting, disintegrating planetesimals. Our observations include the first set of near-infrared light curves for the object, obtained on multiple nights over the span of one month, and recorded multiple transit events with depths varying between ~20 to 50 per cent. Simultaneous near-infrared and optical observations of the deepest and longest duration transit event were obtained on two epochs with the Anglo-Australian Telescope and three optical facilities, over the wavelength range of 0.5 to 1.2 microns. These observations revealed no measurable difference in transit depths for multiple photometric pass bands, allowing us to place a 2 sigma lower limit of 0.8 microns on the grain size in the putative transiting debris cloud. This conclusion is consistent with the spectral energy distribution of the system, which can be fit with an optically thin debris disc with minimum particle sizes of 10 +5/-3 microns.

=== arXiv:1604.05911v1  [2016-04-20]
TITLE  : Hi-GAL, the Herschel infrared Galactic Plane Survey: photometric maps and compact source catalogues. First data release for Inner Milky Way: +68°&gt; l &gt; -70°
AUTHORS: S. Molinari, E. Schisano, D. Elia, M. Pestalozzi, A. Traficante, S. Pezzuto, B. M. Swinyard, A. Noriega-Crespo
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201526380
ABS    : (Abridged) We present the first public release of high-quality data products (DR1) from Hi-GAL, the {\em Herschel} infrared Galactic Plane Survey. Hi-GAL is the keystone of a suite of continuum Galactic Plane surveys from the near-IR to the radio, and covers five wavebands at 70, 160, 250, 350 and 500 micron, encompassing the peak of the spectral energy distribution of cold dust for 8 &lt; T &lt; 50K. This first Hi-GAL data release covers the inner Milky Way in the longitude range 68° &gt; l &gt; -70° in a |b|&lt;1° latitude strip. Photometric maps have been produced with the ROMAGAL pipeline, that optimally capitalizes on the excellent sensitivity and stability of the bolometer arrays of the {\em Herschel} PACS and SPIRE photometric cameras, to deliver images of exquisite quality and dynamical range, absolutely calibrated with {\em Planck} and {\em IRAS}, and recovering extended emission at all wavelengths and all spatial scales. The compact source catalogues have been generated with the CuTEx algorithm, specifically developed to optimize source detection and extraction in the extreme conditions of intense and spatially varying background that are found in the Galactic Plane in the thermal infrared. Hi-GAL DR1 images will be accessible via a dedicated web-based image cutout service. The DR1 Compact Source Catalogues are delivered as single-band photometric lists containing, in addition to source position, peak and integrated flux and source sizes, a variety of parameters useful to assess the quality and reliability of the extracted sources, caveats and hints to help this assessment are provided. Flux completeness limits in all bands are determined from extensive synthetic source experiments and depend on the specific line of sight along the Galactic Plane. Hi-GAL DR1 catalogues contain 123210, 308509, 280685, 160972 and 85460 compact sources in the five bands, respectively.

=== arXiv:1604.05443v1  [2016-04-19]
TITLE  : The Nature of CME-Flare Associated Coronal Dimming
AUTHORS: J. X. Cheng, J. Qiu
DOI    : 10.3847/0004-637X/825/1/37
ABS    : Coronal mass ejections (CMEs) are often accompanied by coronal dimming evident in extreme ultraviolet (EUV) and soft X-ray observations. The locations of dimming are sometimes considered to map footpoints of the erupting flux rope. As the emitting material expands in the corona, the decreased plasma density leads to reduced emission observed in spectral and irradiance measurements. Therefore, signatures of dimming may reflect properties of CMEs in the early phase of its eruption. In this study, we analyze the event of flare, CME, and coronal dimming on December 26, 2011. We use the data from the Atmospheric Imaging Assembly (AIA) on Solar Dynamics Observatories (SDO) for disk observations of the dimming, and analyze images taken by EUVI, COR1, and COR2 onboard the Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatories to obtain the height and velocity of the associated CMEs observed at the limb. We also measure magnetic reconnection rate from flare observations. Dimming occurs in a few locations next to the flare ribbons, and it is observed in multiple EUV passbands. Rapid dimming starts after the onset of fast reconnection and CME acceleration, and its evolution well tracks the CME height and flare reconnection. The spatial distribution of dimming exhibits cores of deep dimming with a rapid growth, and their light curves are approximately linearly scaled with the CME height profile. From the dimming analysis, we infer the process of the CME expansion, and estimate properties of the CME.

=== arXiv:1604.03026v1  [2016-04-11]
TITLE  : A Search for short-period Rocky Planets around WDs with the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph (COS)
AUTHORS: P. H. Sandhaus, J. H. Debes, J. Ely, D. C. Hines, M. Bourque
DOI    : 10.3847/0004-637X/823/1/49
ABS    : The search for transiting habitable exoplanets has broadened to include several types of stars that are smaller than the Sun in an attempt to increase the observed transit depth and hence the atmospheric signal of the planet. Of all spectral types, white dwarfs are the most favorable for this type of investigation. The fraction of white dwarfs that possess close-in rocky planets is unknown, but several large angle stellar surveys have the photometric precision and cadence to discover at least one if they are common. Ultraviolet observations of white dwarfs may allow for detection of molecular oxygen or ozone in the atmosphere of a terrestrial planet. We use archival Hubble Space Telescope data from the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph to search for transiting rocky planets around UV-bright white dwarfs. In the process, we discovered unusual variability in the pulsating white dwarf GD 133, which shows slow sinusoidal variations in the UV. While we detect no planets around our small sample of targets, we do place stringent limits on the possibility of transiting planets, down to sub-lunar radii. We also point out that non-transiting small planets in thermal equilibrium are detectable around hotter white dwarfs through infrared excesses, and identify two candidates.

=== arXiv:1603.08936v1  [2016-03-29]
TITLE  : Stellar Streams and Clouds in the Galactic Halo
AUTHORS: Carl J. Grillmair, Jeffrey L. Carlin
JOURNAL: Astrophysics and Space Science Library, Volume 420. ISBN 978-3-319-19335-9. Springer International Publishing Switzerland, 2016, p. 87
DOI    : 10.1007/978-3-319-19336-6_4
ABS    : Recent years have seen the discovery of an ever growing number of stellar debris streams and clouds. These structures are typically detected as extended and often curvilinear overdensities of metal-poor stars that stand out from the foreground disk population. The streams typically stretch tens of degrees or more across the sky, even encircling the Galaxy, and range in heliocentric distance from 3 to 100 kpc. This chapter summarizes the techniques used for finding such streams and provides tables giving positions, distances, velocities, and metallicities, where available, for all major streams and clouds that have been detected as of January 2015. Sky maps of the streams are also provided. Properties of individual tidal debris structures are discussed.

=== arXiv:1603.07034v1  [2016-03-23]
TITLE  : GRACES observations of young [alpha/Fe]-rich stars
AUTHORS: David Yong, Luca Casagrande, Kim A. Venn, Andre-Nicolas Chene, Jared Keown, Lison Malo, Eder Martioli, Alan Alves-Brito
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stw676
ABS    : We measure chemical abundance ratios and radial velocities in four massive (i.e., young) [alpha/Fe]-rich red giant stars using high-resolution high-S/N spectra from ESPaDOnS fed by Gemini-GRACES. Our differential analysis ensures that our chemical abundances are on the same scale as the Alves-Brito et al. (2010) study of bulge, thin and thick disk red giants. We confirm that the program stars have enhanced [alpha/Fe] ratios and are slightly metal poor. Aside from lithium enrichment in one object, the program stars exhibit no chemical abundance anomalies when compared to giant stars of similar metallicity throughout the Galaxy. This includes the elements Li, O, Si, Ca, Ti, Cr, Ni, Cu, Ba, La, and Eu. Therefore, there are no obvious chemical signatures that can help to reveal the origin of these unusual stars. While our new observations show that only one star (not the Li-rich object) exhibits a radial velocity variation, simulations indicate that we cannot exclude the possibility that all four could be binaries. In addition, we find that two (possibly three) stars show evidence for an infrared excess, indicative of a debris disk. This is consistent with these young [alpha/Fe]-rich stars being evolved blue stragglers, suggesting their apparent young age is a consequence of a merger or mass transfer. We would expect a binary fraction of ~50% or greater for the entire sample of these stars, but the signs of the circumbinary disk may have been lost since these features can have short timescales. Radial velocity monitoring is needed to confirm the blue straggler origin.

=== arXiv:1603.05755v3  [2016-03-18]
TITLE  : Strange quark matter and quark stars with the Dyson-Schwinger quark model
AUTHORS: H. Chen, J. -B Wei, H. -J. Schulze
JOURNAL: Eur. Phys. J. A (2016) 52: 291
DOI    : 10.1140/epja/i2016-16291-x
ABS    : We calculate the equation of state of strange quark matter and the interior structure of strange quark stars in a Dyson-Schwinger quark model within rainbow or Ball-Chiu vertex approximation. We emphasize constraints on the parameter space of the model due to stability conditions of ordinary nuclear matter. Respecting these constraints, we find that the maximum mass of strange quark stars is about 1.9 solar masses, and typical radii are 9 --11 km. We obtain an energy release as large as $3.6 \times 10^{53}\,\text{erg}$ from conversion of neutron stars into strange quark stars.

=== arXiv:1602.06269v2  [2016-02-19]
TITLE  : Infrared spectroscopy of eruptive variable protostars from VVV
AUTHORS: C. Contreras Peña, P. W. Lucas, R. Kurtev, D. Minniti, A. Caratti o Garatti, F. Marocco, M. A. Thompson, D. Froebrich
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stw2802
ABS    : In a companion work (Paper I) we detected a large population of highly variable Young Stellar Objects (YSOs) in the Vista Variables in the Via Lactea (VVV) survey, typically with class I or flat spectrum spectral energy distributions and diverse light curve types. Here we present infrared spectra (0.9--2.5 $μ$m) of 37 of these variables, many of them observed in a bright state. The spectra confirm that 15/18 sources with eruptive light curves have signatures of a high accretion rate, either showing EXor-like emission features ($Δ$v=2 CO, Br$γ$) and/or FUor-like features ($Δ$v=2 CO and H$_{2}$O strongly in absorption). Similar features were seen in some long term periodic YSOs and faders but not in dippers or short-term variables. The sample includes some dusty Mira variables (typically distinguished by smooth Mira-like light curves), 2 cataclysmic variables and a carbon star. In total we have added 19 new objects to the broad class of eruptive variable YSOs with episodic accretion. Eruptive variable YSOs in our sample that were observed at bright states show higher accretion luminosities than the rest of the sample. Most of the eruptive variables differ from the established FUor and EXor subclasses, showing intermediate outburst durations and a mixture of their spectroscopic characteristics. This is in line with a small number of other recent discoveries. Since these previously atypical objects are now the majority amongst embedded members of the class, we propose a new classification for them as MNors. This term (pronounced emnor) follows V1647 Ori, the illuminating star of McNeil's Nebula.

=== arXiv:1602.06267v2  [2016-02-19]
TITLE  : A population of eruptive variable protostars in VVV
AUTHORS: C. Contreras Peña, P. W. Lucas, D. Minniti, R. Kurtev, W. Stimson, C. Navarro Molina, J. Borissova, N. Kumar
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stw2801
ABS    : We present the discovery of 816 high amplitude infrared variable stars ($ΔK_{\rm s} &gt;$ 1 mag) in 119 deg$^2$ of the Galactic midplane covered by the Vista Variables in the Via Lactea (VVV) survey. Almost all are new discoveries and about 50$\%$ are YSOs. This provides further evidence that YSOs are the commonest high amplitude infrared variable stars in the Galactic plane. In the 2010-2014 time series of likely YSOs we find that the amplitude of variability increases towards younger evolutionary classes (class I and flat-spectrum sources) except on short timescales ($&lt;$25 days) where this trend is reversed. Dividing the likely YSOs by light curve morphology, we find 106 with eruptive light curves, 45 dippers, 39 faders, 24 eclipsing binaries, 65 long-term periodic variables (P$&gt;$100 days) and 162 short-term variables. Eruptive YSOs and faders tend to have the highest amplitudes and eruptive systems have the reddest SEDs. Follow up spectroscopy in a companion paper verifies high accretion rates in the eruptive systems. Variable extinction is disfavoured by the 2 epochs of colour data. These discoveries increase the number of eruptive variable YSOs by a factor of at least 5, most being at earlier stages of evolution than the known FUor and EXor types. We find that eruptive variability is at least an order of magnitude more common in class I YSOs than class II YSOs. Typical outburst durations are 1 to 4 years, between those of EXors and FUors. They occur in 3 to 6\% of class I YSOs over a 4 year time span.

=== arXiv:1602.05000v1  [2016-02-16]
TITLE  : Extreme abundance ratios in the polluted atmosphere of the cool white dwarf NLTT19868
AUTHORS: Adela Kawka, Stephane Vennes
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stw383
ABS    : We present an analysis of intermediate-dispersion spectra and photometric data of the newly identified cool, polluted white dwarf NLTT19868. The spectra obtained with X-shooter on the Very Large Telescope (VLT)-Melipal show strong lines of calcium, and several lines of magnesium, aluminium and iron. We use these spectra and the optical-to-near infrared spectral energy distribution to constrain the atmospheric parameters of NLTT19868. Our analysis shows that NLTT19868 is iron poor with respect to aluminium and calcium. A comparison with other cool, polluted white dwarfs shows that the Fe to Ca abundance ratio (Fe/Ca) varies by up to approximately two orders of magnitudes over a narrow temperature range with NLTT19868 at one extremum in the Fe/Ca ratio and, in contrast, NLTT888 at the other extremum. The sample shows evidence of extreme diversity in the composition of the accreted material: In the case of NLTT888, the inferred composition of the accreted matter is akin to iron-rich planetary core composition, while in the case of NLTT19868 it is close to mantle or bulk-Earth composition depleted by subsequent chemical separation at the bottom of the convection zone.

=== arXiv:1602.03256v1  [2016-02-10]
TITLE  : Improved Eigenfeature Regularization for Face Identification
AUTHORS: Bappaditya Mandal
ABS    : In this work, we propose to divide each class (a person) into subclasses using spatial partition trees which helps in better capturing the intra-personal variances arising from the appearances of the same individual. We perform a comprehensive analysis on within-class and within-subclass eigenspectrums of face images and propose a novel method of eigenspectrum modeling which extracts discriminative features of faces from both within-subclass and total or between-subclass scatter matrices. Effective low-dimensional face discriminative features are extracted for face recognition (FR) after performing discriminant evaluation in the entire eigenspace. Experimental results on popular face databases (AR, FERET) and the challenging unconstrained YouTube Face database show the superiority of our proposed approach on all three databases.

=== arXiv:1602.01320v1  [2016-02-03]
TITLE  : A temperature condensation trend in the debris-disk binary system Zet2 Ret
AUTHORS: C. Saffe, M. Flores, M. Jaque Arancibia, A. Buccino, E. Jofre
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 588, A81 (2016)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201528043
ABS    : We explore condensation temperature Tc trends in the unique binary system Zet1 Ret - Zet2 Ret, to determine whether there is a depletion of refractories, which could be related to the planet formation process. The star Zet2 Ret hosts a debris disk which was detected by an IR excess and confirmed by direct imaging and numerical simulations, while Zet1 Ret does not present IR excess nor planets. We carried out a high-precision abundance determination in both components of the binary system via a line-by-line, strictly differential approach. The stellar parameters Teff , log g, [Fe/H] and vturb were determined by imposing differential ionization and excitation equilibrium of Fe I and Fe II lines, with an updated version of the program FUNDPAR. The star Zet1 Ret resulted slightly more metal rich than Zet2 Ret by 0.02 dex. In the differential calculation of Zet1 Ret using Zet2 Ret as reference, the abundances of the refractory elements resulted higher than the volatile elements, and the trend of the refractory elements with Tc showed a positive slope. These facts together show a lack of refractory elements in Zet2 Ret (a debris-disk host) relative to Zet1 Ret. The Tc trend would be in agreement with the proposed signature of planet formation (Melendez et al. 2009) rather than possible Galactic Chemical Evolution or age effects, which are largely diminished here. Then, following the interpretation of Melendez et al. (2009), we propose an scenario in which the refractory elements depleted in Zet2 Ret are possibly locked-up in the rocky material that orbits this star and produce the debris disk observed around this object. We estimated a lower limit of Mrock = 3 Me for the rocky mass of depleted material, which is compatible with a rough estimation of 3-50 Me of a debris disk mass around a solar-type star (Krivov et al. 2008). (abridged)

=== arXiv:1602.00987v2  [2016-02-02]
TITLE  : A Search for Brief Optical Flashes Associated with the SETI Target KIC 8462852
AUTHORS: A. U. Abeysekara, S. Archambault, A. Archer, W. Benbow, R. Bird, M. Buchovecky, J. H. Buckley, K. Byrum
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8205/818/2/L33
ABS    : The F-type star KIC 8462852 has recently been identified as an exceptional target for SETI (search for extraterrestrial intelligence) observations. We describe an analysis methodology for optical SETI, which we have used to analyse nine hours of serendipitous archival observations of KIC 8462852 made with the VERITAS gamma-ray observatory between 2009 and 2015. No evidence of pulsed optical beacons, above a pulse intensity at the Earth of approximately 1 photon per m^2, is found. We also discuss the potential use of imaging atmospheric Cherenkov telescope arrays in searching for extremely short duration optical transients in general.

=== arXiv:1601.07314v4  [2016-01-27]
TITLE  : A statistical analysis of the accuracy of the digitized magnitudes of photometric plates on the time scale of decades with an application to the century-long light curve of KIC 8462852
AUTHORS: Michael Hippke, Daniel Angerhausen, Michael B. Lund, Joshua Pepper, Keivan G. Stassun
DOI    : 10.3847/0004-637X/825/1/73
ABS    : We present a statistical analysis of the accuracy of the digitized magnitudes of photometric plates on the time scale of decades. In our examination of archival Johnson B photometry from the Harvard DASCH archive, we find a median RMS scatter of lightcurves of order 0.15mag over the range B~9-17 for all calibrations. Slight underlying systematics (trends or flux discontinuities) are on a level of ~&lt;=0.2mag per century (1889-1990) for the majority of constant stars. These historic data can be unambiguously used for processes that happen on scales of magnitudes, and need to be carefully examined in cases approaching the noise floor. The characterization of these limits in photometric stability may guide future studies in their use of plate archives. We explain these limitations for the example case of KIC8462852, which has been claimed to dim by 0.16mag per century, and show that this trend cannot be considered as significant.

=== arXiv:1601.03338v2  [2016-01-13]
TITLE  : A search for new hot subdwarf stars by means of Virtual Observatory tools II
AUTHORS: Esther Pérez-Fernández, Ana Ulla, Enrique Solano, Raquel Oreiro, Carlos Rodrigo
JOURNAL: MNRAS 457 3396-3408 (2016)
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stw200
ABS    : Recent massive sky surveys in different bandwidths are providing new opportunities to modern astronomy. The Virtual Observatory (VO) represents the adequate framework to handle the huge amount of information available and filter out data according to specific requirements. In this work, we applied a selection strategy to find new, uncatalogued hot subdwarfs making use of VO tools. We used large area catalogues (GALEX, SDSS, SuperCosmos, 2MASS) to retrieve photometric and astrometric information of stellar objects. To these objects, we applied colour and proper motion filters, together with an effective temperature cutoff, aimed at separating hot subdwarfs from other blue objects such as white dwarfs, cataclysmic variables or main sequence OB stars. As a result, we obtained 437 new, uncatalogued hot subdwarf candidates. Based on previous results, we expect our procedure to have an overall efficiency of at least 80 per cent. Visual inspection of the 68 candidates with SDSS spectrum showed that 65 can be classified as hot subdwarfs: 5 sdOs, 25 sdOBs and 35 sdBs. This success rate above 95 per cent proves the robustness and efficiency of our methodology. The spectral energy distribution of 45 per cent of the subdwarf candidates showed infrared excesses, a signature of their probable binary nature. The stellar companions of the binary systems so detected are expected to be late-type main sequence stars. A detailed determination of temperatures and spectral classification of the cool companions will be presented in a forthcoming work.

=== arXiv:1601.03256v2  [2016-01-13]
TITLE  : KIC 8462852 Faded at an Average Rate of 0.165+-0.013 Magnitudes Per Century From 1890 To 1989
AUTHORS: Bradley E. Schaefer
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8205/822/2/L34
ABS    : KIC8462852 is a completely-ordinary F3 main sequence star, except that the light curve from Kepler shows episodes of unique and inexplicable day-long dips with up to 20% dimming. Here, I provide a light curve of 1338 Johnson B-band magnitudes from 1890 to 1989 taken from archival photographic plates at Harvard. KIC8462852 displays a secular dimming at an average rate of 0.164+-0.013 magnitudes per century. From the early-1890s to the late-1980s, KIC8462852 faded by 0.193+-0.030 mag. The decline is not an artifact because nearby check stars have closely flat light curves. This century-long dimming is unprecedented for any F-type main sequence star. Thus the Harvard light curve provides the first confirmation (past the several dips seen in the Kepler light curve alone) that KIC8462852 has anything unusual. The century-long dimming and the day-long dips are both just extreme ends of a spectrum of timescales for unique dimming events. By Ockham's Razor, two such unique and similar effects are very likely produced by one physical mechanism. This one mechanism does not appear as any isolated catastrophic event in the last century, but rather must be some ongoing process with continuous effects. Within the context of dust-occultation models, the century-long dimming trend requires 10^4 to 10^7 times as much dust as for the deepest Kepler dip. Within the context of the comet-family idea, the century-long dimming trend requires an estimated 648,000 giant comets (each with 200 km diameter) all orchestrated to pass in front of the star within the last century.

=== arXiv:1601.02897v2  [2016-01-12]
TITLE  : Life under a black sun
AUTHORS: Tomáš Opatrný, Lukáš Richterek, Pavel Bakala
JOURNAL: Am. J. Phys. 85, 14 (2017)
DOI    : 10.1119/1.4966905
ABS    : Life is dependent on the income of energy with low entropy and the disposal of energy with high entropy. On Earth, the low-entropy energy is provided by solar radiation and the high-entropy energy is disposed as infrared radiation emitted into the cold space. Here we turn the situation around and assume cosmic background radiation as the low-entropy source of energy for a planet orbiting a black hole into which the high-entropy energy is disposed. We estimate the power that can be produced by thermodynamic processes on such a planet, with a particular interest in planets orbiting a fast rotating Kerr black hole as in the science fiction movie {\em Interstellar}. We also briefly discuss a reverse Dyson sphere absorbing cosmic background radiation from the outside and dumping waste energy to a black hole inside.

=== arXiv:1601.02519v2  [2016-01-11]
TITLE  : David Gill - Magnificent and Desirable Astronomer
AUTHORS: John S. Reid
ABS    : This paper was given to mark the centenary of the death of David Gill, the foremost British astronomer in the last quarter of the 19th century and into the 20th century. Gill abandoned a successful career as a clock and watchmaker. His speciality was in astrometry, an area of astronomy of both practical and scientific importance that tended to be eclipsed in the 20th century by the rise of astrophysics. As Her Majesty's Astronomer at the Cape of Good Hope for 27 years, David Gill was admired for his prolific contribution to highly accurate and trustworthy results. David Gill's collaboration was desired by leading astronomers of the day and he was the only southern hemisphere representative on the hugely important Conference Internationale des Etoiles Fondamentales of 1896. He created with Jacobus Kapteyn the first extensive star catalogue derived from photographic plates (the CPD), including over 450,000 stars. He was an initiator of the biggest multi-national and multi-observatory project of the century, taking on the role of President of the International Commission overseeing the Carte du Ciel project. David Gill raised the Cape of Good Hope observatory from a rather run-down jobbing observatory of the Admiralty to the best observatory in the Southern hemisphere. He acquired in the process the reputation of an expert in precision instrument design. He also made a substantial name for himself as semi-official director of the geodetic survey of South Africa. Overall David Gill was highly influential, respected and well liked. With the resurgence of interest in astrometry, the contribution of David Gill to astronomy is due for a re-assessment a century after he died.

=== arXiv:1601.05112v1  [2016-01-07]
TITLE  : Kardashev's Classification at 50+: A Fine Vehicle with Room for Improvement
AUTHORS: Milan M. Cirkovic
JOURNAL: Serbian Astronomical Journal, vol. 191, pp. 1-15 (2015)
DOI    : 10.2298/SAJ1591001C
ABS    : We review the history and status of the famous classification of extraterrestrial civilizations given by the great Russian astrophysicist Nikolai Semenovich Kardashev, roughly half a century after it has been proposed. While Kardashev's classification (or Kardashev's scale) has often been seen as oversimplified, and multiple improvements, refinements, and alternatives to it have been suggested, it is still one of the major tools for serious theoretical investigation of SETI issues. During these 50+ years, several attempts at modifying or reforming the classification have been made; we review some of them here, together with presenting some of the scenarios which present difficulties to the standard version. Recent results in both theoretical and observational SETI studies, especially the G-hat infrared survey (2014-2015), have persuasively shown that the emphasis on detectability inherent in Kardashev's classification obtains new significance and freshness. Several new movements and conceptual frameworks, such as the Dysonian SETI, tally extremely well with these developments. So, the apparent simplicity of the classification is highly deceptive: Kardashev's work offers a wealth of still insufficiently studied methodological and epistemological ramifications and it remains, in both letter and spirit, perhaps the worthiest legacy of the SETI "founding fathers".

=== arXiv:1512.09150v2  [2015-12-30]
TITLE  : High-speed photometry of the disintegrating planetesimals at WD1145+017: evidence for rapid dynamical evolution
AUTHORS: B. T. Gaensicke, A. Aungwerojwit, T. R. Marsh, V. S. Dhillon, D. I. Sahman, Dimitri Veras, J. Farihi, P. Chote
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8205/818/1/L7
ABS    : We obtained high-speed photometry of the disintegrating planetesimals orbiting the white dwarf WD1145+017, spanning a period of four weeks. The light curves show a dramatic evolution of the system since the first observations obtained about seven months ago. Multiple transit events are detected in every light curve, which have varying durations(~3-12min) and depths (~10-60%). The time-averaged extinction is ~11%, much higher than at the time of the Kepler observations. The shortest-duration transits require that the occulting cloud of debris has a few times the size of the white dwarf, longer events are often resolved into the superposition of several individual transits. The transits evolve on time scales of days, both in shape and in depth, with most of them gradually appearing and disappearing over the course of the observing campaign. Several transits can be tracked across multiple nights, all of them recur on periods of ~4.49h, indicating multiple planetary debris fragments on nearly identical orbits. Identifying the specific origin of these bodies within this planetary system, and the evolution leading to their current orbits remains a challenging problem.

=== arXiv:1512.03745v1  [2015-12-11]
TITLE  : Recurring Occultations of RW Aurigae by Coagulated Dust in the Tidally Disrupted Circumstellar Disk
AUTHORS: Joseph E. Rodriguez, Phillip A. Reed, Robert J. Siverd, Joshua Pepper, Keivan G. Stassun, B. Scott Gaudi, David A. Weintraub, Thomas G. Beatty
DOI    : 10.3847/0004-6256/151/2/29
ABS    : We present photometric observations of RW Aurigae, a Classical T Tauri system, that reveal two remarkable dimming events. These events are similar to that which we observed in 2010-2011, which was the first such deep dimming observed in RW Aur in a century's worth of photometric monitoring. We suggested the 2010-2011 dimming was the result of an occultation of the star by its tidally disrupted circumstellar disk. In 2012-2013, the RW Aur system dimmed by ~0.7 mag for ~40 days and in 2014/2015 the system dimmed by ~2 mag for &gt;250 days. The ingress/egress duration measurements of the more recent events agree well with those from the 2010-2011 event, providing strong evidence that the new dimmings are kinematically associated with the same occulting source. Therefore, we suggest that both the 2012-2013 and 2014-2015 dimming events, measured using data from the Kilodegree Extremely Little Telescope and the Kutztown University Observatory, are also occultations of RW Aur A by tidally disrupted circumstellar material. Recent hydrodynamical simulations of the eccentric fly-by of RW Aur B suggest the occulting body to be a bridge of material connecting RW Aur A and B. These simulations suggest the possibility of additional occultations, supported by the observations presented in this work. The color evolution of the dimmings suggest that the tidally stripped disk material includes dust grains ranging in size from small grains at the leading edge, typical of star forming regions, to large grains, ices or pebbles producing grey or nearly grey extinction deeper within the occulting material. It is not known whether this material represents arrested planet building prior to the tidal disruption event, or perhaps accelerated planet building as a result of the disruption event, but in any case the evidence suggests the presence of advanced planet building material in the space between RW Aur A and B.

=== arXiv:1512.03693v1  [2015-12-11]
TITLE  : Constraints on the circumstellar dust around KIC 8462852
AUTHORS: M. A. Thompson, P. Scicluna, F. Kemper, J. E. Geach, M. M. Dunham, O. Morata, S. Ertel, P. T. P. Ho
DOI    : 10.1093/mnrasl/slw008
ABS    : We present millimetre (SMA) and sub-millimetre (SCUBA-2) continuum observations of the peculiar star KIC 8462852 which displayed several deep and aperiodic dips in brightness during the Kepler mission. Our observations are approximately confusion-limited at 850 $μ$m and are the deepest millimetre and sub-millimetre photometry of the star that has yet been carried out. No significant emission is detected towards KIC 8462852. We determine upper limits for dust between a few 10$^{-6}$ M$_{\oplus}$ and 10$^{-3}$ M$_{\oplus}$ for regions identified as the most likely to host occluding dust clumps and a total overall dust budget of $&lt;$7.7 M$_{\oplus}$ within a radius of 200 AU. Such low limits for the inner system make the catastrophic planetary disruption hypothesis unlikely. Integrating over the Kepler lightcurve we determine that at least 10$^{-9}$ M$_{\oplus}$ of dust is required to cause the observed Q16 dip. This is consistent with the currently most favoured cometary breakup hypothesis, but nevertheless implies the complete breakup of $\sim$ 30 Comet 1/P Halley type objects. Finally, in the wide SCUBA-2 field-of-view we identify another candidate debris disc system that is potentially the largest yet discovered.

=== arXiv:1512.02388v1  [2015-12-08]
TITLE  : Optical SETI Observations of the Anomalous Star KIC 8462852
AUTHORS: Marlin Schuetz, Douglas A. Vakoch, Seth Shostak, Jon Richards
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8205/825/1/L5
ABS    : To explore the hypothesis that KIC 8462852's aperiodic dimming is caused by artificial megastructures in orbit (Wright et al. 2015), rather than a natural cause such as cometary fragments in a highly elliptical orbit (Marengo et al. 2015), we searched for electromagnetic signals from KIC 8462852 indicative of extraterrestrial intelligence. The primary observations were in the visible optical regime using the Boquete Optical SETI Observatory in Panama. In addition, as a preparatory exercise for the possible future detection of a candidate signal (Heidmann 1991), three of six observing runs simultaneously searched radio frequencies at the Allen Telescope Array in California. No periodic optical signals greater than 67 photons/m2 within a time frame of 25 ns were seen. This limit corresponds to isotropic optical pulses of 8E22 joules. If, however, any inhabitants of KIC 8462852 were targeting our solar system (Shostak &amp; Villard 2004), the required energy would be reduced greatly. The limits on narrowband radio signals were 180 - 300 Jy Hz at 1 and 8 GHz, respectively, corresponding to a transmitter with an effective isotropic radiated power of 4E15 W (and 7E15 W) at the distance of KIC 8462852. While these powers requirements are high, even modest targeting could - just as for optical signals - lower these numbers substantially.

=== arXiv:1512.00638v1  [2015-12-02]
TITLE  : Minimal genus of a multiple and Frobenius number of a quotient of a numerical semigroup
AUTHORS: Francesco Strazzanti
JOURNAL: International Journal of Algebra and Computation 25 (2015), no. 6, 1043-1053
DOI    : 10.1142/S0218196715500290
ABS    : Given two numerical semigroups $S$ and $T$ and a positive integer $d$, $S$ is said to be one over $d$ of $T$ if $S=\{s \in \mathbb{N} \ | \ ds \in T \}$ and in this case $T$ is called a $d$-fold of $S$. We prove that the minimal genus of the $d$-folds of $S$ is $g + \lceil \frac{(d-1)f}{2} \rceil$, where $g$ and $f$ denote the genus and the Frobenius number of $S$. The case $d=2$ is a problem proposed by Robles-Pérez, Rosales, and Vasco. Furthermore, we find the minimal genus of the symmetric doubles of $S$ and study the particular case when $S$ is almost symmetric. Finally, we study the Frobenius number of the quotient of some families of numerical semigroups.

=== arXiv:1511.08821v2  [2015-11-27]
TITLE  : KIC 8462852: Transit of a Large Comet Family
AUTHORS: Eva H. L. Bodman, Alice Quillen
DOI    : 10.3847/2041-8205/819/2/L34
ABS    : We investigate the plausibility of a cometary source of the unusual transits observed in the KIC 8462852 light curve. A single comet of similar size to those in our solar system produces a transit depth of the order of $10^{-3}$ lasting less than a day which is much smaller and shorter than the largest dip observed ($\sim20\%$ for $\sim3$ days), but a large, closely traveling cluster of comets can fit the observed depths and durations. We find that a series of large comet swarms, with all but one on the same orbit, provides a good fit for the KIC 8462852 data during Quarters 16 and 17, but does not explain the large dip observed during Quarter 8. However, the transit dips only loosely constrain the orbits and can be fit by swarms with periastrons differing by a factor of 10. To reach a transit depth of $\sim0.2$, the comets need to be in a close group of $\sim30$, if they are $\sim100$ km in radius or in a group of $\sim300$ if they are $\sim10$ km in radius. The total number of comets required to fit all of the dips is $\sim70$ $\sim$100 km or $\sim700$ $\sim10$ km comets. A single comet family from a tidally disrupted Ceres-sized progenitor or the start of a Late Heavy Bombardment period explains the last $\sim60$ days of the unusual KIC 8462852 light curve.

=== arXiv:1511.07908v1  [2015-11-24]
TITLE  : KIC 8462852 - The Infrared Flux
AUTHORS: Massimo Marengo, Alan Hulsebus, Sarah Willis
JOURNAL: ApJL, 814, L15 (2015)
DOI    : 10.1088/2041-8205/814/1/L15
ABS    : We analyzed the warm Spitzer/IRAC data of KIC 8462852. We found no evidence of infrared excess at 3.6 micron and a small excess of 0.43 +/- 0.18 mJy at 4.5 micron, below the 3 sigma threshold necessary to claim a detection. The lack of strong infrared excess 2 years after the events responsible for the unusual light curve observed by Kepler, further disfavors the scenarios involving a catastrophic collision in a KIC 8462852 asteroid belt, a giant impact disrupting a planet in the system or a population of a dust-enshrouded planetesimals. The scenario invoking the fragmentation of a family of comets on a highly elliptical orbit is instead consistent with the lack of strong infrared excess found by our analysis.

=== arXiv:1511.07322v1  [2015-11-23]
TITLE  : Astronomical Surveys and Big Data
AUTHORS: A. M. Mickaelian
ABS    : Recent all-sky and large-area astronomical surveys and their catalogued data over the whole range of electromagnetic spectrum are reviewed, from Gamma-ray to radio, such as Fermi-GLAST and INTEGRAL in Gamma-ray, ROSAT, XMM and Chandra in X-ray, GALEX in UV, SDSS and several POSS I and II based catalogues (APM, MAPS, USNO, GSC) in optical range, 2MASS in NIR, WISE and AKARI IRC in MIR, IRAS and AKARI FIS in FIR, NVSS and FIRST in radio and many others, as well as most important surveys giving optical images (DSS I and II, SDSS, etc.), proper motions (Tycho, USNO, Gaia), variability (GCVS, NSVS, ASAS, Catalina, Pan-STARRS) and spectroscopic data (FBS, SBS, Case, HQS, HES, SDSS, CALIFA, GAMA). An overall understanding of the coverage along the whole wavelength range and comparisons between various surveys are given: galaxy redshift surveys, QSO/AGN, radio, Galactic structure, and Dark Energy surveys. Astronomy has entered the Big Data era. Astrophysical Virtual Observatories and Computational Astrophysics play an important role in using and analysis of big data for new discoveries.

=== arXiv:1511.06300v1  [2015-11-19]
TITLE  : Large-scale latitude distortions of the inner Milky Way Disk from the Herschel/Hi-GAL Survey
AUTHORS: Sergio Molinari, Alberto Noriega-Crespo, John Bally, Toby Moore, Davide Elia, Eugenio Schisano, Rene Plume, Bruce Swinyard
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201526286
ABS    : We use the Herschel Hi-GAL survey data to study the spatial distribution in Galactic longitude and latitude of the interstellar medium and of dense, star-forming clumps in the inner Galaxy. The peak position and width of the latitude distribution of the dust column density as well as of number density of compact sources from the band-merged Hi-GAL photometric catalogues are analysed as a function of longitude. The width of the diffuse dust column density traced by the Hi-GAL 500 micron emission varies across the inner Galaxy, with a mean value of 1°.2-1°.3, similar to that of the 250um Hi-GAL sources. 70um Hi-GAL sources define a much thinner disk, with a mean FWHM of 0°.75, and an average latitude of b=0°.06, coincident with the results from ATLASGAL. The GLAT distribution as a function of GLON shows modulations, both for the diffuse emission and for the compact sources, with ~0°.2 displacements mostly toward negative latitudes at l~ +40°, +12°, -25° and -40°. No such modulations can be found in the MIPSGAL 24 or WISE 22 um data when the entire source samples are considered. The distortions revealed by Herschel are interpreted as large-scale bending modes of the Plane. The lack of similar distortions in tracers of more evolved YSOs or stars rules out gravitational instabilities or satellite-induced perturbations, as they should act on both the diffuse and stellar disk components. We propose that the observed bends are caused by incoming flows of extra-planar gas interacting with the gaseous disk. Stars decouple from the gaseous ISM and relax into the stellar disk potential. The time required for the disappearance of the distortions from the diffuse ISM to the relatively evolved YSO stages are compatible with star-formation timescales.

=== arXiv:1511.01606v3  [2015-11-05]
TITLE  : Radio SETI Observations of the Anomalous Star KIC 8462852
AUTHORS: G. R. Harp, Jon Richards, Seth Shostak, J. C. Tarter, Douglas A. Vakoch, Chris Munson
JOURNAL: The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 825, (2016) 155
DOI    : 10.3847/0004-637X/825/2/155
ABS    : We report on a search for the presence of signals from extraterrestrial intelligence in the direction of the star system KIC 8462852. Observations were made at radio frequencies between 1-10 GHz using the Allen Telescope Array. No narrowband radio signals were found at a level of 180-300 Jy in a 1 Hz channel, or medium band signals above 10 Jy in a 100 kHz channel.

=== arXiv:1511.01122v2  [2015-11-03]
TITLE  : Minicharged Particles from the Sun: A Cutting-Edge Bound
AUTHORS: Núria Vinyoles, Hendrik Vogel
JOURNAL: JCAP03(2016)002
DOI    : 10.1088/1475-7516/2016/03/002
ABS    : We study the impact on the Sun of an exotic energy-loss channel caused by plasmon decay into fermionic minicharged particles with charge $εe$ and mass $m_f$. We compare solar models with this extra emission to helioseismological and neutrino data, obtaining a bound $ε&lt;2.2\times 10^{-14}\ ({\rm 95\%\, CL})$ for $m_f\lesssim 25 \, \text{eV}$. Our result is comparable to previous limits from the cooling of globular cluster stars, while at the same time it is better understood and takes theoretical and observational errors into account.

=== arXiv:1510.08994v1  [2015-10-30]
TITLE  : The visual binary AG Tri in $β$ Pictoris Association: can a debris disc cause very different rotation periods of its components?
AUTHORS: Sergio Messina, Miguel Muro Serrano, Svetlana Artemenko, John I. Bailey, Alexander Savushkin, Robert H. Nelson
DOI    : 10.1007/s10509-015-2561-7
ABS    : We measure the photometric rotation periods of the components of multiple systems in young stellar associations to investigate the causes of the observed rotation period dispersion. We present the case of the wide binary AG Tri in the 23-Myr young beta Pictoris Association consisting of K4 + M1 dwarfs. Our multi-band, multi-season photometric monitoring allowed us to measure the rotation periods of both components P_A = 12.4d and P_B = 4.66d, to detect a prominent magnetic activity in the photosphere, likely responsible for the measured radial velocity variations, and for the first time, a flare event on the M1 component AG Tri B. We investigate either the possibility that the faster rotating component may have suffered an enhanced primordial disc dispersal, starting its PMS spin-up earlier than the slower rotating component, or the possibility that the formation of a debris disc may have prevented AG Tri A from gaining part of the angular momentum from the accreting disc.

=== arXiv:1510.06387v1  [2015-10-21]
TITLE  : A disintegrating minor planet transiting a white dwarf
AUTHORS: Andrew Vanderburg, John Asher Johnson, Saul Rappaport, Allyson Bieryla, Jonathan Irwin, John Arban Lewis, David Kipping, Warren R. Brown
JOURNAL: Nature 526, 546-549 (22 October 2015)
DOI    : 10.1038/nature15527
ABS    : White dwarfs are the end state of most stars, including the Sun, after they exhaust their nuclear fuel. Between 1/4 and 1/2 of white dwarfs have elements heavier than helium in their atmospheres, even though these elements should rapidly settle into the stellar interiors unless they are occasionally replenished. The abundance ratios of heavy elements in white dwarf atmospheres are similar to rocky bodies in the Solar system. This and the existence of warm dusty debris disks around about 4% of white dwarfs suggest that rocky debris from white dwarf progenitors' planetary systems occasionally pollute the stars' atmospheres. The total accreted mass can be comparable to that of large asteroids in the solar system. However, the process of disrupting planetary material has not yet been observed. Here, we report observations of a white dwarf being transited by at least one and likely multiple disintegrating planetesimals with periods ranging from 4.5 hours to 4.9 hours. The strongest transit signals occur every 4.5 hours and exhibit varying depths up to 40% and asymmetric profiles, indicative of a small object with a cometary tail of dusty effluent material. The star hosts a dusty debris disk and the star's spectrum shows prominent lines from heavy elements like magnesium, aluminium, silicon, calcium, iron, and nickel. This system provides evidence that heavy element pollution of white dwarfs can originate from disrupted rocky bodies such as asteroids and minor planets.

=== arXiv:1510.04606v2  [2015-10-15]
TITLE  : The Ĝ Search for Extraterrestrial Civilizations with Large Energy Supplies. IV. The Signatures and Information Content of Transiting Megastructures
AUTHORS: Jason T. Wright, Kimberly M. S. Cartier, Ming Zhao, Daniel Jontof-Hutter, Eric B. Ford
DOI    : 10.3847/0004-637X/816/1/17
ABS    : Arnold (2005), Forgan (2013), and Korpela et al. (2015) noted that planet-sized artificial structures could be discovered with Kepler as they transit their host star. We present a general discussion of transiting megastructures, and enumerate ten potential ways their anomalous silhouettes, orbits, and transmission properties would distinguish them from exoplanets. We also enumerate the natural sources of such signatures. Several anomalous objects, such as KIC 12557548 and CoRoT-29, have variability in depth consistent with Arnold's prediction and/or an asymmetric shape consistent with Forgan's model. Since well motivated physical models have so far provided natural explanations for these signals, the ETI hypothesis is not warranted for these objects, but they still serve as useful examples of how nonstandard transit signatures might be identified and interpreted in a SETI context. Boyajian et al. 2015 recently announced KIC 8462852, an object with a bizarre light curve consistent with a "swarm" of megastructures. We suggest this is an outstanding SETI target. We develop the normalized information content statistic $M$ to quantify the information content in a signal embedded in a discrete series of bounded measurements, such as variable transit depths, and show that it can be used to distinguish among constant sources, interstellar beacons, and naturally stochastic or artificial, information-rich signals. We apply this formalism to KIC 12557548 and a specific form of beacon suggested by Arnold to illustrate its utility.

=== arXiv:1509.08393v2  [2015-09-28]
TITLE  : A Systematic Search for Changing-Look Quasars in SDSS
AUTHORS: Chelsea L. MacLeod, Nicholas P. Ross, Andy Lawrence, Mike Goad, Keith Horne, William Burgett, Ken C. Chambers, Heather Flewelling
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stv2997
ABS    : We present a systematic search for changing-look quasars based on repeat photometry from SDSS and Pan-STARRS1, along with repeat spectra from SDSS and SDSS-III BOSS. Objects with large, |Δg|&gt;1 mag photometric variations in their light curves are selected as candidates to look for changes in broad emission line (BEL) features. Out of a sample of 1011 objects that satisfy our selection criteria and have more than one epoch of spectroscopy, we find 10 examples of quasars that have variable and/or "changing-look" BEL features. Four of our objects have emerging BELs; five have disappearing BELs, and one object shows tentative evidence for having both emerging and disappearing BELs. With redshifts in the range 0.20 &lt; z &lt; 0.63, this sample includes the highest-redshift changing-look quasars discovered to date. We highlight the quasar J102152.34+464515.6 at z = 0.204. Here, not only have the Balmer emission lines strongly diminished in prominence, including H$β$ all but disappearing, but the blue continuum $f_ν \propto ν^{1/3}$ typical of an AGN is also significantly diminished in the second epoch of spectroscopy. Using our selection criteria, we estimate that &gt;15% of strongly variable luminous quasars display changing-look BEL features on rest-frame timescales of 8 to 10 years. Plausible timescales for variable dust extinction are factors of 2-10 too long to explain the dimming and brightening in these sources, and simple dust reddening models cannot reproduce the BEL changes. On the other hand, an advancement such as disk reprocessing is needed if the observed variations are due to accretion rate changes.

=== arXiv:1509.04403v1  [2015-09-15]
TITLE  : On an exactly solvable confining quark model and its thermodynamics
AUTHORS: Bruno W. Mintz
ABS    : We perform an exact computation of the grand partition function of a model of confined quarks at arbitrary temperatures and quark chemical potentials. The model is inspired by a version of QCD where the perturbative BRST symmetry is broken in the infrared, while perturbative QCD is recovered in the ultraviolet. The theory leads, even at tree level, to a quark mass function compatible with nonperturbative analyses of lattice simulations and Dyson-Schwinger equations. In spite of being defined at tree level, the model produces a non-trivial and stable thermodynamic behaviour at arbitrary values of temperature or chemical potential. Results for the pressure and the trace anomaly as a function of temperature qualitatively resemble those of non-perturbative interactions as observed in lattice simulations. The cold and dense thermodynamics is also contains non-trivial features, being unlike a gas of free massive particles.

=== arXiv:1509.04351v1  [2015-09-14]
TITLE  : First Results from the Disk Eclipse Search with KELT (DESK) Survey
AUTHORS: Joseph E. Rodriguez, Joshua Pepper, Keivan G. Stassun
DOI    : 10.1017/S1743921315005931
ABS    : Using time-series photometry from the Kilodegree Extremely Little Telescope (KELT) exoplanet survey, we are looking for eclipses of stars by their protoplanetary disks, specifically in young stellar associations. To date, we have discovered two previously unknown, large dimming events around the young stars RW Aurigae and V409 Tau. We attribute the dimming of RW Aurigae to an occultation by its tidally disrupted disk, with the disruption perhaps resulting from a recent flyby of its binary companion. Even with the dynamical environment of RW Aurigae, the distorted disk material remains very compact and presumably capable of forming planets. This system also shows that strong binary interactions with disks can also influence planet and core composition by stirring up and mixing materials during planet formation. We interpret the dimming of V409 Tau to be due to a feature, possibly a warp or perturbation, lying at least 10 AU from the host star in its nearly edge-on circumstellar disk.

=== arXiv:1509.03622v2  [2015-09-11]
TITLE  : Planet Hunters X. KIC 8462852 - Where's the Flux?
AUTHORS: T. S. Boyajian, D. M. LaCourse, S. A. Rappaport, D. Fabrycky, D. A. Fischer, D. Gandolfi, G. M. Kennedy, H. Korhonen
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stw218
ABS    : Over the duration of the Kepler mission, KIC8462852 was observed to undergo irregularly shaped, aperiodic dips in flux of up to $\sim 20$\%. The dipping activity can last for between 5 and 80 days. We characterize the object with high-resolution spectroscopy, spectral energy distribution fitting, radial velocity measurements, high-resolution imaging, and Fourier analyses of the Kepler light curve. We determine that KIC8462852 is a typical main-sequence F3 V star that exhibits no significant IR excess, and has no very close interacting companions. In this paper, we describe various scenarios to explain the dipping events observed in the Kepler light curve. We confirm that the dipping signals in the data are not caused by any instrumental or data processing artifact, and thus are astrophysical in origin. We construct scenario-independent constraints on the size and location of a body in the system that is needed to reproduce the observations. We deliberate over several assorted stellar and circumstellar astrophysical scenarios, most of which have problems explaining the data in hand. By considering the observational constraints on dust clumps in orbit around a normal main-sequence star, we conclude that the scenario most consistent with the data in hand is the passage of a family of exocomet or planetesimal fragments, all of which are associated with a single previous break-up event, possibly caused by tidal disruption or thermal processing. The minimum total mass associated with these fragments likely exceeds $10^{-6}$~\mearth, corresponding to an original rocky body of $&gt;100$~km in diameter. We discuss the necessity of future observations to help interpret the system.

=== arXiv:1508.02764v2  [2015-08-11]
TITLE  : Gravity and Zonal Flows of Giant Planets: From the Euler Equation to the Thermal Wind Equation
AUTHORS: Hao Cao, David J. Stevenson
DOI    : 10.1002/2017JE005272
ABS    : Any nonspherical distribution of density inside planets and stars gives rise to a non-spherical external gravity and change of shape. If part or all of the observed zonal flows at the cloud deck of Jupiter and Saturn represent deep interior dynamics, then the density perturbations associated with the deep zonal flows could generate gravitational signals detectable by the Juno mission and the Cassini Grand Finale. Here we present a critical examination of the applicability of the thermal wind equation to calculate the wind induced gravity moments. Our analysis shows that wind induced gravity moments calculated from TWE are in overall agreement with the full solution to the Euler equation. However, the accuracy of individual high-degree moments calculated from TWE depends crucially on retaining the nonsphericity of the background density and gravity. Only when the background nonsphericity of the planet is taken into account, does the TWE make accurate enough prediction (with a few tens of percent errors) for individual high-degree gravity moments associated with deep zonal flows. Since the TWE is derived from the curl of the Euler equation and is a local relation, it necessarily says nothing about any density perturbations that contribute irrotational terms to the Euler equation and that have a non-local origin. However, the predicted corrections from these density contributions to the low harmonic degree gravity moments are not discernible from insignificant changes in interior models while the corrections at high harmonic degree are very small, a few percent or less.

=== arXiv:1508.00898v1  [2015-08-04]
TITLE  : Isochronal age scale of young moving groups in the solar neighbourhood
AUTHORS: Cameron P. M. Bell, Eric E. Mamajek, Tim Naylor
DOI    : 10.1017/S1743921315006213
ABS    : We present a self-consistent, absolute isochronal age scale for young (&lt; 200 Myr), nearby (&lt; 100 pc) moving groups, which is consistent with recent lithium depletion boundary ages for both the Beta Pic and Tucana-Horologium moving groups. This age scale was derived using a set of semi-empirical pre-main-sequence model isochrones that incorporate an empirical colour-Teff relation and bolometric corrections based on the observed colours of Pleiades members, with theoretical corrections for the dependence on log g. Absolute ages for young, nearby groups are vital as these regions play a crucial role in our understanding of the early evolution of low- and intermediate-mass stars, as well as providing ideal targets for direct imaging and other measurements of dusty debris discs, substellar objects and, of course, extrasolar planets.

=== arXiv:1507.04175v3  [2015-07-15]
TITLE  : The WISE View of RV Tauri Stars
AUTHORS: I. Gezer, H. Van Winckel, Z. Bozkurt, K. De Smedt, D. Kamath, M. Hillen, R. Manick
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stv1627
ABS    : We present a detailed study based on infrared photometry of all Galactic RV Tauri stars from the General Catalogue of Variable Stars (GCVS). RV Tauri stars are the brightest among the population II Cepheids. They are thought to evolve away from the asymptotic giant branch (AGB) towards the white dwarf domain. IRAS detected several RV Tauri stars because of their large IR excesses and it was found that they occupy a specific region in the [12] - [25], [25] - [60] IRAS two-colour diagram. We used the all sky survey of WISE to extend these studies and compare the infrared properties of all RV Tauri stars in the GCVS with a selected sample of post-AGB objects with the goal to place the RV Tauri pulsators in the context of post-AGB evolution. Moreover, we correlated the IR properties of both the RV Tauri stars and the comparison sample with other observables like binarity and the presence of a photospheric chemical anomaly called depletion. We find that Galactic RV Tauri stars display a range of infrared properties and we differentiate between disc sources, objects with no IR excess and objects for which the spectral energy distribution (SED) is uncertain. We obtain a clear correlation between disc sources and binarity. RV Tauri stars with a variable mean magnitude are exclusively found among the disc sources. We also find evidence for disc evolution among the binaries. Furthermore our studies show that the presence of a disc seems to be a necessary but not sufficient condition for the depletion process to become efficient.

=== arXiv:1506.06771v1  [2015-06-22]
TITLE  : Rotation Periods of Young Brown Dwarfs: K2 Survey in Upper Scorpius
AUTHORS: Aleks Scholz, Veselin Kostov, Ray Jayawardhana, Koraljka Muzic
DOI    : 10.1088/2041-8205/809/2/L29
ABS    : We report rotational periods for 16 young brown dwarfs in the nearby Upper Scorpius association, based on 72 days of high-cadence, high-precision photometry from the Kepler space telescope's K2 mission. The periods range from a few hours to two days (plus one outlier at 5 days), with a median just above one day, confirming that brown dwarfs, except at the very youngest ages, are fast rotators. Interestingly, four of the slowest rotators in our sample exhibit mid-infrared excess emission from disks; at least two also show signs of disk eclipses and accretion in the lightcurves. Comparing these new periods with those for two other young clusters and simple angular momentum evolution tracks, we find little or no rotational braking in brown dwarfs between 1-10 Myr, in contrast to low-mass stars. Our findings show that disk braking, while still at work, is inefficient in the substellar regime, thus provide an important constraint on the mass dependence of the braking mechanism.

=== arXiv:1505.06204v1  [2015-05-22]
TITLE  : Formation of planetary debris discs around white dwarfs II: Shrinking extremely eccentric collisionless rings
AUTHORS: Dimitri Veras, Zoe M. Leinhardt, Siegfried Eggl, Boris T. Gaensicke
ABS    : The formation channel of the tens of compact debris discs which orbit white dwarfs (WDs) at a distance of one Solar radius remains unknown. Asteroids that survive the giant branch stellar phases beyond a few au are assumed to be dynamically thrust towards the WD and tidally disrupted within its Roche radius, generating extremely eccentric (e&gt;0.98) rings. Here, we establish that WD radiation compresses and circularizes the orbits of super-micron to cm-sized ring constituents to entirely within the WD's Roche radius. We derive a closed algebraic formula which well-approximates the shrinking time as a function of WD cooling age, the physical properties of the star and the physical and orbital properties of the ring particles. The shrinking timescale increases with both particle size and cooling age, yielding age-dependent WD debris disc size distributions.

=== arXiv:1505.05805v1  [2015-05-21]
TITLE  : V409 Tau As Another AA Tau: Photometric Observations of Stellar Occultations by the Circumstellar Disk
AUTHORS: Joseph E. Rodriguez, Joshua Pepper, Keivan G. Stassun, Robert J. Siverd, Phillip Cargile, David A. Weintraub, Thomas G. Beatty, B. Scott Gaudi
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-6256/150/1/32
ABS    : AA Tau is a well studied young stellar object that presents many of the photometric characteristics of a Classical T Tauri star (CTTS), including short-timescale stochastic variability attributed to spots and/or accretion as well as long duration dimming events attributed to occultations by vertical features (e.g., warps) in its circumstellar disk. We present new photometric observations of AA Tau from the Kilodegree Extremely Little Telescope North (KELT-North) which reveal a deep, extended dimming event in 2011, which we show supports the interpretation by Bouvier et al. (2013) of an occultation by a high-density feature in the circumstellar disk located &gt;8 AU from the star. We also present KELT-North observations of V409 Tau, a relatively unstudied young stellar object also in Taurus-Auriga, showing short timescale erratic variability, along with two separate long and deep dimming events, one from January 2009 through late October 2010, and the other from March 2012 until at least September 2013. We interpret both dimming events to have lasted more than 600 days, each with a depth of ~1.4 mag. From a spectral energy distribution analysis, we propose that V409 Tau is most likely surrounded by a circumstellar disk viewed nearly edge-on, and using Keplerian timescale arguments we interpret the deep dimmings of V409 Tau as occultations from one or more features within this disk &gt;10 AU from the star. In both AA Tau and V409 Tau, the usual CTTS short-timescale variations associated with accretion processes close to the stars continue during the occultations, further supporting the distant occulting material interpretation. Like AA Tau, V409 Tau serves as a laboratory for studying the detailed structure of the protoplanetary environments of T Tauri disks, specifically disk structures that may be signposts of planet formation at many AU out in the disk.

=== arXiv:1505.05131v3  [2015-05-18]
TITLE  : On the search for artificial Dyson-like structures around pulsars
AUTHORS: Z. Osmanov
DOI    : 10.1017/S1473550415000257
ABS    : Assuming the possibility of existence of a supercivilization we extend the idea of Freeman Dyson considering pulsars instead of stars. It is shown that instead of a spherical shell the supercivilization must use ring-like constructions. We have found that a size of the "ring" should be of the order of $(10^{-4}-10^{-1})$AU with temperature interval $(300-600)$K for relatively slowly rotating pulsars and $(10-350)$AU with temperature interval $(300-700)$K for rapidly spinning neutron stars, respectively. Although for the latter the Dyson construction is unrealistically massive and cannot be considered seriously. Analyzing the stresses in terms of the radiation and wind flows it has been argued that they cannot significantly affect the ring construction. On the other hand, the ring in-plane unstable equilibrium can be restored by the energy which is small compared to the energy extracted from the star. This indicates that the search for infrared ring-like sources close to slowly rotating pulsars seems to be quite promising.

=== arXiv:1504.05681v1  [2015-04-22]
TITLE  : AKARI Observation of the Sub-degree Scale Fluctuation of the Near-infrared Background
AUTHORS: H. J. Seo, Hyung Mok Lee, T. Matsumoto, W. -S. Jeong, Myung Gyoon Lee, J. Pyo
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/807/2/140
ABS    : We report spatial fluctuation analysis of the sky brightness in near-infrared from observations toward the north ecliptic pole (NEP) by the AKARI at 2.4 and 3.2 micron. As a follow up study of our previous work on the Monitor field of AKARI, we used NEP deep survey data, which covered a circular area of about 0.4 square degrees, in order to extend fluctuation analysis at angular scales up to 1000". We found residual fluctuation over the estimated shot noise at larger angles than the angular scale of the Monitor field. The excess fluctuation of the NEP deep field smoothly connects with that of the Monitor field at angular scales with a few hundreds arcseconds and extends without any significant variation to larger angular scales up to 1000". By comparing excess fluctuations at two wavelengths, we confirm a blue spectrum feature similar to the result of the Monitor field. We find that the result of this study is consistent with Spitzer Space Telescope observations at 3.6 micron. The origin of the excess fluctuation in the near-infrared background remains to be answered, but we could exclude zodiacal light, diffuse Galactic light, and unresolved faint galaxies at low-redshift based on the comparison with mid- and far-infrared brightness, ground based near-infrared images.

=== arXiv:1504.03418v2  [2015-04-14]
TITLE  : The Ĝ Infrared Search for Extraterrestrial Civilizations with Large Energy Supplies. III. The Reddest Extended Sources in WISE
AUTHORS: Roger L. Griffith, Jason T. Wright, Jessica Maldonado, Matthew S. Povich, Steinn Sigurdsson, Brendan Mullan
DOI    : 10.1088/0067-0049/217/2/25
ABS    : Nearby Type III (galaxy-spanning) Kardashev supercivilizations would have high mid-infrared (MIR) luminosities. We have used the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) to survey ~$1 \times 10^5$ galaxies for extreme MIR emission, $10^3$ times more galaxies than the only previous such search. We have calibrated the WISE All-sky Catalog pipeline products to improve its photometry for extended sources. We present 563 extended sources with $|b| \ge 10$ and red MIR colors, having visually vetted them to remove artifacts. No galaxies in our sample host an alien civilization reprocessing more than 85% of its starlight into the MIR, and only 50 galaxies, including Arp 220, have MIR luminosities consistent with &gt;50% reprocessing. Ninety of these (likely) extragalactic sources have little literature presence; in most cases they are likely barely resolved galaxies or pairs of galaxies undergoing large amounts of star formation. Five are new to science and deserve further study. The Be star 48 Librae sits within a MIR nebula, and we suggest that it may be creating dust. WISE, 2MASS, and Spitzer imagery shows that IRAS 04287+6444 is consistent with a previously unnoticed, heavily extinguished cluster of young stellar objects. We identify five "passive" (i.e. red) spiral galaxies with unusually high MIR and low NUV luminosity. We search a set of optically "dark" HI galaxies for MIR emission, and find none. These 90 poorly understood sources and five anomalous passive spirals deserve follow-up via both SETI and conventional astrophysics.

=== arXiv:1503.08773v2  [2015-03-30]
TITLE  : Planck intermediate results. XXVII. High-redshift infrared galaxy overdensity candidates and lensed sources discovered by Planck and confirmed by Herschel-SPIRE
AUTHORS: Planck Collaboration, N. Aghanim, B. Altieri, M. Arnaud, M. Ashdown, J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi, A. J. Banday
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201424790
ABS    : [Abridged] We use the Planck all-sky submm and mm maps to search for rare sources distinguished by extreme brightness, a few hundreds of mJy, and their potential for being situated at high redshift. These "cold" Planck sources, selected using the High Frequency Instrument (HFI) directly from the maps and from the Planck Catalogue of Compact Sources (PCCS), all satisfy the criterion of having their rest-frame far-infrared peak redshifted to the frequency range 353 and 857 GHz. This colour-selection favours galaxies in the redshift range z=2-4, which we consider as cold peaks in the cosmic infrared background (CIB). We perform a dedicated Herschel-SPIRE follow-up of 234 such Planck targets, finding a significant excess of red 350 and 500um sources, in comparison to reference SPIRE fields. About 94% of the SPIRE sources in the Planck fields are consistent with being overdensities of galaxies peaking at 350um. About 3% are candidate lensed systems, all 12 of which have secure spectroscopic confirmations, placing them at redshifts z&gt;2.2. The galaxy overdensities are detected with high significance, half of the sample showing statistical significance above 10sigma. The SPIRE photometric redshifts of galaxies in overdensities suggest a peak at z~2. Under the Td=35K assumption, we derive an infrared (IR) luminosity for each SPIRE source of about 4x10^12 Lsun, yielding star formation rates of typically 700 Msun.yr^-1. If the observed overdensities are actual gravitationally-bound structures, the total total star formation rates reaches 7x10^3 Msun.yr^-1. Taken together, these sources show the signatures of high-z (z&gt;$) protoclusters of intensively star-forming galaxies. All these observations confirm the uniqueness of our sample and demonstrate the ability of the all-sky Planck-HFI cold sources to select populations of cosmological and astrophysical interest for structure formation studies.

=== arXiv:1503.07442v1  [2015-03-25]
TITLE  : Vector interaction enhanced bag model for astrophysical applications
AUTHORS: Thomas Klahn, Tobias Fischer
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/810/2/134
ABS    : For quark matter studies in astrophysics the thermodynamic bag model (tdBAG) has been widely used. Despite its success it fails to account for various phenomena expected from Quantum-Chromo-Dynamics (QCD). We suggest a straightforward extension of tdBAG in order to take the dynamical breaking of chiral symmetry and the influence of vector interactions explicitly into account. As for tdBAG the model mimics confinement in a phenomenological approach. It is based on an analysis of the Nambu--Jona-Lasinio (NJL) model at finite density. Furthermore, we demonstrate how NJL and bag models in this regime follow from the more general and QCD based framework of Dyson-Schwinger (DS) equations in medium by assuming a simple gluon contact interaction. Based on our simple and novel model, we construct quark hadron hybrid equations of state (EoS) and study systematically chiral and deconfinement phase transitions, the appearance of $s$-quarks and the role of vector interaction. We further study these aspects for matter in beta-equilibrium at zero temperature, with particular focus on the current ~2 solar masses maximum mass constraint for neutron stars. Our approach indicates that the currently only theoretical evidence for the hypothesis of stable strange matter is an artifact of tdBAG and results from neglecting the dynamical breaking of chiral symmetry.

=== arXiv:1503.04376v1  [2015-03-15]
TITLE  : Dyson Spheres around White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: İbrahim Semiz, Salim Oğur
ABS    : A Dyson Sphere is a hypothetical structure that an advanced civilization might build around a star to intercept all of the star's light for its energy needs. One usually thinks of it as a spherical shell about one astronomical unit (AU) in radius, and surrounding a more or less Sun-like star; and might be detectable as an infrared point source. We point out that Dyson Spheres could also be built around white dwarfs. This type would avoid the need for artificial gravity technology, in contrast to the AU-scale Dyson Spheres. In fact, we show that parameters can be found to build Dyson Spheres suitable --temperature- and gravity-wise-- for human habitation. This type would be much harder to detect.

=== arXiv:1503.02795v1  [2015-03-10]
TITLE  : Hybrid neutron stars with the Dyson-Schwinger quark model and various quark-gluon vertices
AUTHORS: H. Chen, J. -B. Wei, M. Baldo, G. F. Burgio, H. -J. Schulze
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevD.91.105002
ABS    : We study cold dense quark matter and hybrid neutron stars with a Dyson-Schwinger quark model and various choices of the quark-gluon vertex. We obtain the equation of state of quark matter in beta equilibrium and investigate the hadron-quark phase transition in combination with a hadronic equation of state derived within the Brueckner-Hartree-Fock many-body theory. Comparing with the results for quark matter with the rainbow approximation, the Ball-Chiu ansatz and the 1BC ansatz for the quark-gluon vertex lead to a reduction of the effective interaction at finite chemical potential, qualitatively similar to the effect of our gluon propagator. We find that the phase transition and the equation of state of the quark or mixed phase and consequently the resulting hybrid star mass and radius depend mainly on a global reduction of the effective interaction due to effects of both the quark-gluon vertex and gluon propagator, but are not sensitive to the vertex ansatz.

=== arXiv:1503.01475v1  [2015-03-04]
TITLE  : X-ray Scattering Echoes and Ghost Halos from the Intergalactic Medium: Relation to the nature of AGN variability
AUTHORS: Lia Corrales
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/805/1/23
ABS    : X-ray bright quasars might be used to trace dust in the circumgalactic and intergalactic medium through the phenomenon of X-ray scattering, which is observed around Galactic objects whose light passes through a sufficient column of interstellar gas and dust. Of particular interest is the abundance of grey dust larger than 0.1 um, which is difficult to detect at other wavelengths. To calculate X-ray scattering from large grains, one must abandon the traditional Rayleigh-Gans approximation. The Mie solution for the X-ray scattering optical depth of the Universe is ~1%. This presents a great difficulty for distinguishing dust scattered photons from the point source image of Chandra, which is currently unsurpassed in imaging resolution. The variable nature of AGN offers a solution to this problem, as scattered light takes a longer path and thus experiences a time delay with respect to non-scattered light. If an AGN dims significantly (&gt; 3 dex) due to a major feedback event, the Chandra point source image will be suppressed relative to the scattering halo, and an X-ray echo or ghost halo may become visible. I estimate the total number of scattering echoes visible by Chandra over the entire sky: N_ech ~ 10^3 (nu_fb / yr^-1), where nu_fb is the characteristic frequency of feedback events capable of dimming an AGN quickly.

=== arXiv:1502.07100v1  [2015-02-25]
TITLE  : Searching for signatures of planet formation in stars with circumstellar debris discs
AUTHORS: J. Maldonado, C. Eiroa, E. Villaver, B. Montesinos, A. Mora
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 579, A20 (2015)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201525764
ABS    : (Abridged) Tentative correlations between the presence of dusty debris discs and low-mass planets have been presented. In parallel, detailed chemical abundance studies have reported different trends between samples of planet and non-planet hosts. We determine in a homogeneous way the metallicity, and abundances of a sample of 251 stars including stars with known debris discs, with debris discs and planets, and only with planets. Stars with debris discs and planets have the same [Fe/H] behaviour as stars hosting planets, and they also show a similar &lt;[X/Fe]&gt;-Tc trend. Different behaviour in the &lt;[X/Fe]&gt;-Tc trend is found between the samples of stars without planets and the samples of planet hosts. In particular, when considering only refractory elements, negative slopes are shown in cool giant planet hosts, whilst positive ones are shown in stars hosting low-mass planets. Stars hosting exclusively close-in giant planets show higher metallicities and positive &lt;[X/Fe]&gt;-Tc slope. A search for correlations between the &lt;[X/Fe]&gt;-Tc slopes and the stellar properties reveals a moderate but significant correlation with the stellar radius and as well as a weak correlation with the stellar age. The fact that stars with debris discs and stars with low-mass planets do not show neither metal enhancement nor a different &lt;[X/Fe]&gt;-Tc trend might indicate a correlation between the presence of debris discs and the presence of low-mass planets. We extend results from previous works which reported differences in the &lt;[X/Fe]&gt;-Tc trends between planet hosts and non hosts. However, these differences tend to be present only when the star hosts a cool distant planet and not in stars hosting exclusively low-mass planets.

=== arXiv:1502.03843v3  [2015-02-12]
TITLE  : Herschel-ATLAS: The Surprising Diversity of Dust-Selected Galaxies in the Local Submillimetre Universe
AUTHORS: Christopher J. R. Clark, Loretta Dunne, Haley L. Gomez, Steven Maddox, Pieter De Vis, Matthew W. L. Smith, Steven A. Eales, Maarten Baes
JOURNAL: MNRAS (September 01, 2015) 452 (1): 397-430
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stv1276
ABS    : We present the properties of the first 250 $μ$m blind sample of nearby galaxies (15 &lt; D &lt; 46 Mpc) containing 42 objects from the Herschel Astrophysical Terahertz Large Area Survey (H-ATLAS). Herschel's sensitivity probes the faint end of the dust luminosity function for the first time, spanning a range of stellar mass (7.4 &lt; log$_{10}$ M$_{\star}$ &lt; 11.3 M$_{\odot}$), star formation activity (-11.8 &lt; log$_{10}$ SSFR &lt; -8.9 yr$^{-1}$), gas fraction (3-96 per cent), and colour (0.6 &lt; FUV-Ks &lt; 7.0 mag). The median cold dust temperature is 14.6 K, colder than in the Herschel Reference Survey (18.5 K) and Planck Early Release Compact Source Catalogue 17.7 K. The mean dust-to-stellar mass ratio in our sample is higher than these surveys by factors of 3.7 and 1.8, with a dust mass volume density of (3.7 $\pm$ 0.7) x 10$^{5}$ M$_{\odot}$ Mpc$^{-3}$. Counter-intuitively, we find that the more dust rich a galaxy, the lower its UV attenuation. Over half of our dust-selected sample are very blue in FUV-Ks colour, with irregular and/or highly flocculent morphology, these galaxies account for only 6 per cent of the sample's stellar mass but contain over 35 per cent of the dust mass. They are the most actively star forming galaxies in the sample, with the highest gas fractions and lowest UV attenuation. They also appear to be in an early stage of converting their gas into stars, providing valuable insights into the chemical evolution of young galaxies.

=== arXiv:1502.01599v1  [2015-02-05]
TITLE  : Planck 2015 results. XXVIII. The Planck Catalogue of Galactic Cold Clumps
AUTHORS: Planck Collaboration, P. A. R. Ade, N. Aghanim, M. Arnaud, M. Ashdown, J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi, A. J. Banday
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201525819
ABS    : We present the Planck Catalogue of Galactic Cold Clumps (PGCC), an all-sky catalogue of Galactic cold clump candidates detected by Planck. This catalogue is the full version of the Early Cold Core (ECC) catalogue, which was made available in 2011 with the Early Release Compact Source Catalogue (ERCSC) and contained 915 high S/N sources. It is based on the Planck 48 months mission data that are currently being released to the astronomical community. The PGCC catalogue is an observational catalogue consisting exclusively of Galactic cold sources. The three highest Planck bands (857, 545, 353 GHz) have been combined with IRAS data at 3 THz to perform a multi-frequency detection of sources colder than their local environment. After rejection of possible extragalactic contaminants, the PGCC catalogue contains 13188 Galactic sources spread across the whole sky, i.e., from the Galactic plane to high latitudes, following the spatial distribution of the main molecular cloud complexes. The median temperature of PGCC sources lies between 13 and 14.5 K, depending on the quality of the flux density measurements, with a temperature ranging from 5.8 to 20 K after removing sources with the 1% largest temperature estimates. Using seven independent methods, reliable distance estimates have been obtained for 5574 sources, which allows us to derive their physical properties such as their mass, physical size, mean density and luminosity. The PGCC sources are located mainly in the solar neighbourhood, up to a distance of 10.5 kpc towards the Galactic centre, and range from low-mass cores to large molecular clouds. Because of this diversity and because the PGCC catalogue contains sources in very different environments, the catalogue is useful to investigate the evolution from molecular clouds to cores. Finally, the catalogue also includes 54 additional sources located in the SMC and LMC.

=== arXiv:1501.03813v2  [2015-01-15]
TITLE  : Does the presence of planets affect the frequency and properties of extrasolar Kuiper Belts? Results from the Herschel DEBRIS and DUNES surveys
AUTHORS: A. Moro-Martin, J. P. Marshall, G. Kennedy, B. Sibthorpe, B. C. Matthews, C. Eiroa, M. C. Wyatt, J. -F. Lestrade
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/801/2/143
ABS    : The study of the planet-debris disk connection can shed light on the formation and evolution of planetary systems, and may help predict the presence of planets around stars with certain disk characteristics. In preliminary analyses of the Herschel DEBRIS and DUNES surveys, Wyatt et al. (2012) and Marshall et al. (2014) identified a tentative correlation between debris and low-mass planets. Here we use the cleanest possible sample out these surveys to assess the presence of such a correlation, discarding stars without known ages, with ages &lt; 1 Gyr and with binary companions &lt;100 AU, to rule out possible correlations due to effects other than planet presence. In our sample of 204 FGK stars, we do not find evidence that debris disks are more common or more dusty around stars harboring high-mass or low-mass planets compared to a control sample without identified planets, nor that debris disks are more or less common (or more or less dusty) around stars harboring multiple planets compared to single-planet systems. Diverse dynamical histories may account for the lack of correlations. The data show the correlation between the presence of high-mass planets and stellar metallicity, but no correlation between the presence of low-mass planets or debris and stellar metallicity. Comparing the observed cumulative distribution of fractional luminosity to those expected from a Gaussian distribution, we find that a distribution centered on the Solar system's value fits well the data, while one centered at 10 times this value can be rejected. This is of interest in the context of future terrestrial planet characterization because it indicates that there are good prospects for finding a large number of debris disk systems (i.e. with evidence of harboring the building blocks of planets) with exozodiacal emission low enough to be appropriate targets for an ATLAST-type mission to search for biosignatures.

=== arXiv:1412.7661v1  [2014-12-24]
TITLE  : Resolved photometry of the binary components of RW Aur
AUTHORS: S. Antipin, A. Belinski, A. Cherepashchuk, D. Cherjasov, A. Dodin, I. Gorbunov, S. Lamzin, M. Kornilov
ABS    : Resolved UBVRI photometry of RW Aur binary was performed on November 13/14, 2014 during the deep dimming of RW Aur with a newly installed 2.5 meter telescope of the Caucasus observatory of Lomonosov Moscow State University at the mount Shatzhatmaz. At that moment RW Aur A was $\simeq 3^m$ fainter than in November 1994 in all spectral bands. We explain the current RW Aur A dimming as a result of eclipse of the star by dust particles with size $&gt;1 μm.$ We found that RW Aur B is also a variable star: it was brighter than 20 years ago at $0.7^m$ in each of UBVRI band (gray brightening).

=== arXiv:1412.5598v1  [2014-12-17]
TITLE  : Five steps in the evolution from protoplanetary to debris disk
AUTHORS: Mark C. Wyatt, Olja Panic, Grant M. Kennedy, Luca Matra
DOI    : 10.1007/s10509-015-2315-6
ABS    : The protoplanetary disks of Herbig Ae stars eventually dissipate leaving a tenuous debris disk comprised of planetesimals and dust, as well as possibly gas and planets. This paper uses the properties of 10-20Myr A star debris disks to consider the protoplanetary to debris disk transition. The physical distinction between these two classes is argued to rest on the presence of primordial gas in sufficient quantities to dominate the motion of small dust grains (not the secondary nature of the dust or its level of stirring). This motivates an observational classification based on the dust spectrum, empirically defined so that A star debris disks require fractional excesses &lt;3 at 12um and &lt;2000 at 70um. We also propose a hypothesis to test, that the main sequence planet/planetesimal structures are already in place (but obscured) during the protoplanetary disk phase. This may be only weakly true if planetary architectures change until frozen during disk dispersal, or completely false if planets and planetesimals form during disk dispersal. Five steps in the transition are discussed: (i) carving an inner hole to form a transition disk; (ii) depletion of mm-sized dust in outer disk, noting the importance of determining whether this mass ends up in planetesimals or is collisionally depleted; (iii) final clearing of inner regions, noting that many mechanisms replenish moderate hot dust levels at later phases, and likely also operate in protoplanetary disks; (iv) disappearence of gas, noting recent discoveries of primordial and secondary gas in debris disks that highlight our ignorance and its impending enlightenment by ALMA; (v) formation of ring-like planetesimal structures, noting these are shaped by interactions with planets, and that the location of planetesimals in protoplanetary disks may be unrelated to the dust concentrations therein that are set by gas interactions.

=== arXiv:1411.5829v1  [2014-11-21]
TITLE  : Stirring in massive, young debris discs from spatially resolved Herschel images
AUTHORS: A. Moór, Á. Kóspál, P. Ábrahám, D. Apai, Z. Balog, C. Grady, Th. Henning, A. Juhász
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stu2442
ABS    : A significant fraction of main-sequence stars are encircled by dusty debris discs, where the short-lived dust particles are replenished through collisions between planetesimals. Most destructive collisions occur when the orbits of smaller bodies are dynamically stirred up, either by the gravitational effect of locally formed Pluto-sized planetesimals (self-stirring scenario), or via secular perturbation caused by an inner giant planet (planetary stirring). The relative importance of these scenarios in debris systems is unknown. Here we present new Herschel Space Observatory imagery of 11 discs selected from the most massive and extended known debris systems. All discs were found to be extended at far-infrared wavelengths, five of them being resolved for the first time. We evaluated the feasibility of the self-stirring scenario by comparing the measured disc sizes with the predictions of the model calculated for the ages of our targets. We concluded that the self-stirring explanation works for seven discs. However, in four cases, the predicted pace of outward propagation of the stirring front, assuming reasonable initial disc masses, was far too low to explain the radial extent of the cold dust. Therefore, for HD 9672, HD 16743, HD 21997, and HD 95086, another explanation is needed. We performed a similar analysis for ß Pic and HR 8799, reaching the same conclusion. We argue that planetary stirring is a promising possibility to explain the disk properties in these systems. In HR 8799 and HD 95086 we may already know the potential perturber, since their known outer giant planets could be responsible for the stirring process. Our study demonstrates that among the largest and most massive debris discs self-stirring may not be the only active scenario, and potentially planetary stirring is responsible for destructive collisions and debris dust production in a number of systems.

=== arXiv:1411.1761v2  [2014-11-06]
TITLE  : The Search for Failed Supernovae with The Large Binocular Telescope: First Candidates
AUTHORS: J. R. Gerke, C. S. Kochanek, K. Z. Stanek
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stv776
ABS    : We are monitoring 27 galaxies within 10 Mpc using the Large Binocular Telescope to search for failed supernovae (SNe), massive stars that collapse to form a black hole without a SN explosion. We present the results from the first 4 years of survey data, during which these galaxies were observed to produce 3 successful core-collapse SNe. We search for stars that have "vanished" over the course of our survey, by examining all stars showing a decrease in luminosity of $ΔνL_ν \ge 10^4L_{\odot}$ from the first to the last observation. We also search for the low luminosity, long duration transients predicted by \citet{lovegrove2013} for failed explosions of red supergiants. After analyzing the first 4 years of data in this first direct search for failed SNe, we are left with one candidate requiring further study. This candidate has an estimated mass of 18-25$M_{\odot}$, a mass range likely associated with failed SNe and, if real, implies that failed SN represent a median fraction of $f \simeq 0.30$ of core-collapses, with symmetric 90% confidence limits of $0.07 \le f \le 0.62$. If follow up data eliminate this candidate, we find an upper limit on the fraction of core collapses leading to a failed SN of $f&lt;0.40$ at 90% confidence. As the duration of the survey continues to increase, it will begin to constrain the $f \simeq$ 10-30% failure rates needed to explain the deficit of massive SN progenitors and the observed black hole mass function.

=== arXiv:1410.8527v2  [2014-10-30]
TITLE  : General-relativistic versus Newtonian: geometric dragging and dynamic anti-dragging in stationary disks in the first post-Newtonian approximation
AUTHORS: Piotr Jaranowski, Patryk Mach, Edward Malec, Michal Pirog
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevD.91.024039
ABS    : We evaluate general-relativistic effects in motion of stationary accretion disks around a Schwarzschild black hole, assuming the first post-Newtonian (1PN) approximation. There arises an integrability condition, that leads to the emergence of two types of general-relativistic corrections to a Newtonian rotation curve. The well known geometric dragging of frames accelerates rotation but the hitherto unknown dynamic term, that reflects the disk structure, deccelerates rotation. The net result can diminish the Newtonian angular velocity of rotation in a central disk zone but the geometric dragging of frames dominates in the disk boundary zone. Both effects are nonlinear in nature and they disappear in the limit of test fluids. Dust disks can be only geometrically dragged while uniformly rotating gaseous disk are untouched at the 1PN order. General-relativistic contributions can strongly affect rotation periods in Keplerian motion for compact systems.

=== arXiv:1409.2490v2  [2014-09-08]
TITLE  : Variable Emission from a Gaseous Disc around a Metal-Polluted White Dwarf
AUTHORS: David J Wilson, Boris Gaensicke, Detlev Koester, Roberto Raddi, Elmé Breedt, John Southworth, Steven G. Parsons
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stu1876
ABS    : We present the discovery of strongly variable emission lines from a gaseous disc around the DA white dwarf SDSS J1617+1620, a star previously found to have an infrared excess indicative of a dusty debris disc formed by the tidal disruption of a rocky planetary body. Time-series spectroscopy obtained during the period 2006-2014 has shown the appearance of strong double-peaked Ca II emission lines in 2008. The lines were weak, at best, during earlier observations, and monotonically faded through the remainder of our monitoring. Our observations represent unambiguous evidence for short-term variability in the debris environment of evolved planetary systems. Possible explanations for this extraordinary variability include the impact onto the dusty disc of either a single small rocky planetesimal, or of material from a highly eccentric debris tail. The increase in flux from the emission lines is sufficient that similar events could be detected in the broadband photometry of ongoing and future large-area time domain surveys.

=== arXiv:1408.5649v1  [2014-08-25]
TITLE  : Interpreting the extended emission around three nearby debris disc host stars
AUTHORS: Jonathan P. Marshall, F. Kirchschlager, S. Ertel, J. -C. Augereau, G. M. Kennedy, M. Booth, S. Wolf, B. Montesinos
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201424517
ABS    : Cool debris discs are a relic of the planetesimal formation process around their host star, analogous to the solar system's Edgeworth-Kuiper belt. As such, they can be used as a proxy to probe the origin and formation of planetary systems like our own. The Herschel Open Time Key Programmes "DUst around NEarby Stars" (DUNES) and "Disc Emission via a Bias-free Reconnaissance in the Infrared/Submillimetre" (DEBRIS) observed many nearby, sun-like stars at far-infrared wavelengths seeking to detect and characterize the emission from their circumstellar dust. Excess emission attributable to the presence of dust was identified from around $\sim$ 20% of stars. Herschel's high angular resolution ($\sim$ 7" FWHM at 100 $μ$m) provided the capacity for resolving debris belts around nearby stars with radial extents comparable to the solar system (50 to 100 au). As part of the DUNES and DEBRIS surveys, we obtained observations of three debris disc stars, HIP 22263 (HD 30495), HIP 62207 (HD 110897), and HIP 72848 (HD 131511), at far-infrared wavelengths with the Herschel PACS instrument. Combining these new images and photometry with ancilliary data from the literature, we undertook simultaneous multi-wavelength modelling of the discs' radial profiles and spectral energy distributions using three different methodologies: single annulus, modified black body, and a radiative transfer code. We present the first far-infrared spatially resolved images of these discs and new single-component debris disc models. We characterize the capacity of the models to reproduce the disc parameters based on marginally resolved emission through analysis of two sets of simulated systems (based on the HIP 22263 and HIP 62207 data) with the noise levels typical of the Herschel images. We find that the input parameter values are recovered well at noise levels attained in the observations presented here.

=== arXiv:1408.4116v1  [2014-08-18]
TITLE  : Do Two Temperature Debris Disks Have Multiple Belts?
AUTHORS: Grant M. Kennedy, Mark C. Wyatt
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stu1665
ABS    : We present a study of debris disks whose spectra are well modelled by dust emission at two different temperatures. These disks are typically assumed to be a sign of multiple belts, which in only a few cases have been confirmed via high resolution observations. We first compile a sample of two-temperature disks to derive their properties, summarised by the ratios of the warm and cool component temperatures and fractional luminosities. The ratio of warm to cool temperatures is constant in the range 2-4, and the temperatures of both warm and cool components increases with stellar mass. We then explore whether this emission can arise from dust in a single narrow belt, with the range of temperatures arising from the size variation of grain temperatures. This model can produce two-temperature spectra for Sun-like stars, but is not supported where it can be tested by observed disk sizes and far-IR/mm spectral slopes. Therefore, while some two-temperature disks arise from single belts, it is probable that most have multiple spatial components. These disks are plausibly similar to the outer Solar System's configuration of Asteroid and Edgeworth-Kuiper belts separated by giant planets. Alternatively, the inner component could arise from inward scattering of material from the outer belt, again due to intervening planets. In either case, we suggest that the ratio of warm/cool component temperatures is indicative of the scale of outer planetary systems, which typically span a factor of about ten in radius.

=== arXiv:1408.1134v1  [2014-08-05]
TITLE  : The Ĝ Infrared Search for Extraterrestrial Civilizations with Large Energy Supplies. II. Framework, Strategy, and First Result
AUTHORS: J. T. Wright, R. Griffith, S. Sigurðsson, M. S. Povich, B. Mullan
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/792/1/27
ABS    : We describe the framework and strategy of the Ĝ infrared search for extraterrestrial civilizations with large energy supplies, which will use the wide-field infrared surveys of WISE and Spitzer to search for these civilizations' waste heat. We develop a formalism for translating mid-infrared photometry into quantitative upper limits on extraterrestrial energy supplies. We discuss the likely sources of false positives, how dust can and will contaminate our search, and prospects for distinguishing dust from alien waste heat. We argue that galaxy-spanning civilizations may be easier to distinguish from natural sources than circumstellar civilizations (i.e., Dyson spheres), although Gaia will significantly improve our capability to identify the latter. We present a "zeroth order" null result of our search based on the WISE all-sky catalog: we show, for the first time, that Kardashev Type III civilizations (as Kardashev originally defined them) are very rare in the local universe. More sophisticated searches can extend our methodology to smaller waste heat luminosities, and potentially entirely rule out (or detect) both Kardashev Type III civilizations and new physics that allows for unlimited "free" energy generation.

=== arXiv:1408.1133v1  [2014-08-05]
TITLE  : The Ĝ Infrared Search for Extraterrestrial Civilizations with Large Energy Supplies. I. Background and Justification
AUTHORS: J. T. Wright, B. Mullan, S. Sigurðsson, M. S. Povich
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/792/1/26
ABS    : We motivate the Ĝ infrared search for extraterrestrial civilizations with large energy supplies. We discuss some philosophical difficulties of SETI, and how communication SETI circumvents them. We review "Dysonian SETI", the search for artifacts of alien civilizations, and find that it is highly complementary to traditional communication SETI; the two together might succeed where either one, alone, has not. We discuss the argument of Hart (1975) that spacefaring life in the Milky Way should be either galaxy-spanning or non-existent, and examine a portion of his argument that we dub the "monocultural fallacy". We discuss some rebuttals to Hart that invoke sustainability and predict long Galaxy colonization timescales. We find that the maximum Galaxy colonization timescale is actually much shorter than previous work has found ($&lt; 10^9$ yr), and that many "sustainability" counter-arguments to Hart's thesis suffer from the monocultural fallacy. We extend Hart's argument to alien energy supplies, and argue that detectably large energy supplies can plausibly be expected to exist because life has potential for exponential growth until checked by resource or other limitations, and intelligence implies the ability to overcome such limitations. As such, if Hart's thesis is correct then searches for large alien civilizations in other galaxies may be fruitful; if it is incorrect, then searches for civilizations within the Milky Way are more likely to succeed than Hart argued. We review some past Dysonian SETI efforts, and discuss the promise of new mid-infrared surveys, such as that of WISE.

=== arXiv:1407.7547v1  [2014-07-28]
TITLE  : Probing the Terrestrial Regions of Planetary Systems: Warm Debris Disks with Emission Features
AUTHORS: Nicholas P. Ballering, George H. Rieke, Andras Gaspar
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/793/1/57
ABS    : Observations of debris disks allow for the study of planetary systems, even where planets have not been detected. However, debris disks are often only characterized by unresolved infrared excesses that resemble featureless blackbodies, and the location of the emitting dust is uncertain due to a degeneracy with the dust grain properties. Here we characterize the Spitzer IRS spectra of 22 debris disks exhibiting 10 micron silicate emission features. Such features arise from small warm dust grains, and their presence can significantly constrain the orbital location of the emitting debris. We find that these features can be explained by the presence of an additional dust component in the terrestrial zones of the planetary systems, i.e. an exozodiacal belt. Aside from possessing exozodiacal dust, these debris disks are not particularly unique; their minimum grain sizes are consistent with the blowout sizes of their systems, and their brightnesses are comparable to those of featureless warm debris disks. These disks are in systems with a range of ages, although the older systems with features are found only around A-type stars. The features in young systems may be signatures of terrestrial planet formation. Analyzing the spectra of unresolved debris disks with emission features may be one of the simplest and most accessible ways to study the terrestrial regions of planetary systems.

=== arXiv:1407.3900v1  [2014-07-15]
TITLE  : A K-band spectral mini-survey of Galactic B[e] stars
AUTHORS: A. Liermann, O. Schnurr, M. Kraus, A. Kreplin, M. L. Arias, L. S. Cidale
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stu1174
ABS    : We present a mini-survey of Galactic B[e] stars mainly undertaken with the Large Binocular Telescope (LBT). B[e] stars show morphological features with hydrogen emission lines and an infrared excess, attributed to warm circumstellar dust. In general, these features are assumed to arise from dense, non-spherical, disk-forming circumstellar material in which molecules and dust can condensate. Due to the lack of reliable luminosities, the class of Galactic B[e] stars contains stars at very different stellar evolutionary phases like Herbig AeBe, supergiants or planetary nebulae. We took near-infrared long-slit K-band spectra for a sample of Galactic B[e] stars with the LBT-Luci I. Prominent spectral features, such as the Brackett gamma line and CO band heads are identified in the spectra. The analysis shows that the stars can be characterized as evolved objects. Among others we find one LBV candidate (MWC314), one supergiant B[e] candidate with 13CO (MWC137) and in two cases (MWC623 and AS 381) indications for the existence of a late-type binary companion, complementary to previous studies. For MWC84, IR spectra were taken at different epochs with LBT-Luci I and the GNIRS spectrograph at the Gemini North telescope. The new data show the disappearance of the circumstellar CO emission around this star, previously detectable over decades. Also no signs of a recent prominent eruption leading to the formation of new CO disk emission are found during 2010 and 2013.

=== arXiv:1407.1449v1  [2014-07-06]
TITLE  : Searching for Dust around Hyper Metal-Poor Stars
AUTHORS: Kim A. Venn, Thomas H. Puzia, Mike Divell, Stephanie Cote, David L. Lambert, Else Starkenburg
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/791/2/98
ABS    : We examine the mid-infrared fluxes and spectral energy distributions for metal-poor stars with iron abundances [Fe/H] $\lesssim-5$, as well as two CEMP-no stars, to eliminate the possibility that their low metallicities are related to the depletion of elements onto dust grains in the formation of a debris disk. Six out of seven stars examined here show no mid-IR excess. These non-detections rule out many types of circumstellar disks, e.g. a warm debris disk ($T\!\le\!290$ K), or debris disks with inner radii $\le1$ AU, such as those associated with the chemically peculiar post-AGB spectroscopic binaries and RV Tau variables. However, we cannot rule out cooler debris disks, nor those with lower flux ratios to their host stars due to, e.g. a smaller disk mass, a larger inner disk radius, an absence of small grains, or even a multicomponent structure, as often found with the chemically peculiar Lambda Bootis stars. The only exception is HE0107-5240, for which a small mid-IR excess near 10 microns is detected at the 2-$σ$ level; if the excess is real and associated with this star, it may indicate the presence of (recent) dust-gas winnowing or a binary system.

=== arXiv:1406.4514v1  [2014-06-17]
TITLE  : Near-infrared spectroscopy of 20 new Chandra sources in the Norma Arm
AUTHORS: Farid Rahoui, John A. Tomsick, Francesca M. Fornasini, Arash Bodaghee, Franz E. Bauer
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 568, A54 (2014)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201424006
ABS    : We report on CTIO/NEWFIRM and CTIO/OSIRIS photometric and spectroscopic observations of 20 new X-ray (0.5-10 keV) emitters discovered in the Norma Arm Region Chandra Survey (NARCS). NEWFIRM photometry was obtained to pinpoint the near-infrared counterparts of NARCS sources, while OSIRIS spectroscopy was used to help identify 20 sources with possible high mass X-ray binary properties. We find that (1) two sources are WN8 Wolf-Rayet stars, maybe in colliding wind binaries, part of the massive star cluster Mercer 81; (2) two are emission-line stars, possibly in X-ray binaries, that exhibit near- and mid-infrared excesses either due to free-free emission from the decretion discs of Be stars or warm dust in the stellar winds of peculiar massive stars such as B[e] supergiants or luminous blue variables; (3) one is a B8-A3 IV-V star that could be in a quiescent high mass X-ray binary system; (4) two are cataclysmic variables including one intermediate polar; (5) three may be neutron star symbiotic binaries; (6) five are most likely white dwarf symbiotic binaries; and (7) five exhibit properties more consistent with isolated giant/dwarf stars. The possible detection of one to three high mass X-ray binaries is in good agreement with our predictions. However, our study illustrates the difficulty of clearly differentiating quiescent or intermediate X-ray luminosity systems from isolated massive stars, which may lead to an underestimation of the number of known high mass X-ray binaries.

=== arXiv:1405.6645v2  [2014-05-26]
TITLE  : Serendipitous Discovery of a Thin Stellar Stream near the Galactic Bulge in the Pan-STARRS1 3Pi Survey
AUTHORS: Edouard J. Bernard, Annette M. N. Ferguson, Edward F. Schlafly, Mohamad Abbas, Eric F. Bell, Niall R. Deacon, Nicolas F. Martin, Hans-Walter Rix
DOI    : 10.1093/mnrasl/slu089
ABS    : We report the discovery of a thin stellar stream found in Pan-STARRS1 photometry near the Galactic bulge in the constellation of Ophiuchus. It appears as a coherent structure in the colour-selected stellar density maps produced to search for tidal debris around nearby globular clusters. The stream is exceptionally short and narrow; it is about 2.5° long and 6' wide in projection. The colour-magnitude diagram of this object, which harbours a blue horizontal-branch, is consistent with an old and relatively metal-poor population ([Fe/H]~-1.3) located 9.5 +/- 0.9 kpc away at (l,b) ~ (5°,+32°), and 5.0 +/- 1.0 kpc from the Galactic centre. These properties argue for a globular cluster as progenitor. The finding of such a prominent, nearby stream suggests that many streams could await discovery in the more densely populated regions of our Galaxy.

=== arXiv:1405.5284v2  [2014-05-21]
TITLE  : Rapid Evolution of the Innermost Dust Disk of Protoplanetary Disks Surrounding Intermediate-mass Stars
AUTHORS: Chikako Yasui, Naoto Kobayashi, Alan T. Tokunaga, Masao Saito
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stu1013
ABS    : We derived the intermediate-mass (~=1.5--7 M_sun) disk fraction (IMDF) in the near-infrared JHK photometric bands as well as in the mid-infrared (MIR) bands for young clusters in the age range of 0 to ~10 Myr. From the JHK IMDF, the lifetime of the innermost dust disk (~0.3 AU; hereafter the K disk) is estimated to be ~3 Myr, suggesting a stellar mass (M*) dependence of K-disk lifetime proportional to M*^-0.7. However, from the MIR IMDF, the lifetime of the inner disk (~5 AU; hereafter the MIR disk) is estimated to be ~6.5 Myr, suggesting a very weak stellar mass dependence (proportional to M*^-0.2). The much shorter K-disk lifetime compared to the MIR-disk lifetime for intermediate-mass (IM) stars suggests that IM stars with transition disks, which have only MIR excess emission but no K-band excess emission, are more common than classical Herbig Ae/Be stars, which exhibit both. We suggest that this prominent early disappearance of the K disk for IM stars is due to dust settling/growth in the protoplanetary disk, and it could be one of the major reasons for the paucity of close-in planets around IM stars.

=== arXiv:1404.5266v2  [2014-04-21]
TITLE  : Constraints on the height of the inner disk rim in pre-main-sequence stars
AUTHORS: Dejan Vinković
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201322008
ABS    : The structure of inner region of protoplanetary disks around young pre-main-sequence stars is still poorly understood. This part of the disk is shaped by various forces that influence dust and gas dynamics, and by dust sublimation, which creates abrupt drops in the dust density. This region also emits strong near-infrared excess that cannot be explained by classical accretion disk models, which suggests the existence of some unusual dust distribution or disk shape. The most prevalent explanation to date is the puffed-up inner disk rim model, where the disk exhibits an optically thin cavity around the star up to the distance of dust sublimation. The critical parameter in this model is the inner disk rim height $z_{\rm max}$ relative to the rim distance from the star $R_{\rm in}$. Observations often require $z_{\rm max}/R_{\rm in}\gtrsim0.2$ to reproduce the near-infrared excess in the spectra. We compile a comprehensive list of processes that can shape the inner disk rim and combine them into a self-consistent model. Two of them, radiation pressure force and the gas velocity profile, have never been applied in this context before. The aim was to find the most plausible theoretical values of $z_{\rm max}/R_{\rm in}$. The results show that this value is $\lesssim$0.13 for Herbig Ae stars, $\lesssim$0.11 for T Tau stars, and $\lesssim$0.10 for young brown dwarfs. This is lower than the observational requirements for Herbig Ae stars. We argue that the same problem exists in T Tau stars as well. We conclude that the puffed-up inner rim model cannot be the sole explanation for the near-infrared excess in young pre-main-sequence stars.

=== arXiv:1404.1815v2  [2014-04-07]
TITLE  : Gas and dust in the Beta Pictoris Moving Group as seen by the Herschel Space Observatory
AUTHORS: P. Riviere-Marichalar, D. Barrado, B. Montesinos, G. Duchêne, H. Bouy, C. Pinte, F. Menard, J. Donaldson
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201322901
ABS    : Context. Debris discs are thought to be formed through the collisional grinding of planetesimals, and can be considered as the outcome of planet formation. Understanding the properties of gas and dust in debris discs can help us to comprehend the architecture of extrasolar planetary systems. Herschel Space Observatory far-infrared (IR) photometry and spectroscopy have provided a valuable dataset for the study of debris discs gas and dust composition. This paper is part of a series of papers devoted to the study of Herschel PACS observations of young stellar associations. Aims. This work aims at studying the properties of discs in the Beta Pictoris Moving Group (BPMG) through far-IR PACS observations of dust and gas. Methods. We obtained Herschel-PACS far-IR photometric observations at 70, 100 and 160 microns of 19 BPMG members, together with spectroscopic observations of four of them. Spectroscopic observations were centred at 63.18 microns and 157 microns, aiming to detect [OI] and [CII] emission. We incorporated the new far-IR observations in the SED of BPMG members and fitted modified blackbody models to better characterise the dust content. Results. We have detected far-IR excess emission toward nine BPMG members, including the first detection of an IR excess toward HD 29391.The star HD 172555, shows [OI] emission, while HD 181296, shows [CII] emission, expanding the short list of debris discs with a gas detection. No debris disc in BPMG is detected in both [OI] and [CII]. The discs show dust temperatures in the range 55 to 264 K, with low dust masses (6.6*10^{-5} MEarth to 0.2 MEarth) and radii from blackbody models in the range 3 to 82 AU. All the objects with a gas detection are early spectral type stars with a hot dust component.

=== arXiv:1404.0709v1  [2014-04-02]
TITLE  : Herschel evidence for disk flattening or gas depletion in transitional disks
AUTHORS: J. T. Keane, I. Pascucci, C. Espaillat, P. Woitke, S. Andrews, I. Kamp, W. -F. Thi, G. Meeus
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/787/2/153
ABS    : Transitional disks are protoplanetary disks characterized by reduced near- and mid-infrared emission with respect to full disks. This characteristic spectral energy distribution indicates the presence of an optically thin inner cavity within the dust disk believed to mark the disappearance of the primordial massive disk. We present new Herschel Space Observatory PACS spectra of [OI] 63 micron for 21 transitional disks. Our survey complements the larger Herschel GASPS program "Gas in Protoplanetary Systems" (Dent et al. 2013) by quadrupling the number of transitional disks observed with PACS at this wavelength. [OI] 63 micron traces material in the outer regions of the disk, beyond the inner cavity of most transitional disks. We find that transitional disks have [OI] 63 micron line luminosities two times fainter than their full disk counterparts. We self consistently determine various stellar properties (e.g. bolometric luminosity, FUV excess, etc.) and disk properties (e.g. disk dust mass, etc.) that could influence the [OI] 63 micron line luminosity and we find no correlations that can explain the lower [OI] 63 micron line luminosities in transitional disks. Using a grid of thermo-chemical protoplanetary disk models, we conclude that either transitional disks are less flared than full disks or they possess lower gas-to-dust ratios due to a depletion of gas mass. This result suggests that transitional disks are more evolved than their full disk counterparts, possibly even at large radii.

=== arXiv:1403.6186v1  [2014-03-24]
TITLE  : Correlations between the stellar, planetary and debris components of exoplanet systems observed by $\textit{Herschel}$
AUTHORS: J. P. Marshall, A. Moro-Martín, C. Eiroa, G. Kennedy, A. Mora, B. Sibthorpe, J. -F. Lestrade, J. Maldonado
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201323058
ABS    : The $\textit{Herschel}$ DEBRIS, DUNES and GT programmes observed 37 exoplanet host stars within 25 pc at 70, 100 and 160 $μ$m with the sensitivity to detect far-infrared excess emission at flux density levels only an order of magnitude greater than that of the Solar system's Edgeworth-Kuiper belt. Here we present an analysis of that sample, using it to more accurately determine the (possible) level of dust emission from these exoplanet host stars and thereafter determine the links between the various components of these exoplanetary systems through statistical analysis. We have fitted the flux densities measured from recent \textit{Herschel} observations with a simple two parameter ($T_{d}$, $L_{\rm IR}/L_{\star}$) black body model (or to the 3-$σ$ upper limits at 100 $μ$m). From this uniform approach we calculate the fractional luminosity, radial extent, dust temperature and disc mass. We then plotted the calculated dust luminosity or upper limits against the stellar properties, e.g. effective temperature, metallicity, age, and identified correlations between these parameters. A total of eleven debris discs are identified around the 37 stars in the sample. An incidence of ten cool debris discs around the Sun-like exoplanet host stars (29 $\pm$ 9 %) is consistent with the detection rate found by DUNES (20.2 $\pm$ 2.0 %). For the debris disc systems, the dust temperatures range from 20 to 80 K, and fractional luminosities ($L_{\rm IR}/L_{\star}$) between 2.4 $\times$10$^{-6}$ and 4.1 $\times$10$^{-4}$. In the case of non-detections, we calculated typical 3-$σ$ upper limits to the dust fractional luminosities of a few $\times10^{-6}$. We recover the previously identified correlation between stellar metallicity and hot Jupiter planets in our data set. We find a correlation between the increased presence of dust, lower planet masses and lower stellar metallicities. (abridged)

=== arXiv:1403.3435v1  [2014-03-13]
TITLE  : A Sensitive Identification of Warm Debris Disks in the Solar Neighborhood Through Precise Calibration of Saturated WISE Photometry
AUTHORS: Rahul I. Patel, Stanimir A. Metchev, Aren Heinze
DOI    : 10.1088/0067-0049/212/1/10
ABS    : We present a sensitive search for WISE W3 (12um) and W4 (22um) excesses from warm optically thin dust around Hipparcos main sequence stars within 75pc from the Sun. We use contemporaneously measured photometry from WISE, remove sources of contamination, and derive and apply corrections to saturated fluxes to attain optimal sensitivity to &gt;10um excesses. We use data from the WISE All-Sky Survey Catalog rather than the AllWISE release, because we find that its saturated photometry is better behaved, allowing us to detect small excesses even around saturated stars in WISE. Our new discoveries increase by 45% the number of stars with warm dusty excesses and expand the number of known debris disks (with excess at any wavelength) within 75pc by 29%. We identify 220 Hipparcos debris disk-host stars, 108 of which are new detections at any wavelength. We present the first measurement of a 12um and/or 22um excess for 10 stars with previously known cold (50-100 K) disks. We also find five new stars with small but significant W3 excesses, adding to the small population of known exozodi, and we detect evidence for a W2 excess around HIP96562 (F2V), indicative of tenuous hot (780 K) dust. As a result of our WISE study, the number of debris disks with known 10-30um excesses within 75pc (379) has now surpassed the number of disks with known &gt;30um excesses (289, with 171 in common), even if the latter have been found to have a higher occurrence rate in unbiased samples.

=== arXiv:1402.5033v2  [2014-02-20]
TITLE  : Waiting time distributions of noninteracting fermions on a tight-binding chain
AUTHORS: Konrad H. Thomas, Christian Flindt
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. B 89, 245420 (2014)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevB.89.245420
ABS    : We consider the distribution of waiting times between non-interacting fermions on a tight-binding chain. We calculate the waiting time distribution for a quantum point contact and find a cross-over from Wigner-Dyson statistics at full transmission to Poisson statistics close to pinch-off as predicted by scattering theory. In addition, we consider several quantum dot structures for which we can associate oscillations in the waiting time distributions to internal energy scales of the scatterers. A detailed comparison with scattering theory and generalized master equations is provided. We focus on mesoscopic conductors, but our tight-binding models may also be realized in cold atomic gases.

=== arXiv:1402.2483v2  [2014-02-11]
TITLE  : Multiwavelength study of the high-latitude cloud L1642: chain of star formation
AUTHORS: J. Malinen, M. Juvela, S. Zahorecz, A. Rivera-Ingraham, J. Montillaud, K. Arimatsu, J. -Ph. Bernard, Y. Doi
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201323026
ABS    : L1642 is one of the two high galactic latitude (|b| &gt; 30deg) clouds confirmed to have active star formation. We examine the properties of this cloud, especially the large-scale structure, dust properties, and compact sources in different stages of star formation. We present high-resolution far-infrared and submm observations with the Herschel and AKARI satellites and mm observations with the AzTEC/ASTE telescope, which we combined with archive data from near- and mid-infrared (2MASS, WISE) to mm observations (Planck). The Herschel observations, combined with other data, show a sequence of objects from a cold clump to young stellar objects at different evolutionary stages. Source B-3 (2MASS J04351455-1414468) appears to be a YSO forming inside the L1642 cloud, instead of a foreground brown dwarf, as previously classified. Herschel data reveal striation in the diffuse dust emission around L1642. The western region shows striation towards NE and has a steeper column density gradient on its southern side. The densest central region has a bow-shock like structure showing compression from the west and a filamentary tail extending towards east. The differences suggest that these may be spatially distinct structures, aligned only in projection. We derive values of the dust emission cross-section per H nucleon for different regions of the cloud. Modified black-body fits to the spectral energy distribution of Herschel and Planck data give emissivity spectral index beta values 1.8-2.0 for the different regions. The compact sources have lower beta values and show an anticorrelation between T and beta. Markov chain Monte Carlo calculations demonstrate the strong anticorrelation between beta and T errors and the importance of mm Planck data in constraining the estimates. L1642 reveals a more complex structure and sequence of star formation than previously known.

=== arXiv:1401.1499v1  [2014-01-07]
TITLE  : The Atmospheres of Earth-like Planets after Giant Impact Events
AUTHORS: R. E. Lupu, Kevin Zahnle, Mark S. Marley, Laura Schaefer, Bruce Fegley, Caroline Morley, Kerri Cahoy, Richard Freedman
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/784/1/27
ABS    : It is now understood that the accretion of terrestrial planets naturally involves giant collisions, the moon-forming impact being a well known example. In the aftermath of such collisions the surface of the surviving planet is very hot and potentially detectable. Here we explore the atmospheric chemistry, photochemistry, and spectral signatures of post-giant-impact terrestrial planets enveloped by thick atmospheres consisting predominantly of CO2, and H2O. The atmospheric chemistry and structure are computed self-consistently for atmospheres in equilibrium with hot surfaces with composition reflecting either the bulk silicate Earth (which includes the crust, mantle, atmosphere and oceans) or Earth's continental crust. We account for all major molecular and atomic opacity sources including collision-induced absorption. We find that these atmospheres are dominated by H2O and CO2, while the formation of CH4, and NH3 is quenched due to short dynamical timescales. Other important constituents are HF, HCl, NaCl, and SO2. These are apparent in the emerging spectra, and can be indicative that an impact has occurred. The use of comprehensive opacities results in spectra that are a factor of 2 lower in surface brightness in the spectral windows than predicted by previous models. The estimated luminosities show that the hottest post-giant-impact planets will be detectable with near-infrared coronagraphs on the planned 30m-class telescopes. The 1-4um region will be most favorable for such detections, offering bright features and better contrast between the planet and a potential debris disk. We derive cooling timescales on the order of 10^5-10^6 Myrs, based on the modeled effective temperatures. This leads to the possibility of discovering tens of such planets in future surveys.

=== arXiv:1312.5315v1  [2013-12-18]
TITLE  : Discovery of the Fomalhaut C debris disc
AUTHORS: G. M. Kennedy, M. C. Wyatt, P. Kalas, G. Duchêne, B. Sibthorpe, J. -F. Lestrade, B. C. Matthews, J. S. Greaves
DOI    : 10.1093/mnrasl/slt168
ABS    : Fomalhaut is one of the most interesting and well studied nearby stars, hosting at least one planet, a spectacular debris ring, and two distant low-mass stellar companions (TW PsA and LP 876-10, a.k.a. Fomalhaut B &amp; C). We observed both companions with Herschel, and while no disc was detected around the secondary, TW PsA, we have discovered the second debris disc in the Fomalhaut system, around LP 876-10. This detection is only the second case of two debris discs seen in a multiple system, both of which are relatively wide ($\gtrsim$3000 AU for HD 223352/40 and 158 kAU [0.77 pc] for Fomalhaut/LP 876-10). The disc is cool (24K) and relatively bright, with a fractional luminosity $L_{\rm disc}/L_\star = 1.2 \times 10^{-4}$, and represents the rare observation of a debris disc around an M dwarf. Further work should attempt to find if the presence of two discs in the Fomalhaut system is coincidental, perhaps simply due to the relatively young system age of 440 Myr, or if the stellar components have dynamically interacted and the system is even more complex than it currently appears.

=== arXiv:1312.4738v1  [2013-12-17]
TITLE  : Freeman Dyson and Gravitational Spin Precession
AUTHORS: N. D. Hari Dass
ABS    : In 1974 Hulse and Taylor discovered the binary pulsar. At that time Prof. Dyson was visiting the Max Planck Institute for Physics at Munich, where I was also working. He initiated a number of discussions on this object. During them it occurred to me that this system could be used to test Geodetic Precession in Einsteins theory, which, even after years of work by the Stanford gyroscope expt, had remained a challenge. I showed some preliminary calculations to Prof Dyson and he encouraged me to do a more refined job. To be applicable to the binary pulsar, one needed to generalise the general relativistic calculations to beyond the so called test particle assumption. Barker and OConnell had obtained such a result from analysing the gravitational interactions of spin half Dirac fermions in linearized spin 2 theories of gravitation. With C.F. Cho I produced a purely classical calculation, using Schwingers Source theory. Boerner, Ehlers and Rudolf confirmed this result with their general relativistic calculations shortly after. With V. Radhakrishnan, I gave a detailed model for the pulse width and polarization sweep as a means of observing this effect. All throughout Prof. Dyson was supportive with reading the manuscripts and his critical comments. In 2005, coincidentally the centennial of the Annus Mirabilis(1905), Hotan, Bailes and Ord observed this in the binary pulsar J1141 6545.

=== arXiv:1312.4531v2  [2013-12-16]
TITLE  : Evolution from protoplanetary to debris discs: The transition disc around HD 166191
AUTHORS: G. M. Kennedy, S. J. Murphy, C. M. Lisse, F. Ménard, M. L. Sitko, M. C. Wyatt, D. D. R. Bayliss, F. E. DeMeo
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stt2435
ABS    : HD 166191 has been identified by several studies as hosting a rare and extremely bright warm debris disc with an additional outer cool disc component. However, an alternative interpretation is that the star hosts a disc that is currently in transition between a full gas disc and a largely gas-free debris disc. With the help of new optical to mid-IR spectra and Herschel imaging, we argue that the latter interpretation is supported in several ways: i) we show that HD 166191 is co-moving with the ~4 Myr-old Herbig Ae star HD 163296, suggesting that the two have the same age, ii) the disc spectrum of HD 166191 is well matched by a standard radiative transfer model of a gaseous protoplanetary disc with an inner hole, and iii) the HD 166191 mid-IR silicate feature is more consistent with similarly primordial objects. We note some potential issues with the debris disc interpretation that should be considered for such extreme objects, whose lifetime at the current brightness is mush shorter than the stellar age, or in the case of the outer component requires a mass comparable to the solid component of the Solar nebula. These aspects individually and collectively argue that HD 166191 is a 4-5 Myr old star that hosts a gaseous transition disc. Though it does not argue in favour of either scenario, we find strong evidence for 3-5 um disc variability. We place HD 166191 in context with discs at different evolutionary stages, showing that it is a potentially important object for understanding the protoplanetary to debris disc transition.

=== arXiv:1312.1665v2  [2013-12-05]
TITLE  : SDSS J074511.56+194926.5: Discovery of a Metal-Rich and Tidally Distorted Extremely Low Mass White Dwarf
AUTHORS: A. Gianninas, J. J. Hermes, Warren R. Brown, P. Dufour, Sara D. Barber, Mukremin Kilic, Scott J. Kenyon, Samuel T. Harrold
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/781/2/104
ABS    : We present the discovery of an unusual, tidally-distorted extremely low mass white dwarf (WD) with nearly solar metallicity. Radial velocity measurements confirm that this is a compact binary with an orbital period of 2.6975 hrs and a velocity semi-amplitude of K = 108.7 km/s. Analysis of the hydrogen Balmer lines yields an effective temperature of Teff = 8380 K and a surface gravity of log g = 6.21 that in turn indicate a mass of M = 0.16 Msol and a cooling age of 4.2 Gyr. In addition, a detailed analysis of the observed metal lines yields abundances of log Mg/H = -3.90, log Ca/H = -5.80, log Ti/H = -6.10, log Cr/H = -5.60, and log Fe/H = -4.50, similar to the sun. We see no evidence of a debris disk from which these metals would be accreted though the possibility cannot entirely be ruled out. Other potential mechanisms to explain the presence of heavy elements are discussed. Finally, we expect this system to ultimately undergo unstable mass transfer and merge to form a ~0.3-0.6 Msol WD in a few Gyr.

=== arXiv:1312.0609v4  [2013-12-02]
TITLE  : Disk evolution in the solar neighborhood. I Disk frequencies from 1 to 100 Myr
AUTHORS: Álvaro Ribas, Bruno Merín, Hervé Bouy, Luke T. Maud
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201322597
ABS    : We study the evolution of circumstellar disks in 22 young (1 to 100 Myr) nearby (within 500 pc) associations over the entire mass spectrum using photometry covering from the optical to the mid-infrared. We compiled a catalog of 2340 spectroscopically-confirmed members of these nearby associations. We analyzed their spectral energy distributions and searched for excess related to the presence of protoplanetary disks in a homogeneous way. Sensitivity limits and spatial completeness were also considered. We derive disk fractions as probed by mid-infrared excess in these regions. The unprecedented size of our sample allows us to confirm the timescale of disk decay reported in the literature and to find new trends. The fraction of excess sources increases systematically if measured at longer wavelengths. Disk percentages derived using different wavelength ranges should therefore be compared with caution. The dust probed at 22-24 um evolves slower than that probed at shorter wavelengths (3.4-12 um). Assuming an exponential decay, we derive a timescale tau=4.2-5.8 Myr at 22-24 um for primordial disks, compared to 2-3 Myr at shorter wavelength (3.4-12 um). Primordial disks disappear around 10 Myr, matching in time a brief increase of the number of 'evolved' disks. The increase in timescale of excess decay at longer wavelength is compatible with inside-out disk clearing scenarios. The increased timescale of decay and larger dispersion in the distribution of disk fractions at 22-24 um suggest that the inner and outer zones evolve differently, the latter potentially following a variety of evolutionary paths. The drop of primordial disks and the coincident rise of evolved disks at 10 Myr are compatible with planet formation theories suggesting that the disappearance of the gas is immediately followed by the dynamical stirring of the disk.

=== arXiv:1311.5246v2  [2013-11-20]
TITLE  : 2MASS Photometric Redshift catalog: a comprehensive three-dimensional census of the whole sky
AUTHORS: Maciej Bilicki, Thomas H. Jarrett, John A. Peacock, Michelle E. Cluver, Louise Steward
JOURNAL: Astrophysical Journal Supplement, 210, 9 (2014)
DOI    : 10.1088/0067-0049/210/1/9
ABS    : Key cosmological applications require the three-dimensional galaxy distribution on the entire celestial sphere. These include measuring the gravitational pull on the Local Group, estimating the large-scale bulk flow and testing the Copernican principle. However, the largest all-sky redshift surveys -- the 2MRS and IRAS PSCz -- have median redshifts of only z=0.03 and sample the very local Universe. There exist all-sky galaxy catalogs reaching much deeper -- SuperCOSMOS in the optical, 2MASS in the near-IR and WISE in the mid-IR -- but these lack complete redshift information. At present, the only rapid way towards larger 3D catalogs covering the whole sky is through photometric redshift techniques. In this paper we present the 2MASS Photometric Redshift catalog (2MPZ) containing 1 million galaxies, constructed by cross-matching 2MASS XSC, WISE and SuperCOSMOS all-sky samples and employing the artificial neural network approach (the ANNz algorithm), trained on such redshift surveys as SDSS, 6dFGS and 2dFGRS. The derived photometric redshifts have errors nearly independent of distance, with an all-sky accuracy of sigma_z=0.015 and a very small percentage of outliers. In this way, we obtain redshift estimates with a typical precision of 12% for all the 2MASS XSC galaxies that lack spectroscopy. In addition, we have made an early effort towards probing the entire 3D sky beyond 2MASS, by pairing up WISE with SuperCOSMOS and training the ANNz on GAMA redshift data reaching currently to z_med~0.2. This has yielded photo-z accuracies comparable to those in the 2MPZ. These all-sky photo-z catalogs, with a median z~0.1 for the 2MPZ, and significantly deeper for future WISE-based samples, will be the largest and most complete of their kind for the foreseeable future.

=== arXiv:1311.2947v1  [2013-11-12]
TITLE  : Herschel Observations of Debris Discs Orbiting Planet-hosting Subgiants
AUTHORS: Amy Bonsor, Grant M. Kennedy, Mark C. Wyatt, John A. Johnson, Bruce Sibthorpe
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stt2128
ABS    : Debris discs are commonly detected orbiting main-sequence stars, yet little is known regarding their fate as the star evolves to become a giant. Recent observations of radial velocity detected planets orbiting giant stars highlight this population and its importance for probing, for example, the population of planetary systems orbiting intermediate mass stars. Our Herschel survey observed a subset of the Johnson et al program subgiants, finding that 4/36 exhibit excess emission thought to indicate debris, of which 3/19 are planet-hosting stars and 1/17 are stars with no current planet detections. Given the small numbers involved, there is no evidence that the disc detection rate around stars with planets is different to that around stars without planets. Our detections provide a clear indication that large quantities of dusty material can survive the stars' main-sequence lifetime and be detected on the subgiant branch, with important implications for the evolution of planetary systems and observations of polluted or dusty white dwarfs. Our detection rates also provide an important constraint that can be included in models of debris disc evolution.

=== arXiv:1310.6936v1  [2013-10-25]
TITLE  : Alignment in star-debris disc systems seen by Herschel
AUTHORS: J. S. Greaves, G. M. Kennedy, N. Thureau, C. Eiroa, J. P. Marshall, J. Maldonado, B. C. Matthews, G. Olofsson
DOI    : 10.1093/mnrasl/slt153
ABS    : Many nearby main-sequence stars have been searched for debris using the far-infrared Herschel satellite, within the DEBRIS, DUNES and Guaranteed-Time Key Projects. We discuss here 11 stars of spectral types A to M where the stellar inclination is known and can be compared to that of the spatially-resolved dust belts. The discs are found to be well aligned with the stellar equators, as in the case of the Sun's Kuiper belt, and unlike many close-in planets seen in transit surveys. The ensemble of stars here can be fitted with a star-disc tilt of ~&lt;10 degrees. These results suggest that proposed mechanisms for tilting the star or disc in fact operate rarely. A few systems also host imaged planets, whose orbits at tens of AU are aligned with the debris discs, contrary to what might be expected in models where external perturbers induce tilts.

=== arXiv:1310.2651v2  [2013-10-09]
TITLE  : Explanation and Prediction of Observables using Continuum Strong QCD
AUTHORS: Ian C. Cloet, Craig D. Roberts
DOI    : 10.1016/j.ppnp.2014.02.001
ABS    : The last five years have brought considerable progress in the study of the bound-state problem in continuum quantum field theory. We highlight a subset of that progress; viz., that made within the context of Dyson Schwinger equation analyses of cold, sparse hadrons. Our focus is primarily on advances in the reliable computation, explanation and prediction of quantities that are truly measurable; but we also review aspects of a new paradigm that has condensates contained within hadrons, and explain that the asymptotic form of parton distribution amplitudes and functions are practically unreachable with terrestrial facilities. Given the pace of expansion in experiment and improvement in theory, it appears possible that the next five years will bring profound growth in our store of knowledge about hadrons and nuclei.

=== arXiv:1310.1893v1  [2013-10-07]
TITLE  : Abundances in Stars with Debris Disks
AUTHORS: Adam M. Ritchey, Guillermo Gonzalez, Myra Stone, George Wallerstein
DOI    : 10.1017/S1743921313008934
ABS    : We present preliminary results of a detailed chemical abundance analysis for a sample of solar-type stars known to exhibit excess infrared emission associated with dusty debris disks. Our sample of 28 stars was selected based on results from the Formation and Evolution of Planetary Systems (FEPS) Spitzer Legacy Program, for the purpose of investigating whether the stellar atmospheres have been polluted with planetary material, which could indicate that the metallicity enhancement in stars with planets is due to metal-rich infall in the later stages of star and planet formation. The preliminary results presented here consist of precise abundances for 15 elements (C, O, Na, Mg, Al, Si, S, Ca, Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Fe, Co, and Ni) for half of the stars in our sample. We find that none of the stars investigated so far exhibit the expected trend of increasing elemental abundance with increasing condensation temperature, which would result from the stars having accreted planetary debris. Rather, the slopes of linear least-squares fits to the abundance data are either negative or consistent with zero. In both cases, our results may indicate that, like the Sun, the debris disk host stars are deficient in refractory elements, a possible signature of terrestrial and/or gas giant planet formation.

=== arXiv:1309.1954v1  [2013-09-08]
TITLE  : Finite size effects in hadron-quark phase transition by the Dyson-Schwinger method
AUTHORS: Nobutoshi Yasutake, Huan Chen, Toshiki Maruyama, Toshitaka Tatsumi
DOI    : 10.1088/1742-6596/665/1/012068
ABS    : We study the hadron-quark phase transition, taking into account the finite-size effects for neutron star matter. For the hadron phase, we adopt a realistic equation of state within the framework of the Brueckner-Hartree-Fock theory. For the quark phase, we apply the Dyson-Schwinger method. The properties of the mixed phase are clarified by considering the finite-size effects. We find that, if the surface tension is strong enough, the equation of state becomes to be close the one with the Maxwell condition, though we properly adopt the Gibbs conditions. This result is qualitatively the same with the one by the use of the simple bag model. We also find that the mass-radius relation by the EoS is consistent with the observations of massive neutron stars.

=== arXiv:1308.5593v3  [2013-08-26]
TITLE  : Bright Debris Disk Candidates Observed with AKARI/Far-Infrared Surveyor (FIS)
AUTHORS: Qiong Liu, Tinggui Wang, Peng Jiang
JOURNAL: The Astronomical Journal, 2014, Volume 148, Number 1
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-6256/148/1/3
ABS    : We cross-correlate \hip\ main-sequence star catalog with \fis\ catalog, and identify 136 stars (at $&gt;90$% reliability) with far-infrared detections at least in one band. After rejecting 51 stars classified as young stellar objects, Be stars, other type stars with known dust disks or with potential contaminations and 2 stars without infrared excess emission, we obtain a sample of 83 candidate stars with debris disks. Stars in our sample cover spectral types from B to K-types with most being early types. This represents an unique sample of luminous debris disks that derived uniformly from all sky survey with a spatial resolution a factor of two better than the previous such survey by \iras. Moreover, by collecting the infrared photometric data from other public archives, 85% of them have infrared excesses in more than one bands, allowing the estimate of the dust temperatures. We fit the blackbody model to the broad band spectral energy distribution of these stars to derive the statistical distribution of the disk parameters. 7 stars require an additional warm component of temperature around 200 K. While a substantial fraction of our sample(58 stars) have weak 12 \micron\ excess indicating that a warm dust component maybe common among these bright debris disk systems.

=== arXiv:1308.3848v1  [2013-08-18]
TITLE  : Bright 22 $μ$m Excess Candidates from WISE All-Sky Catalog and Hipparcos Main Catalog
AUTHORS: Chao-Jian Wu, Hong Wu, Man-I Lam, Ming Yang, Xiao-Qing Wen, Shuo Li, Tong-Jie Zhang, Liang Gao
JOURNAL: ApJS, 208, 29 (2013)
DOI    : 10.1088/0067-0049/208/2/29
ABS    : In this paper we present a catalog which includes 141 bright candidates ($\leq10.27$ mag, V band) showing the infrared (IR) excess at 22 $μ$m. Of which, 38 stars are known IR excess stars or disk, 23 stars are double or multiple stars and 4 are Be stars. While the remaining more than 70 stars are identified as the 22 $μ$m excess candidates in our work. The criterion of selecting candidates is $K_s-[22]_{μm}$. All these candidates are selected from \emph{WISE} All-sky data cross-correlated with \emph{Hipparcos} Main Catalog and the likelihood-ratio technique is employed. Considering the effect of background, we introduce the \emph{IRAS} 100 $μ$m level to exclude the high background. We also estimated the coincidence probability of these sources. In addition, we presented the optical to mid-infrared SEDs and optical images of all the candidates, and gave the observed optical spectra of 6 stars with NAOC's 2.16-m telescope. To measure for the dust amount around each star, the fractional luminosity is also provided. We also test whether our method of selecting IR excess stars can be used to search for extra-solar planets, we cross-matched our catalog with known IR-excess stars having planets but none is matched. Finally, we give the fraction of stars showing IR-excess for different spectral type of main-sequence stars.

=== arXiv:1308.3560v1  [2013-08-16]
TITLE  : UV-excess sources with a red/IR-counterpart: low-mass companions, debris disks and QSO selection
AUTHORS: Kars Verbeek, Paul J. Groot, Simone Scaringi, Jorge Casares, Jesus M. Corral-Santana, Niall Deacon, Janet E. Drew, Boris T. Gänsicke
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stt1492
ABS    : We present the result of the cross-matching between UV-excess sources selected from the UV-excess survey of the Northern Galactic Plane (UVEX) and several infrared surveys (2MASS, UKIDSS and WISE). From the position in the (J-H) vs. (H-K) colour-colour diagram we select UV-excess candidate white dwarfs with an M-dwarf type companion, candidates that might have a lower mass, brown-dwarf type companion, and candidates showing an infrared-excess only in the K-band, which might be due to a debris disk. Grids of reddened DA+dM and sdO+MS/sdB+MS model spectra are fitted to the U,g,r,i,z,J,H,K photometry in order to determine spectral types and estimate temperatures and reddening. From a sample of 964 hot candidate white dwarfs with (g-r)&lt;0.2, the spectral energy distribution fitting shows that ~2-4% of the white dwarfs have an M-dwarf companion, ~2% have a lower-mass companion, and no clear candidates for having a debris disk are found. Additionally, from WISE 6 UV-excess sources are selected as candidate Quasi-Stellar Objects (QSOs). Two UV-excess sources have a WISE IR-excess showing up only in the mid-IR W3 band of WISE, making them candidate Luminous InfraRed Galaxies (LIRGs) or Sbc star-burst galaxies.

=== arXiv:1308.2017v1  [2013-08-09]
TITLE  : Occultation of the T Tauri Star RW Aurigae A by its Tidally Disrupted Disk
AUTHORS: Joseph E. Rodriguez, Joshua Pepper, Keivan G. Stassun, Robert J. Siverd, Phillip Cargile, Thomas G. Beatty, B. Scott Gaudi
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-6256/146/5/112
ABS    : RW Aur A is a classical T Tauri star, believed to have undergone a reconfiguration of its circumstellar environment as a consequence of a recent fly-by of its stellar companion, RW Aur B. This interaction stripped away part of the circumstellar disk of RW Aur A, leaving a tidally disrupted arm and a short truncated circumstellar disk. We present photometric observations of the RW Aur system from the Kilodegree Extremely Little Telescope (KELT) survey showing a long and deep dimming that occurred from September 2010 until March 2011. The dimming has a depth of ~2 magnitudes, a duration of ~180 days and was confirmed by archival observations from American Association of Variable Star Observers (AAVSO). We suggest that this event is the result of a portion of the tidally disrupted disk occulting RW Aur A, specifically a fragment of the tidally disrupted arm. The calculated transverse linear velocity of the occulter is in excellent agreement with the measured relative radial velocity of the tidally disrupted arm. Using simple kinematic and geometric arguments, we show that the occulter cannot be a feature of the RW Aur A circumstellar disk, and we consider and discount other hypotheses. We also place constraints on the thickness and semi-major axis of the portion of the arm that occulted the star.

=== arXiv:1308.0495v1  [2013-08-02]
TITLE  : A deep WISE search for very late type objects and the discovery of two halo/thick-disk T dwarfs: WISE 0013+0634 and WISE 0833+0052
AUTHORS: D. J. Pinfield, J. Gomes, A. C. Day-Jones, S. K. Leggett, M. Gromadzki, B. Burningham, M. T. Ruiz, R. Kurtev
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stt1437
ABS    : A method is defined for identifying late T and Y dwarfs in WISE down to low values of signal-to-noise. This requires a WISE detection only in the W2-band and uses the statistical properties of the WISE multi-frame measurements and profile fit photometry to reject contamination resulting from non-point-like objects, variables and moving sources. To trace our desired parameter space we use a control sample of isolated non-moving non-variable point sources from the SDSS, and identify a sample of 158 WISE W2-only candidates down to a signal-to-noise limit of 8. For signal-to-noise ranges &gt;10 and 8-10 respectively, ~45% and ~90% of our sample fall outside the selection criteria published by the WISE team (Kirkpatrick et al. 2012), due mainly to the type of constraints placed on the number of individual W2 detections. We present follow-up of eight candidates and identify WISE 0013+0634 and WISE 0833+0052, T8 and T9 dwarfs with high proper motion (~1.3 and ~1.8 arcsec/yr). Both objects show a mid-infrared/near-infrared excess of ~1-1.5 magnitudes, and are K-band suppressed. Distance estimates lead to space motion constraints that suggest halo (or at least thick disk) kinematics. We then assess the reduced proper motion diagram of WISE ultracool dwarfs, which suggests that late T and Y dwarfs may have a higher thick-disk/halo population fraction than earlier objects.

=== arXiv:1307.4887v2  [2013-07-18]
TITLE  : Near-Infrared Imaging of White Dwarfs with Candidate Debris Disks
AUTHORS: Zhongxiang Wang, Anestis Tziamtzis, Xuebing Wang
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/782/1/20
ABS    : We have carried out $JHK_s$ imaging of 12 white dwarf debris disk candidates from the WIRED SDSS DR7 catalog, aiming to confirm or rule out disks among these sources. On the basis of positional identification and the flux density spectra, we find that seven white dwarfs have excess infrared emission, but mostly at WISE W1 and W2 bands, four are due to nearby red objects consistent with background galaxies or very low mass dwarfs, and one exhibits excess emission at $JHK_s$ consistent with an unresolved L0 companion at the correct distance. While our photometry is not inconsistent with all seven excesses arising from disks, the stellar properties are distinct from the known population of debris disk white dwarfs, making the possibility questionable. In order to further investigate the nature of these infrared sources, warm Spitzer imaging is needed, which may help resolve galaxies from the white dwarfs and provide more accurate flux measurements.

=== arXiv:1306.2637v1  [2013-06-11]
TITLE  : A young hierarchical triple system harbouring a candidate debris disc
AUTHORS: N. R. Deacon, J. E. Schlieder, J. Olofsson, K. G. Johnston, Th. Henning
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stt1054
ABS    : We report the detection of a wide young hierarchical triple system where the primary has a candidate debris disc. The primary, TYC 5241-986-1 A, is a known Tycho star which we classify as a late-K star with emission in the X-ray, near and far-UV and Hα suggestive of youth. Its proper motion, photometric distance (65-105 pc) and radial velocity lead us to associate the system with the broadly defined Local Association of young stars but not specifically with any young moving group. The presence of weak lithium absorption and X-ray and calcium H and K emission support an age in the 20 to ~125 Myr range. The secondary is a pair of M4.5+-0.5 dwarfs with near and far UV and Hα emission separated by approximately 1 arcsec (~65-105 AU projected separation) which lie 145 arcsec (9200-15200 AU) from the primary. The primary has a WISE 22 micron excess and follow-up Herschel observations also detect an excess at 70 micron. The excess emissions are indicative of a 100-175 K debris disc. We also explore the possibility that this excess could be due to a coincident background galaxy and conclude that this is unlikely. Debris discs are extremely rare around stars older than 15 Myr, hence if the excess is caused by a disc this is an extremely novel system.

=== arXiv:1306.0328v1  [2013-06-03]
TITLE  : Gas and dust in the TW Hydrae Association as seen by the Herschel Space Observatory
AUTHORS: P. Riviere-Marichalar, C. Pinte, D. Barrado, W. F. Thi, C. Eiroa, I. Kamp, B. Montesinos, J. Donaldson
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201321506
ABS    : Context. Circumstellar discs are the places where planets form, therefore knowledge of their evolution is crucial for our understanding of planet formation. The Herschel Space Observatory is providing valuable data for studying disc systems, thanks to its sensitivity and wavelength coverage. This paper is one of several devoted to analysing and modelling Herschel-PACS observations of various young stellar associations from the GASPS Open Time Key Programme. Aims. The aim of this paper is to elucidate the gas and dust properties of circumstellar discs in the 10 Myr TW Hya Association (TWA) using new far-infrared (IR) imaging and spectroscopy from Herschel-PACS. Methods. We obtained far-IR photometric data at 70, 100, and 160 microns of 14 TWA members; spectroscopic observations centred on the [OI] line at 63.18 microns were also obtained for 9 of the 14. The new photometry for each star was incorporated into its full spectral energy distribution (SED). Results. We detected excess IR emission that is characteristic of circumstellar discs from five TWA members, and computed upper limits for another nine. Two TWA members (TWA 01 and TWA 04B) also show [OI] emission at 63.18 microns. Discs in the TWA association display a variety of properties, with a wide range of dust masses and inner radii, based on modified blackbody modelling. Both transitional and debris discs are found in the sample. Models for sources with a detected IR excess give dust masses in the range from 0.15 Msun to 63 Msun.

=== arXiv:1305.4954v1  [2013-05-21]
TITLE  : Dusty OB stars in the Small Magellanic Cloud - II: Extragalactic Disks or Examples of the Pleiades Phenomenon?
AUTHORS: Joshua J. Adams, Joshua D. Simon, Alberto D. Bolatto, G. C. Sloan, Karin M. Sandstrom, Anika Schmiedeke, Jacco Th. van Loon, Joana M. Oliveira
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/771/2/112
ABS    : We use mid-infrared Spitzer spectroscopy and far-infrared Herschel photometry for a sample of twenty main sequence O9--B2 stars in the Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC) with strong 24 micron excesses to investigate the origin of the mid-IR emission. Either debris disks around the stars or illuminated patches of dense interstellar medium (ISM) can cause such mid-IR emission. In a companion paper, Paper I, we use optical spectroscopy to show that it is unlikely for any of these sources to be classical Be stars or Herbig Ae/Be stars. We focus our analysis on debris disks and cirrus hot spots. We find three out of twenty stars to be significantly extended in the mid-IR, establishing them as cirrus hot spots. We then fit the IR spectral energy distributions to determine dust temperatures and masses. We find the dust masses in the SMC stars to be larger than for any known debris disks, although this evidence against the debris disk hypothesis is circumstantial. Finally, we created a local comparison sample of bright mid-IR OB stars in the Milky Way (MW) by cross-matching the WISE and Hipparcos catalogs. All such local stars in the appropriate luminosity range that can be unambiguously classified are young stars with optical emission lines or are spatially resolved by WISE with sizes too large to be plausible debris disk candidates. We conclude that the very strong mid-IR flux excesses are most likely explained as cirrus hot spots, although we cannot rigorously rule out that a small fraction of the sample is made up of debris disks or transition disks. We present suggestive evidence that bow-shock heating around runaway stars may be a contributing mechanism to the interstellar emission. These sources, interpreted as cirrus hot spots, offer a new localised probe of diffuse interstellar dust in a low metallicity environment. (Abridged)

=== arXiv:1305.0155v2  [2013-05-01]
TITLE  : DUst Around NEarby Stars. The survey observational results
AUTHORS: C. Eiroa, J. P. Marshall, A. Mora, B. Montesinos, O. Absil, J. Ch. Augereau, A. Bayo, G. Bryden
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201321050
ABS    : Debris discs are a consequence of the planet formation process and constitute the fingerprints of planetesimal systems. Their solar system's counterparts are the asteroid and Edgeworth-Kuiper belts. The DUNES survey aims at detecting extra-solar analogues to the Edgeworth-Kuiper belt around solar-type stars, putting in this way the solar system into context. The survey allows us to address some questions related to the prevalence and properties of planetesimal systems. We used {\it Herschel}/PACS to observe a sample of nearby FGK stars. Data at 100 and 160 $μ$m were obtained, complemented in some cases with observations at 70 $μ$m, and at 250, 350 and 500 $μ$m using SPIRE. The observing strategy was to integrate as deep as possible at 100 $μ$m to detect the stellar photosphere. Debris discs have been detected at a fractional luminosity level down to several times that of the Edgeworth-Kuiper belt. The incidence rate of discs around the DUNES stars is increased from a rate of $\sim$ 12.1% $\pm$ 5% before \emph{Herschel} to $\sim$ 20.2% $\pm$ 2%. A significant fraction ($\sim$ 52%) of the discs are resolved, which represents an enormous step ahead from the previously known resolved discs. Some stars are associated with faint far-IR excesses attributed to a new class of cold discs. Although it cannot be excluded that these excesses are produced by coincidental alignment of background galaxies, statistical arguments suggest that at least some of them are true debris discs. Some discs display peculiar SEDs with spectral indexes in the 70-160$μ$m range steeper than the Rayleigh-Jeans one. An analysis of the debris disc parameters suggests that a decrease might exist of the mean black body radius from the F-type to the K-type stars. In addition, a weak trend is suggested for a correlation of disc sizes and an anticorrelation of disc temperatures with the stellar age.

=== arXiv:1304.7801v2  [2013-04-29]
TITLE  : The WIRED Survey. IV. New Dust Disks from the McCook &amp; Sion White Dwarf Catalog
AUTHORS: D. W. Hoard, John H. Debes, Stefanie Wachter, David T. Leisawitz, Martin Cohen
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/770/1/21
ABS    : We have compiled photometric data from the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer All Sky Survey and other archival sources for the more than 2200 objects in the original McCook &amp; Sion Catalog of Spectroscopically Identified White Dwarfs. We applied color-selection criteria to identify 28 targets whose infrared spectral energy distributions depart from the expectation for the white dwarf photosphere alone. Seven of these are previously known white dwarfs with circumstellar dust disks, five are known central stars of planetary nebulae, and six were excluded for being known binaries or having possible contamination of their infrared photometry. We fit white dwarf models to the spectral energy distributions of the remaining ten targets, and find seven new candidates with infrared excess suggesting the presence of a circumstellar dust disk. We compare the model dust disk properties for these new candidates with a comprehensive compilation of previously published parameters for known white dwarfs with dust disks. It is possible that the current census of white dwarfs with dust disks that produce an excess detectable at K-band and shorter wavelengths is close to complete for the entire sample of known WDs to the detection limits of existing near-IR all-sky surveys. The white dwarf dust disk candidates now being found using longer wavelength infrared data are drawn from a previously underrepresented region of parameter space, in which the dust disks are overall cooler, narrower in radial extent, and/or contain fewer emitting grains.

=== arXiv:1304.7504v3  [2013-04-28]
TITLE  : Improved Photometry for the DASCH Pipeline
AUTHORS: Sumin Tang, Jonathan Grindlay, Edward Los, Mathieu Servillat
DOI    : 10.1086/671760
ABS    : The Digital Access to a Sky Century@Harvard (DASCH) project is digitizing the ~500,000 glass plate images obtained (full sky) by the Harvard College Observatory from 1885-1992. Astrometry and photometry for each resolved object are derived with photometric rms values of ~0.15mag for the initial photometry analysis pipeline. Here we describe new developments for DASCH photometry, applied to the Kepler field, that has yielded further improvements, including better identification of image blends and plate defects by measuring image profiles and astrometric deviations. A local calibration procedure using nearby stars in a similar magnitude range as the program star (similar to what has been done for visual photometry from the plates) yields additional improvement for a net photometric rms ~0.1mag. We also describe statistical measures of light curves that are now used in the DASCH pipeline processing to autonomously identify new variables. The DASCH photometry methods described here are used in the pipeline processing for the Data Releases of DASCH data (Grindlay et al. 2012; http://dasch.rc.fas.harvard.edu), as well as for the long-term variables discovered by DASCH in the Kepler field (Tang et al, in preparation).

=== arXiv:1304.7503v2  [2013-04-28]
TITLE  : 100-year DASCH Light Curves of Kepler Planet-Candidate Host Stars
AUTHORS: Sumin Tang, Dimitar Sasselov, Jonathan Grindlay, Edward Los, Mathieu Servillat
DOI    : 10.1086/671759
ABS    : We present 100 year light curves of Kepler planet-candidate host stars from the Digital Access to a Sky Century at Harvard (DASCH) project. 261 out of 997 host stars have at least 10 good measurements on DASCH scans of the Harvard plates. 109 of them have at least 100 good measurements, including 70% (73 out of 104) of all host stars with g&lt;=13 mag, and 44% (100 out of 228) of all host stars with g&lt;=14 mag. Our typical photometric uncertainty is ~0.1-0.15 mag. No variation is found at 3-sigma level for these host stars, including 21 confirmed or candidate hot Jupiter systems which might be expected to show enhanced flares from magnetic interactions between dwarf primaries and their close and relatively massive planet companions.

=== arXiv:1304.5671v1  [2013-04-20]
TITLE  : General modal properties of optical resonances in subwavelength nonspherical dielectric structures
AUTHORS: Lujun Huang, Yiling Yu, Linyou Cao
JOURNAL: Nano Letter 13, 3559 (2013)
DOI    : 10.1021/nl401150j
ABS    : Subwavelength dielectric structures offer an attractive low loss alternative to plasmonic structures for the development of resonant optics functionality such as metamaterials. Nonspherical like rectangular structures are of most interest from the standpoint of device development due to fabrication convenience. However, no intuitive fundamental understanding of optical resonance in nonspherical structures is available, which has substantially delayed the device development with dielectric materials. Here we elucidate the general fundamentals of optical resonances in nonspherical subwavelength dielectric structures of different shapes (rectangular or triangular) and dimensionalities (1D nanowires and 0D nanoparticles). We demonstrate that the optical properties (i.e. light absorption) of nonspherical structures are dictated by the eigenvalue of the structure's leaky modes. Leaky modes are defined as natural optical modes with propagating waves outside the structure. We also elucidate the dependence of the eigenvalue on physical features of the structures. The eigenvalue shows scaling invariance with the overall size, weakly relies on the refractive index, but linearly depends on the size ratio of different sizes of the structure. We propose a modified Fabry-Perot model to account for this linear dependence. Knowledge of the dominant role of leaky modes and the dependence of leaky mode on physical features can serve as a powerful guide for the rational design of devices with desired optical resonances. It opens up a pathway to design devices with functionality that has not been explored due to lack of intuitive understanding, for instance, imaging devices able to sense incident angle, or superabsorbing photodetectors.

=== arXiv:1304.3125v1  [2013-04-10]
TITLE  : Debris discs around M stars: non-existence versus non-detection
AUTHORS: Kevin Heng, Matej Malik
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/stt615
ABS    : Motivated by the reported dearth of debris discs around M stars, we use survival models to study the occurrence of planetesimal discs around them. These survival models describe a planetesimal disc with a small number of parameters, determine if it may survive a series of dynamical processes and compute the associated infrared excess. For the WISE satellite, we demonstrate that the dearth of debris discs around M stars may be attributed to the small semi-major axes generally probed if either: 1. the dust grains behave like blackbodies emitting at a peak wavelength coincident with the observed one; 2. or the grains are hotter than predicted by their blackbody temperatures and emit at peak wavelengths that are shorter than the observed one. At these small distances from the M star, planetesimals are unlikely to survive or persist for time scales of 300 Myr or longer if the disc is too massive. Conversely, our survival models allow for the existence of a large population of low-mass debris discs that are too faint to be detected with current instruments. However, our interpretation becomes less clear and large infrared excesses are allowed if only one of these scenarios holds: 3. the dust grains are hotter than blackbody and predominantly emit at the observed wavelength; 4. or are blackbody in nature and emit at peak wavelengths longer than the observed one. Both scenarios imply that the parent planetesimals reside at larger distances from the star than inferred if the dust grains behaved like blackbodies. In all scenarios, we show that the infrared excesses detected at 22 and 70 microns from AU Mic are easily reconciled with its young age. We elucidate the conditions under which stellar wind drag may be neglected when considering dust populations around M stars. The WISE satellite should be capable of detecting debris discs around young M stars with ages on the order of 10 Myr.

=== arXiv:1304.1487v2  [2013-04-04]
TITLE  : AA Tau's sudden and long-lasting deepening: enhanced extinction by its circumstellar disk
AUTHORS: Jerome Bouvier, Konstantin Grankin, Lucas Ellerbroek, Herve Bouy, David Barrado
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201321389
ABS    : AA Tau has been monitored for more than 20 years since 1987, exhibiting a nearly constant brightness level of V=12.5 mag. We report here that in 2011 it suddenly faded away, becoming 2 magnitudes fainter in the V-band, and has remained in this deep state since then. We report new optical and near-IR photometry and spectroscopy obtained during the fading event. The system appears much redder and fainter than it was in the bright state. Also, the 8.2d photometric period continuously observed for more than 20 years is not seen during most of the deep state. The analysis of the system's brightness and colors suggests that the visual extinction on the line of sight has increased by about 3-4 magnitudes in the deep state. At optical wavelengths, the system appears to be dominated by scattered light, probably originating from the upper surface layers of a highly inclined circumstellar disk. The profiles of the Balmer lines have significantly changed as well, with the disappearance of a central absorption component regularly observed in the bright state. We ascribe this change to the scattering of the system's spectrum by circumstellar dust. Noticeably, the mass accretion rate in the inner disk and onto the central star has not changed as the system faded away. We conclude that the deepening of the AA Tau system is due to a sudden increase of circumstellar dust extinction on the line of sight without concomitant change in the accretion rate. We suggest that the enhanced obscuration may be produced by a non-axisymmetric overdense region in the disk, located at a distance of 7.7 AU or more, that was recently brought on the line of sight by its keplerian motion around the central star.

=== arXiv:1304.1170v1  [2013-04-03]
TITLE  : Detection of a Nearby Halo Debris Stream in the WISE and 2MASS Surveys
AUTHORS: Carl J. Grillmair, Roc Cutri, Frank J. Masci, Tim Conroy, Branimir Sesar, Peter R. M. Eisenhardt, Edward L. Wright
DOI    : 10.1088/2041-8205/769/2/L23
ABS    : Combining the Wide-Field Infrared Survey Explorer All-Sky Release with the 2MASS Point Source Catalog, we detect a nearby, moderately metal-poor stellar debris stream spanning 24 degrees across the southern sky. The stream, which we designate Alpheus, is at an estimated distance of ~1.9 kpc. Its position, orientation, width, estimated metallicity, and to some extent its distance, are in approximate agreement with what one might expect of the leading tidal tail of the southern globular cluster NGC 288.

=== arXiv:1303.4138v1  [2013-03-18]
TITLE  : An active asteroid belt causing the UX Ori phenomenon in RZ Psc
AUTHORS: W. J. de Wit, V. P. Grinin, I. S. Potravnov, D. N. Shakhovskoi, A. Müller, M. Moerchen
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201220715
ABS    : We report the discovery of mid-infrared excess emission in the young object RZ Psc. The excess constitutes ~8% of its Lbol, and is well fit by a single 500K black-body implying a dust free region within 0.7AU for optically thick dust. The object displays dust obscuration events (UXOR behaviour) with a time-scale that suggests dusty material on orbits of 0.5AU. We also report a 12.4 year cyclical photometric variability which can be interpreted as due to perturbations in the dust distribution. The system is characterized by a high inclination, marginal extinction (during bright photometric states), a single temperature for the warm dust, and an age estimate which puts the star beyond the formation stage. We propose that the dust occultation events present a dynamical view of an active asteroid belt whose collisional products sporadically obscure the central star.

=== arXiv:1303.3905v1  [2013-03-15]
TITLE  : Chemistry of Impact-Generated Silicate Melt-Vapor Debris Disks
AUTHORS: Channon Visscher, Bruce Fegley,
DOI    : 10.1088/2041-8205/767/1/L12
ABS    : In the giant impact theory for lunar origin, the Moon forms from material ejected by the impact into an Earth-orbiting disk. Here we report the initial results from a silicate melt-vapor equilibrium chemistry model for such impact-generated planetary debris disks. In order to simulate the chemical behavior of a two-phase (melt+vapor) disk, we calculate the temperature-dependent pressure and chemical composition of vapor in equilibrium with molten silicate from 2000 to 4000 K. We consider the elements O, Na, K, Fe, Si, Mg, Ca, Al, Ti, and Zn for a range of bulk silicate compositions (Earth, Moon, Mars, eucrite parent body, angrites, and ureilites). In general, the disk atmosphere is dominated by Na, Zn, and O2 at lower temperatures (&lt; 3000 K) and SiO, O2, and O at higher temperatures. The high-temperature chemistry is consistent for any silicate melt composition, and we thus expect abundant SiO, O2, and O to be a common feature of hot, impact-generated debris disks. In addition, the saturated silicate vapor is highly oxidizing, with oxygen fugacity (fO2) values (and hence H2O/H2 and CO2/CO ratios) several orders of magnitude higher than those in a solar-composition gas. High fO2 values in the disk atmosphere are found for any silicate composition because oxygen is the most abundant element in rock. We thus expect high oxygen fugacity to be a ubiquitous feature of any silicate melt-vapor disk produced via collisions between rocky planets.

=== arXiv:1303.1179v1  [2013-03-05]
TITLE  : DASCH 100-yr light curves of high-mass X-ray binaries
AUTHORS: Mathieu Servillat, S. Tang, J. E. Grindlay, E. Los
ABS    : We analyzed the 100-yr light curves of Galactic high-mass X-ray binaries using the Harvard photographic plate collection, made accessible through the DASCH project (Digital Access to a Sky Century at Harvard). As scanning is still in progress, we focus on the four objects that are currently well covered: the supergiant X-ray binary Cyg X-1 (V1357 Cyg), and the Be X-ray binaries 1H 1936+541 (BD+53 2262), RX J1744.7-2713 (HD 161103), and RX J2030.5+4751 (SAO 49725), the latter two objects being similar to gamma Cas. The star associated with Cyg X-1 does not show evidence for variability with an amplitude higher than 0.3 magnitude over a hundred years. We found significant variability of one magnitude with timescales of more than 10 years for SAO 49725, as well as a possible period of 500-600 days and an amplitude of 0.05 magnitude that might be the orbital, or super-orbital period of the system. The data is insufficient to conclude for HD 161103 but suggests a similar long-term variability. We thus observe an additional characteristic of gamma Cas-like objects: their long-term variability. This variability seems to be due to the slow evolution of a decretion disk around the Be star, but may be triggered by the presence of a compact object in the system, possibly a white dwarf. This characteristic could be used to identify further similar objects otherwise difficult to detect.

=== arXiv:1302.4799v2  [2013-02-20]
TITLE  : Two Beyond-Primitive Extrasolar Planetesimals
AUTHORS: S. Xu, M. Jura, B. Klein, D. Koester, B. Zuckerman
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/766/2/132
ABS    : Using the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph onboard the Hubble Space Telescope, we have obtained high-resolution ultraviolet observations of GD 362 and PG 1225-079, two helium-dominated, externally-polluted white dwarfs. We determined or placed useful upper limits on the abundances of two key volatile elements, carbon and sulfur, in both stars; we also constrained the zinc abundance in PG 1225-079. In combination with previous optical data, we find strong evidence that each of these two white dwarfs has accreted a parent body that has evolved beyond primitive nebular condensation. The planetesimal accreted onto GD 362 had a bulk composition roughly similar to that of a mesosiderite meteorite based on a reduced chi-squared comparison with solar system objects; however, additional material is required to fully reproduce the observed mid-infrared spectrum for GD 362. No single meteorite can reproduce the unique abundance pattern observed in PG 1225-079; the best fit model requires a blend of ureilite and mesosiderite material. From a compiled sample of 9 well-studied polluted white dwarfs, we find evidence for both primitive planetesimals, which are a direct product from nebular condensation, as well as beyond-primitive planetesimals, whose final compositions were mainly determined by post-nebular processing.

=== arXiv:1301.6876v1  [2013-01-29]
TITLE  : The twofold debris disk around HD 113766 A - Warm and cold dust as seen with VLTI/Midi and Herschel/Pacs
AUTHORS: Johan Olofsson, Thomas Henning, Markus Nielbock, Jean-Charles Augereau, Attila Juhasz, Isa Oliveira, Olivier Absil, Akemi Tamanai
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201220904
ABS    : Warm debris disks are a sub-sample of the large population of debris disks, and display excess emission in the mid-IR. Around solar-type stars, very few objects show emission features in mid-IR spectroscopic observations, that are attributed to small, warm silicate dust grains. The origin of this warm dust can possibly be explained either by a collision between several bodies or by transport from an outer belt. We present and analyse new far-IR Herschel/Pacs observations, supplemented by ground-based data in the mid-IR (VLTI/Midi and VLT/Visir), for one of these rare systems: the 10-16 Myr old debris disk around HD 113766 A. We improve an existing model to account for these new observations, and better constrain the spatial distribution of the dust and its composition. We underline the limitations of SED modelling and the need for spatially resolved observations. We find that the system is best described by an inner disk located within the first AU, well constrained by the Midi data, and an outer disk located between 9-13 AU. In the inner dust belt, our previous finding of Fe-rich crystalline olivine grains still holds. We do not observe time variability of the emission features over at least a 8 years time span, in a environment subjected to strong radiation pressure. The time stability of the emission features indicates that μm-sized dust grains are constantly replenished from the same reservoir, with a possible depletion of sub-μm-sized grains. We suggest that the emission features may arise from multi-composition aggregates. We discuss possible scenarios concerning the origin of the warm dust. The compactness of the innermost regions as probed by Midi, as well as the dust composition, suggest that we are witnessing the outcomes of (at least) one collision between partially differentiated bodies, in an environment possibly rendered unstable by terrestrial planetary formation.

=== arXiv:1301.5562v1  [2013-01-23]
TITLE  : The Elemental Compositions of Extrasolar Planetesimals
AUTHORS: M. Jura
DOI    : 10.1017/S1743921313012878
ABS    : Evidence is now compelling that most externally-polluted white dwarfs derive their heavy atoms by accretion from asteroids - the building blocks of rocky planets. Optical and ultraviolet spectroscopy of a small sample of suitable white dwarf stars shows that to zeroth order, the accreted extrasolar parent bodies compositionally resemble bulk Earth. (1) Extrasolar planetesimals are at least 85% by mass composed of O, Mg, Si and Fe. (2) Compared to the Sun, C is often deficient, usually by at least a factor of 10 and therefore comprises less than 1% of an extrasolar planetesimal's mass. At least to-date, C has never been found to be enhanced as would be expected if carbon-rich planetesimals have formed. (3) While there may be individual exceptions, considered as a whole, the population of extrasolar asteroids accreted onto a well-defined sample of local white dwarf stars is less than 1% water by mass.

=== arXiv:1301.4060v1  [2013-01-17]
TITLE  : Constraints on the quark matter equation of state from astrophysical observations
AUTHORS: G. F. Burgio, H. Chen, H. -J. Schulze, G. Taranto
JOURNAL: PoS Confinement X (2013) 255
ABS    : We calculate the structure of neutron star interiors comprising both the hadronic and the quark phases. For the hadronic sector we employ a microscopic equation of state involving nucleons and hyperons derived within the Brueckner-Hartree-Fock many-body theory with realistic two-body and three-body forces. For the description of quark matter, we use several different models, e.g. the MIT bag, the Nambu--Jona-Lasinio (NJL), the Color Dielectric (CDM), the Field Correlator method (FCM), and one based on the Dyson-Schwinger model (DSM). We find that a two solar mass hybrid star is possible only if the nucleonic EOS is stiff enough.

=== arXiv:1212.1530v1  [2012-12-07]
TITLE  : Sequential clustering of star formation in IC 1396
AUTHORS: Ya Fang Huang, Jin Zeng Li
DOI    : 10.1088/1674-4527/13/5/007
ABS    : We present in this paper a comprehensive study of the H II region IC 1396 and its star formation activity, in which multi-wavelength data ranging from the optical to the near- and far-infrared were employed. The surface density distribution of all the 2MASS sources with certain detection toward IC 1396 indicates the existence of a compact cluster spatially consistent with the position of the exciting source of the H II region, HD 206267. The spatial distribution of the infrared excessive emission sources selected based on archived 2MASS data reveals the existence of four sub-clusters in this region. One is in association with the open cluster Trumpler 37. The other three are found to be spatially coincident with the bright rims of the H II region. All the excessive emission sources in the near infrared are cross-identified with the AKARI IRC data, an analysis of the spectral energy distributions (SEDs) of the resultant sample leads to the identification of 8 CLASS I, 15 CLASS II and 15 CLASS III sources in IC 1396. Optical identification of the sample sources with R magnitudes brighter than 17 mag corroborates the results from the SED analysis. Based on the spatial distribution of the infrared young stellar objects at different evolutionary stages, the surrounding sub-clusters located in the bright rims are believed to be younger than the central one. This is consistent with a scenario of sequential star formation in this region. Imaging data of a dark patch in IC 1396 by Herschel SPIRE, on the other hand, indicate the presence of two far-infrared cores in LDN 1111, which are likely new generation protostellar objects in formation. So we infer that the star formation process in this H II region was not continuous but episodic.

=== arXiv:1211.6365v1  [2012-11-27]
TITLE  : AKARI/IRC 18 Micron Survey of Warm Debris Disks
AUTHORS: Hideaki Fujiwara, Daisuke Ishihara, Takashi Onaka, Satoshi Takita, Hirokazu Kataza, Takuya Yamashita, Misato Fukagawa, Takafumi Ootsubo
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201219841
ABS    : Context. Little is known about the properties of the warm (Tdust &gt;~ 150 K) debris disk material located close to the central star, which has a more direct link to the formation of terrestrial planets than the low temperature debris dust that has been detected to date. Aims. To discover new warm debris disk candidates that show large 18 micron excess and estimate the fraction of stars with excess based on the AKARI/IRC Mid-Infrared All-Sky Survey data. Methods. We have searched for point sources detected in the AKARI/IRC All-Sky Survey, which show a positional match with A-M dwarf stars in the Tycho-2 Spectral Type Catalogue and exhibit excess emission at 18 micron compared to that expected from the Ks magnitude in the 2MASS catalogue. Results. We find 24 warm debris candidates including 8 new candidates among A-K stars. The apparent debris disk frequency is estimated to be 2.8 +/- 0.6%. We also find that A stars and solar-type FGK stars have different characteristics of the inner component of the identified debris disk candidates --- while debris disks around A stars are cooler and consistent with steady-state evolutionary model of debris disks, those around FGK stars tend to be warmer and cannot be explained by the steady-state model.

=== arXiv:1211.2809v1  [2012-11-12]
TITLE  : Mini-Oort clouds: Compact isotropic planetesimal clouds from planet-planet scattering
AUTHORS: Sean N. Raymond, Philip J. Armitage
DOI    : 10.1093/mnrasl/sls033
ABS    : Starting from planetary systems with three giant planets and an outer disk of planetesimals, we use dynamical simulations to show how dynamical instabilities can transform planetesimal disks into 100-1000 AU-scale isotropic clouds. The instabilities involve a phase of planet-planet scattering that concludes with the ejection of one or more planets and the inward-scattering of the surviving gas giant(s) to remove them from direct dynamical contact with the planetesimals. "Mini-Oort clouds" are thus formed from scattered planetesimals whose orbits are frozen by the abrupt disappearance of the perturbing giant planet. Although the planetesimal orbits are virtually isotropic, the surviving giant planets tend to have modest inclinations (typically ~10 degrees) with respect to the initial orbital plane. The collisional lifetimes of mini-Oort clouds are long (10 Myr to &gt;10 Gyr) and there is a window of ~100 Myr or longer during which they produce spherical clouds of potentially observable dust at 70 microns. If the formation channel for hot Jupiters commonly involves planetary close encounters, we predict a correlation between this subset of extrasolar planetary systems and mini-Oort clouds.

=== arXiv:1211.2475v4  [2012-11-11]
TITLE  : The ongoing pursuit of R Coronae Borealis stars: ASAS-3 survey strikes again
AUTHORS: P. Tisserand, G. C. Clayton, D. L. Welch, B. Pilecki, L. Wyrzykowski, D. Kilkenny
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201220713
ABS    : R Coronae Borealis stars (RCBs) are rare, hydrogen-deficient, carbon-rich supergiant variable stars that are likely the evolved merger products of pairs of CO and He white dwarfs. Only 55 RCB stars are known in our galaxy and their distribution on the sky is weighted heavily by microlensing survey field positions. A less-biased wide-area survey would provide the ability to test competing evolutionary scenarios, understand the population or populations that produce RCBs and constraint their formation rate. The ASAS-3 survey monitored the sky south of declination +28 deg since 2000 to a limiting magnitude of V=14. We searched ASAS-3 for RCB variables using a number of different methods to ensure that the probability of RCB detection was as high as possible and to reduce selection biases based on luminosity, temperature, dust production activity and shell brightness. Candidates whose light curves were visually inspected were pre-selected based on their infrared excesses due to warm dust in their circumstellar shells using the WISE and/or 2MASS catalogues, and criteria on light curve variability. We then acquired spectra of 104 stars to determine their real nature using the SSO/WiFeS spectrograph. We report 21 newly-discovered RCB stars and 2 new DY Per stars. Two previously suspected RCB candidates were also spectroscopically confirmed. Our methods allowed us to extend our detection efficiency to fainter magnitudes that would not have been easily accessible to discovery techniques based only on light curve variability. The overall detection efficiency is about 90% for RCBs with maximum light brighter than V~13. This growing sample is of great value to constrain the peculiar and disparate atmosphere composition of RCBs. Most importantly, we show that the spatial distribution and apparent magnitudes of Galactic RCB stars is consistent with RCBs being part of the Galactic bulge population.

=== arXiv:1211.2453v1  [2012-11-11]
TITLE  : Extrasolar Refractory-Dominated Planetesimals: an Assessment
AUTHORS: M. Jura, S. Xu
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-6256/145/2/30
ABS    : Previously published observations of 60 externally-polluted white dwarfs show that none of the stars have accreted from intact refractory-dominated parent bodies composed mainly of Al, Ca and O, although planetesimals with such a distinctive composition have been predicted to form. We propose that such remarkable objects are not detected, by themselves, because, unless they are scattered outward from their initial orbit, they are engulfed and destroyed during the star's Asymptotic Giant Branch evolution. As-yet, there is at most only weak evidence supporting a scenario where the composition of any extrasolar minor planet can be explained by blending of an outwardly scattered refractory-dominated planetesimal with an ambient asteroid.

=== arXiv:1211.1051v1  [2012-11-05]
TITLE  : Opening the 100-Year Window for Time Domain Astronomy
AUTHORS: Jonathan Grindlay, Sumin Tang, Edward Los, Mathieu Servillat
JOURNAL: New Horizons in Time-Domain Astronomy, Proceedings IAU Symposium No. 285, R. Elizabeth Griffin, Robert J. Hanisch and Robert L. Seaman, eds., Cambridge University Press, pp. 29-34 (2012)
DOI    : 10.1017/S1743921312000166
ABS    : The large-scale surveys such as PTF, CRTS and Pan-STARRS-1 that have emerged within the past 5 years or so employ digital databases and modern analysis tools to accentuate research into Time Domain Astronomy (TDA). Preparations are underway for LSST which, in another 6 years, will usher in the second decade of modern TDA. By that time the Digital Access to a Sky Century @ Harvard (DASCH) project will have made available to the community the full sky Historical TDA database and digitized images for a century (1890--1990) of coverage. We describe the current DASCH development and some initial results, and outline plans for the "production scanning" phase and data distribution which is to begin in 2012. That will open a 100-year window into temporal astrophysics, revealing rare transients and (especially) astrophysical phenomena that vary on time-scales of a decade. It will also provide context and archival comparisons for the deeper modern surveys

=== arXiv:1211.0007v1  [2012-10-31]
TITLE  : Extragalactic number counts at 100 um, free from cosmic variance
AUTHORS: B. Sibthorpe, R. Ivison, R. J. Massey, I. G. Roseboom, P. van der Werf, B. C. Matthews, J. S. Greaves
DOI    : 10.1093/mnrasl/sls002
ABS    : We use data from the Disc Emission via a Bias-free Reconnaissance in the Infrared/Submillimetre (DEBRIS) survey, taken at 100 um with the Photoconductor Array Camera and Spectrometer instrument on board the Herschel Space Observatory, to make a cosmic variance independent measurement of the extragalactic number counts. These data consist of 323 small-area mapping observations performed uniformly across the sky, and thus represent a sparse sampling of the astronomical sky with an effective coverage of ~2.5 deg^2. We find our cosmic variance independent analysis to be consistent with previous count measurements made using relatively small area surveys. Furthermore, we find no statistically significant cosmic variance on any scale within the errors of our data. Finally, we interpret these results to estimate the probability of galaxy source confusion in the study of debris discs.

=== arXiv:1210.6258v1  [2012-10-23]
TITLE  : A Self-Consistent Model of the Circumstellar Debris Created by a Giant Hypervelocity Impact in the HD172555 System
AUTHORS: B. C. Johnson, C. M. Lisse, C. H. Chen, H. J. Melosh, M. C. Wyatt, P. Thebault, W. G. Henning, E. Gaidos
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/761/1/45
ABS    : Spectral modeling of the large infrared excess in the Spitzer IRS spectra of HD 172555 suggests that there is more than 10^19 kg of sub-micron dust in the system. Using physical arguments and constraints from observations, we rule out the possibility of the infrared excess being created by a magma ocean planet or a circumplanetary disk or torus. We show that the infrared excess is consistent with a circumstellar debris disk or torus, located at approximately 6 AU, that was created by a planetary scale hypervelocity impact. We find that radiation pressure should remove submicron dust from the debris disk in less than one year. However, the system's mid-infrared photometric flux, dominated by submicron grains, has been stable within 4 percent over the last 27 years, from IRAS (1983) to WISE (2010). Our new spectral modeling work and calculations of the radiation pressure on fine dust in HD 172555 provide a self-consistent explanation for this apparent contradiction. We also explore the unconfirmed claim that 10^47 molecules of SiO vapor are needed to explain an emission feature at 8 um in the Spitzer IRS spectrum of HD 172555. We find that unless there are 10^48 atoms or 0.05 Earth masses of atomic Si and O vapor in the system, SiO vapor should be destroyed by photo-dissociation in less than 0.2 years. We argue that a second plausible explanation for the 8 um feature can be emission from solid SiO, which naturally occurs in submicron silicate "smokes" created by quickly condensing vaporized silicate.

=== arXiv:1210.4015v1  [2012-10-15]
TITLE  : Observations and NLTE Modeling of the Gaseous Planetary Debris Disk around Ton 345
AUTHORS: S. Hartmann, T. Nagel, T. Rauch, K. Werner
ABS    : Debris disks around single white dwarfs are thought to be the remains of planetary bodies disrupted by tidal forces. Ongoing accretion of the hereby produced dust allows to detect the planetary material in the white dwarf photosphere and to conclude on its chemical composition. As an alternative, the composition can in principle be determined directly from the emission lines of the sometimes additionally observed gaseous component of the disks. To this aim, we perform spectral modeling with our non-LTE code for accretion disks. We have obtained new observations of Ton 345 in order to look for long- and short-term variations in the disk line-profiles. We find that the prominent red-violet asymmetry of the Ca II infrared triplet almost disappeared. Line-profile variations during one night are not seen without doubt.

=== arXiv:1210.0587v2  [2012-10-01]
TITLE  : The Absence of Cold Dust around Warm Debris Disk Star HD 15407A
AUTHORS: Hideaki Fujiwara, Takashi Onaka, Satoshi Takita, Takuya Yamashita, Misato Fukagawa, Daisuke Ishihara, Hirokazu Kataza, Hiroshi Murakami
DOI    : 10.1088/2041-8205/759/1/L18
ABS    : We report Herschel and AKARI photometric observations at far-infrared (FIR) wavelengths of the debris disk around the F3V star HD 15407A, in which the presence of an extremely large amount of warm dust (~500-600 K) has been suggested by mid-infrared (MIR) photometry and spectroscopy. The observed flux densities of the debris disk at 60-160 micron are clearly above the photospheric level of the star, suggesting excess emission at FIR as well as at MIR wavelengths previously reported. The observed FIR excess emission is consistent with the continuum level extrapolated from the MIR excess, suggesting that it originates in the inner warm debris dust and cold dust (~50-130 K) is absent in the outer region of the disk. The absence of cold dust does not support a late heavy bombardment-like event as an origin of the large amount of warm debris dust around HD 15047A.

=== arXiv:1210.0547v1  [2012-10-01]
TITLE  : Resolved Debris Discs Around A Stars in the Herschel DEBRIS Survey
AUTHORS: Mark Booth, Grant Kennedy, Bruce Sibthorpe, Brenda C. Matthews, Mark C. Wyatt, Gaspard Duchêne, J. J. Kavelaars, David Rodriguez
JOURNAL: MNRAS 428, 1263 (2013)
DOI    : 10.1093/mnras/sts117
ABS    : The majority of debris discs discovered so far have only been detected through infrared excess emission above stellar photospheres. While disc properties can be inferred from unresolved photometry alone under various assumptions for the physical properties of dust grains, there is a degeneracy between disc radius and dust temperature that depends on the grain size distribution and optical properties. By resolving the disc we can measure the actual location of the dust. The launch of Herschel, with an angular resolution superior to previous far-infrared telescopes, allows us to spatially resolve more discs and locate the dust directly. Here we present the nine resolved discs around A stars between 20 and 40 pc observed by the DEBRIS survey. We use these data to investigate the disc radii by fitting narrow ring models to images at 70, 100 and 160 μm and by fitting blackbodies to full spectral energy distributions. We do this with the aim of finding an improved way of estimating disc radii for unresolved systems. The ratio between the resolved and blackbody radii varies between 1 and 2.5. This ratio is inversely correlated with luminosity and any remaining discrepancies are most likely explained by differences to the minimum size of grain in the size distribution or differences in composition. We find that three of the systems are well fit by a narrow ring, two systems are borderline cases and the other four likely require wider or multiple rings to fully explain the observations, reflecting the diversity of planetary systems.

=== arXiv:1210.0134v2  [2012-09-29]
TITLE  : Effect of Dimensionality on the Percolation Threshold of Overlapping Nonspherical Hyperparticles
AUTHORS: Salvatore Torquato, Yang Jiao
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevE.87.022111
ABS    : A set of lower bounds on the continuum percolation threshold $η_c$ of overlapping convex hyperparticles of general nonspherical (anisotropic) shape with a specified orientational probability distribution in $d$-dimensional Euclidean space have been derived [S. Torquato, J. Chem. Phys. {\bf 136}, 054106 (2012)]. The simplest of these lower bounds is given by $η_c \ge v/v_{ex}$, where $v_{ex}$ is the $d$-dimensional exclusion volume of a hyperparticle and $v$ is its $d$-dimensional volume. In order to study the effect of dimensionality on the threshold $η_c$ of overlapping nonspherical convex hyperparticles with random orientations here, we obtain a scaling relation for $η_c$ that is based on this lower bound and a conjecture that hyperspheres provide the highest threshold among all convex hyperparticle shapes for any $d$. This scaling relation exploits the principle that low-dimensional continuum percolation behavior encodes high-dimensional information. We derive a formula for the exclusion volume $v_{ex}$ of a hyperparticle in terms of its $d$-dimensional volume $v$, surface area $s$ and {\it radius of mean curvature} ${\bar R}$ (or, equivalently, {\it mean width}). These basic geometrical properties are computed for a wide variety of nonspherical hyperparticle shapes with random orientations across all dimensions, including, among other shapes, various polygons for $d=2$, Platonic solids, spherocylinders, parallepipeds and zero-volume plates for $d=3$ and their appropriate generalizations for $d \ge 4$. We then compute the lower bound and scaling relation for $η_c$ for this comprehensive set of continuum percolation models across dimensions. We show that the scaling relation provides accurate {\it upper-bound} estimates of the threshold $η_c$ across dimensions and becomes increasingly accurate as the space $d$ increases.

=== arXiv:1210.0089v1  [2012-09-29]
TITLE  : HD 172555: detection of 63 microns [OI] emission in a debris disc
AUTHORS: P. Riviere-Marichalar, D. Barrado, J. -C. Augereau, W. F. Thi, A. Roberge, C. Eiroa, B. Montesinos, G. Meeus
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 546L, 8R (2012)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201219745
ABS    : Context. HD 172555 is a young A7 star belonging to the Beta Pictoris Moving Group that harbours a debris disc. The Spitzer IRS spectrum of the source showed mid-IR features such as silicates and glassy silica species, indicating the presence of a warm dust component with small grains, which places HD 172555 among the small group of debris discs with such properties. The IRS spectrum also shows a possible emission of SiO gas. Aims. We aim to study the dust distribution in the circumstellar disc of HD 172555 and to asses the presence of gas in the debris disc. Methods. As part of the GASPS Open Time Key Programme, we obtained Herschel-PACS photometric and spectroscopic observations of the source. We analysed PACS observations of HD 172555 and modelled the Spectral Energy Distribution (SED) with a modified blackbody and the gas emission with a two-level population model with no collisional de-excitation. Results. We report for the first time the detection of OI atomic gas emission at 63.18 microns in the HD 172555 circumstellar disc. We detect excesses due to circumstellar dust toward HD 172555 in the three photometric bands of PACS (70, 100, and 160 microns). We derive a large dust particle mass of 4.8e-4 Earth masses and an atomic oxygen mass of 2.5e-2*R^2 Earth masses, where R in AU is the separation between the star and the inner disc. Thus, most of the detected mass of the disc is in the gaseous phase.

=== arXiv:1209.5287v1  [2012-09-24]
TITLE  : The WIRED Survey III: An Infrared Excess around the Eclipsing Post-Common Envelope Binary SDSS J030308.35+005443.7
AUTHORS: John H. Debes, D. W. Hoard, Jay Farihi, Stefanie Wachter, David T. Leisawitz, Martin Cohen
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/759/1/37
ABS    : We present the discovery with WISE of a significant infrared excess associated with the eclipsing post-common envelope binary SDSSJ 030308.35+005443.7, the first excess discovered around a non-interacting white dwarf+main sequence M dwarf binary. The spectral energy distribution of the white dwarf+M dwarf companion shows significant excess longwards of 3-microns. A T_eff of 8940K for the white dwarf is consistent with a cooling age &gt;2 Gyr, implying that the excess may be due to a recently formed circumbinary dust disk of material that extends from the tidal truncation radius of the binary at 1.96 Rsun out to &lt;0.8 AU, with a total mass of ~10^20 g. We also construct WISE and follow-up ground-based near-infrared light curves of the system, and find variability in the K-band that appears to be in phase with ellipsoidal variations observed in the visible. The presence of dust might be due to a) material being generated by the destruction of small rocky bodies that are being perturbed by an unseen planetary system or b) dust condensing from the companion's wind. The high inclination of this system, and the presence of dust, make it an attractive target for M dwarf transit surveys and long term photometric monitoring.

=== arXiv:1207.7082v1  [2012-07-30]
TITLE  : Inner edges of compact debris disks around metal-rich white dwarfs
AUTHORS: Roman R. Rafikov, Jose A. Garmilla
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/760/2/123
ABS    : A number of metal-rich white dwarfs (WDs) are known to host compact, dense particle disks, which are thought to be responsible for metal pollution of these stars. In many such systems the inner radii of disks inferred from their spectra are so close to the WD that particles directly exposed to starlight must be heated above 1500 K and are expected to be unstable against sublimation. To reconcile this expectation with observations we explore particle sublimation in H-poor debris disks around WDs. We show that because of the high metal vapor pressure the characteristic sublimation temperature in these disks is 300-400 K higher than in their protoplanetary analogues, allowing particles to survive at higher temperatures. We then look at the structure of the inner edges of debris disks and show that they should generically feature superheated inner rims directly exposed to starlight with temperatures reaching 2500-3500 K. Particles migrating through the rim towards the WD (and rapidly sublimating) shield the disk behind them from strong stellar heating, making the survival of solids possible close to the WD. Our model agrees well with observations of WD+disk systems provided that disk particles are composed of Si-rich material such as olivine, and have sizes in the range ~(0.03-30) cm.

=== arXiv:1207.1162v1  [2012-07-05]
TITLE  : Rapid disappearance of a warm, dusty circumstellar disk
AUTHORS: Carl Melis, B. Zuckerman, Joseph H. Rhee, Inseok Song, Simon J. Murphy, Michael S. Bessell
DOI    : 10.1038/nature11210
ABS    : Stars form with gaseous and dusty circumstellar envelopes, which rapidly settle into disks that eventually give rise to planetary systems. Understanding the process by which these disks evolve is paramount in developing an accurate theory of planet formation that can account for the variety of planetary systems discovered so far. The formation of Earth-like planets through collisional accumulation of rocky objects within a disk has mainly been explored in theoretical and computational work in which post-collision ejecta evolution is typically ignored, although recent work has considered the fate of such material. Here we report observations of a young, Sun-like star (TYC 8241 2652 1) where infrared flux from post-collisional ejecta has decreased drastically, by a factor of about 30, over a period of less than two years. The star seems to have gone from hosting substantial quantities of dusty ejecta, in a region analogous to where the rocky planets orbit in the Solar System, to retaining at most a meagre amount of cooler dust. Such a phase of rapid ejecta evolution has not been previously predicted or observed, and no currently available physical model satisfactorily explains the observations.

=== arXiv:1207.0767v1  [2012-07-03]
TITLE  : Chemical compositions of stars in two stellar streams from the Galactic thick disk
AUTHORS: P. Ramya, Bacham E. Reddy, David L. Lambert
DOI    : 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.21677.x
ABS    : We present abundances for 20 elements for stars in two stellar streams identified by Arifyanto &amp; Fuchs (2006, A&amp;A, 449, 533): 18 stars from the Arcturus stream and 26 from a new stream, which we call AF06 stream, both from the Galactic thick disk. Results show both streams are metal-poor and very old (10$-$14 Gyrs) with kinematics and abundances overlapping with the properties of local field thick disk stars. Both streams exhibit a range in metallicity but with relative elemental abundances that are identical to those of thick disk stars of the same metallicity. These results show that neither stream can result from dissolution of an open cluster. It is highly unlikely that either stream represents tidal debris from an accreted satellite galaxy. Both streams most probably owe their origin to dynamical perturbations within the Galaxy.

=== arXiv:1206.3716v2  [2012-06-17]
TITLE  : Organizing Principles for Dense Packings of Nonspherical Hard Particles: Not All Shapes Are Created Equal
AUTHORS: Salvatore Torquato, Yang Jiao
JOURNAL: Physical Review E 86, 011102 (2012)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevE.86.011102
ABS    : We have recently devised organizing principles to obtain maximally dense packings of the Platonic and Archimedean solids, and certain smoothly-shaped convex nonspherical particles [Torquato and Jiao, Phys. Rev. E 81, 041310 (2010)]. Here we generalize them in order to guide one to ascertain the densest packings of other convex nonspherical particles as well as concave shapes. Our generalized organizing principles are explicitly stated as four distinct propositions. We apply and test all of these organizing principles to the most comprehensive set of both convex and concave particle shapes to date, including Catalan solids, prisms, antiprisms, cylinders, dimers of spheres and various concave polyhedra. We demonstrate that all of the densest known packings associated with this wide spectrum of nonspherical particles are consistent with our propositions. Among other applications, our general organizing principles enable us to construct analytically the densest known packings of certain convex nonspherical particles, including spherocylinders, "lens-shaped" particles, square pyramids and rhombic pyramids. Moreover, we show how to apply these principles to infer the high-density equilibrium crystalline phases of hard convex and concave particles. We also discuss the unique packing attributes of maximally random jammed packings of nonspherical particles.

=== arXiv:1206.1839v1  [2012-06-08]
TITLE  : Herschel PACS and SPIRE Observations of TWA brown dwarf discs
AUTHORS: B. Riaz, J. E. Gizis
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201219524
ABS    : We present Herschel SPIRE observations for the TW Hydrae association (TWA) brown dwarf discs SSSPM J1102-3431 (SS1102) and 2MASSW J1207334-393254 (2M1207). Both discs are undetected in the SPIRE 200-500mu bands. We have also analyzed the archival PACS data and find no detection for either source in the 160mu band. Based on radiative transfer modeling, we estimate an upper limit to the disc mass for both sources of 0.1 M_Jup. The lack of detection in the SPIRE bands could be due to a paucity of millimeter sized dust grains in the 2M1207 and SS1102 discs. We also report a non-detection for the brown dwarf 2MASS J1139511-315921 (2M1139) in the PACS 70 and 160mu bands. We have argued for the presence of a warm debris disc around 2M1139, based on an excess emission observed at 24mu. The mid-infrared colors for 2M1139 are similar to the transition discs in the Taurus and Ophuichus regions. A comparison of the brown dwarf disc masses over a ~1-10 Myr age interval suggests a decline in the disc mass with the age of the system.

=== arXiv:1205.5032v1  [2012-05-22]
TITLE  : Mid and Far Infrared Properties of a Complete Sample of Local AGNs
AUTHORS: Kohei Ichikawa, Yoshihiro Ueda, Yuichi Terashima, Shinki Oyabu, Poshak Gandhi, Keiko Matsuta, Takao Nakagawa
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/754/1/45
ABS    : We investigate the mid- (MIR) to far-infrared (FIR) properties of a nearly complete sample of local Active Galactic Nuclei (AGNs) detected in the Swift/BAT all sky hard X-ray (14-195 keV) survey, based on the cross correlation with the AKARI infrared survey catalogs complemented by those with IRAS and WISE. Out of 135 non-blazer AGNs in the Swift/BAT 9 month catalog, we obtain the MIR photometric data for 128 sources either in the 9, 12, 18, 22, and/or 25 um band. We find good correlation between their hard X-ray and MIR luminosities over 3 orders of magnitude (42&lt; log lambda L_{lambda}(9, 18 um)&lt; 45), which is tighter than that with the FIR luminosities at 90 um. This suggests that thermal emission from hot dusts irradiated by the AGN emission dominate the MIR fluxes. Both X-ray unabsorbed and absorbed AGNs follow the same correlation, implying isotropic infrared emission, as expected in clumpy dust tori rather than homogeneous ones. We find excess signals around 9 um in the averaged infrared spectral energy distribution from heavy obscured "new type" AGNs with small scattering fractions in the X-ray spectra. This could be attributed to the PAH emission feature, suggesting that their host galaxies have strong starburst activities.

=== arXiv:1205.4078v1  [2012-05-18]
TITLE  : Properties of dust in the Galactic center region probed by AKARI far-infrared spectral mapping - detection of a dust feature
AUTHORS: H. Kaneda, A. Yasuda, T. Onaka, M. Kawada, N. Murakami, T. Nakagawa, Y. Okada, H. Takahashi
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201219238
ABS    : We investigate the properties of interstellar dust in the Galactic center region toward the Arches and Quintuplet clusters. With the Fourier Transform Spectrometer of the AKARI/Far-Infrared Surveyor, we performed the far-infrared (60 - 140 cm^-1) spectral mapping of an area of about 10' x 10' which includes the two clusters to obtain a low-resolution (R = 1.2 cm^-1) spectrum at every spatial bin of 30" x 30". We derive the spatial variations of dust continuum emission at different wavenumbers, which are compared with those of the [O III] 88 micron (113 cm^-1) emission and the OH 119 micron (84 cm^-1) absorption. The spectral fitting shows that two dust modified blackbody components with temperatures of ~20 K and ~50 K can reproduce most of the continuum spectra. For some spectra, however, we find that there exists a significant excess on top of a modified blackbody continuum around 80 - 90 cm^-1 (110 - 130 microns). The warmer dust component is spatially correlated well with the [O III] emission and hence likely to be associated with the highly-ionized gas locally heated by intense radiation from the two clusters. The excess emission probably represents a dust feature, which is found to be spatially correlated with the OH absorption and a CO cloud. We find that a dust model including micron-sized graphite grains can reproduce the observed spectrum with the dust feature fairly well.

=== arXiv:1205.3503v1  [2012-05-15]
TITLE  : Detection of Weak Circumstellar Gas around the DAZ White Dwarf WD 1124-293: Evidence for the Accretion of Multiple Asteroids
AUTHORS: J. H. Debes, M. Kilic, F. Faedi, E. L. Shkolnik, M. Lopez-Morales, A. J. Weinberger, C. Slesnick, R. G. West
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/754/1/59
ABS    : Single metal polluted white dwarfs with no dusty disks are believed to be actively accreting metals from a circumstellar disk of gas caused by the destruction of asteroids perturbed by planetary systems. We report, for the first time, the detection of circumstellar Ca~II gas in absorption around the DAZ WD~1124-293, which lacks an infrared excess. We constrain the gas to $&gt;$7 $R_{\rm WD}$ and $&lt;$32000~AU, and estimate it to be at $\sim$54~R$_{\rm WD}$, well within WD~1124-293's tidal disruption radius. This detection is based on several epochs of spectroscopy around the Ca~II H and K lines ($λ$=3968Å, 3933Å) with the MIKE spectrograph on the Magellan/Clay Telescope at Las Campanas Observatory. We confirm the circumstellar nature of the gas by observing nearby sightlines and finding no evidence for gas from the local interstellar medium. Through archival data we have measured the equivalent width of the two photospheric Ca lines over a period of 11 years. We see $&lt;$ 5-7\% epoch-to-epoch variation in equivalent widths over this time period, and no evidence for long term trends. The presence of a circumstellar gas implies a near edge-on inclination to the system, thus we place limits to short period transiting planetary companions with R $&gt;$ R$_{\rm \oplus}$ using the WASP survey. The presence of gas in orbit around WD~1124-293 implies that most DAZs could harbor planetary systems. Since 25-30\% of white dwarfs show metal line absorption, the dynamical process for perturbing small bodies must be robust.

=== arXiv:1205.1040v1  [2012-05-04]
TITLE  : Variability of the Infrared Excess of Extreme Debris Disks
AUTHORS: Huan Y. A. Meng, George H. Rieke, Kate Y. L. Su, Valentin D. Ivanov, Leonardo Vanzi, Wiphu Rujopakarn
JOURNAL: The Astrophysical Journal Letters, Volume 751, Number 1, Page L17 (2012)
DOI    : 10.1088/2041-8205/751/1/L17
ABS    : Debris disks with extremely large infrared excesses (fractional luminosities $&gt; 10^{-2}$) are rare. Those with ages between 30 and 130 Myr are of interest because their evolution has progressed well beyond that of protoplanetary disks (which dissipate with a timescale of order 3 Myr), yet they represent a period when dynamical models suggest that terrestrial planet building may still be progressing through large, violent collisions that could yield large amounts of debris and large infrared excesses. For example, our Moon was formed through a violent collision of two large proto-planets during this age range. We report two disks around the solar-like stars ID8 and HD 23514 in this age range where the 24 μm infrared excesses vary on timescales of a few years, even though the stars are not variable in the optical. Variations this rapid are difficult to understand if the debris is produced by collisional cascades, as it is for most debris disks. It is possible that the debris in these two systems arises in part from condensates from silicate-rich vapor produced in a series of violent collisions among relatively large bodies. If their evolution is rapid, the rate of detection of extreme excesses would indicate that major collisions may be relatively common in this age range.

=== arXiv:1205.0004v2  [2012-04-30]
TITLE  : Scars of Intense Accretion Episodes at Metal-Rich White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: J. Farihi, B. T. Gänsicke, M. C. Wyatt, J. Girven, J. E. Pringle, A. R. King
DOI    : 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.21215.x
ABS    : A re-evaluation of time-averaged accretion rates at DBZ-type white dwarfs points to historical, time-averaged rates significantly higher than the currently observed episodes at their DAZ counterparts. The difference between the ongoing, instantaneous accretion rates witnessed at DAZ white dwarfs, which often exceed 1e8 g/s, and those inferred over the past 1e5-1e6 yr for the DBZ stars can be a few orders of magnitude, and therefore must result from high-rate episodes of tens to hundreds of years so they remain undetected to date. This paper explores the likelihood that such brief, intense accretion episodes of gas-phase material can account for existing data. For reasonable assumptions about the circumstellar gas, accretion rates approaching or exceeding 1e15 g/s are possible, similar to rates observed in quiescent cataclysmic variables, and potentially detectable with future x-ray missions or wide-field monitoring facilities. Gaseous debris that is prone to such rapid accretion may be abundant immediately following a tidal disruption event via collisions and sublimation, or if additional bodies impinge upon an extant disk. Particulate disk matter accretes at or near the Poynting-Robertson drag rate for long periods between gas-producing events, consistent with rates inferred for dusty DAZ white dwarfs. In this picture, warm DAZ stars without infrared excesses have rates consistent with accretion from particulate disks that remain undetected. This overall picture has implications for quasi-steady state models of accretion and the derived chemical composition of asteroidal debris in DBZ white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:1204.4087v2  [2012-04-18]
TITLE  : On the unusual gas composition in the Beta Pictoris debris disk
AUTHORS: Ji-Wei Xie, Alexis Brandeker, Yanqin Wu
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/762/2/114
ABS    : The metallic gas associated with the Beta Pic debris disk is not believed to be primordial, but arises from the destruction of dust grains. Recent observations have shown that carbon and oxygen in this gas are exceptionally overabundant compared to other elements, by some 400 times. We study the origin of this enrichment under two opposing hypothesis, preferential production, where the gas is produced with the observed unusual abundance (as may happen if gas is produced by photo-desorption from C/O-rich icy grains), and preferential depletion, where the gas evolves to the observed state from an original solar abundance (if outgassing occurs under high-speed collisions) under a number of dynamical processes. We include ... ... We find ... ...

=== arXiv:1204.3907v1  [2012-04-17]
TITLE  : Molecular gas towards G18.8+1.8
AUTHORS: J. Vasquez, M. Rubio, C. E. Cappa, N. U. Duronea
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201219147
ABS    : This work aims at investigating the characteristics of the molecular gas associated with the nebula G18.8+1.8, linked to the Wolf-Rayet star HD168206 (WR 113), and its relation to other components of its local interstellar medium. We carried out molecular observations of the 12CO(J=1-0) and (J=2-1) lines with angular resolution of 44 arcsec and 22 arcsec using the SEST telescope. Complementary NANTEN data of the 12CO(1-0) line were also used. The dust emission was analyzed using Spitzer-IRAC images at 8.0 microns, and WISE data at 3.4, 4.6, and 12.0 microns. The SEST data allowed us to identify a molecular component (Cloud 3) having velocities in the interval from ~ +30 to +36 km/s which is most probably linked to the nebula. Morphological and kinematical properties suggest that Cloud 3 constitute a wind-blown molecular half-shell, which expands around WR113. The ratio R_(2-1/1-0) and excitation temperatures indicate that the molecular gas is being irradiated by strong UV radiation. The location of the inner optical ring in the outer edge of Cloud 3 suggests that the stars SerOB2-1, -2, -3, -63, and -64 are responsables for the ionization of Cloud 3 and the inner ring nebula. A comparison between the spatial distribution of the molecular gas and the PAH emission at 8 $μ$m indicates the existence of a PDR between the ionized and the molecular gas. A search for candidate young stellar objects (YSOs) in the region around G18.8+1.8 based on available 2MASS, MSX, IRAS, and Spitzer-IRAC catalogs resulted in the detection of about sixty sources, some of them projected onto Cloud 3. Two small spots of clustered candidates YSOs are projected near the outer border of Cloud 3, although a triggered stellar formation scenario is doubtful.

=== arXiv:1204.1132v1  [2012-04-05]
TITLE  : Gaseous Material Orbiting the Polluted, Dusty White Dwarf HE1349-2305
AUTHORS: Carl Melis, P. Dufour, J. Farihi, J. Bochanski, Adam J. Burgasser, S. Parsons, B. Gaensicke, D. Koester
DOI    : 10.1088/2041-8205/751/1/L4
ABS    : We present new spectroscopic observations of the polluted, dusty, helium-dominated atmosphere white dwarf star HE1349-2305. Optical spectroscopy reveals weak CaII infrared triplet emission indicating that metallic gas debris orbits and is accreted by the white dwarf. Atmospheric abundances are measured for magnesium and silicon while upper limits for iron and oxygen are derived from the available optical spectroscopy. HE1349-2305 is the first gas disk-hosting white dwarf star identified amongst previously known polluted white dwarfs. Further characterization of the parent body polluting this star will require ultraviolet spectroscopy.

=== arXiv:1203.4711v1  [2012-03-21]
TITLE  : The evolutionary state of short period magnetic white dwarf binaries
AUTHORS: E. Breedt, B. T. Gaensicke, J. Girven, A. J. Drake, C. M. Copperwheat, S. G. Parsons, T. R. Marsh
DOI    : 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.20965.x
ABS    : We present phase-resolved spectroscopy of two new short period low accretion rate magnetic binaries, SDSSJ125044.42+154957.3 (Porb = 86 min) and SDSSJ151415.65+074446.5 (Porb = 89 min). Both systems were previously identified as magnetic white dwarfs from the Zeeman splitting of the Balmer absorption lines in their optical spectra. Their spectral energy distributions exhibit a large near-infrared excess, which we interpret as a combination of cyclotron emission and possibly a late type companion star. No absorption features from the companion are seen in our optical spectra. We derive the orbital periods from a narrow, variable H_alpha emission line which we show to originate on the companion star. The high radial velocity amplitude measured in both systems suggests a high orbital inclination, but we find no evidence for eclipses in our data. The two new systems resemble the polar EF Eri in its prolonged low state and also SDSSJ121209.31+013627.7, a known magnetic white dwarf plus possible brown dwarf binary, which was also recovered by our method.

=== arXiv:1203.0158v1  [2012-03-01]
TITLE  : Hybrid protoneutron stars with the Dyson-Schwinger quark model
AUTHORS: H. Chen, M. Baldo, G. F. Burgio, H. -J. Schulze
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. D86, 045006 (2012)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevD.86.045006
ABS    : We study the hadron-quark phase transition at finite temperature in the interior of protoneutron stars, combining the Dyson-Schwinger model for quark matter with the Brueckner-Hartree-Fock approach for hadronic matter. We discuss the dependence of the results on different nuclear three-body forces and on details of the quark model. %Compared to the bag model, the transition from the hadron phase %(without hyperons) to the quark phase appears at large density. A maximum mass exceeding two solar masses can be obtained with a strong three-body force and suitable parameter values in the Dyson-Schwinger model. With a hybrid configuration, the maximum mass of protoneutron stars is larger then that of cold neutron stars, such that a delayed collapse might be possible in principle.

=== arXiv:1203.0005v2  [2012-02-29]
TITLE  : Dusty Planetary Systems
AUTHORS: Amaya Moro-Martin
DOI    : 10.1007/978-94-007-5606-9_9
ABS    : Extensive photometric stellar surveys show that many main sequence stars show emission at infrared and longer wavelengths that is in excess of the stellar photosphere; this emission is thought to arise from circumstellar dust. The presence of dust disks is confirmed by spatially resolved imaging at infrared to millimeter wavelengths (tracing the dust thermal emission), and at optical to near infrared wavelengths (tracing the dust scattered light). Because the expected lifetime of these dust particles is much shorter than the age of the stars (&gt;10 Myr), it is inferred that this solid material not primordial, i.e. the remaining from the placental cloud of gas and dust where the star was born, but instead is replenished by dust-producing planetesimals. These planetesimals are analogous to the asteroids, comets and Kuiper Belt objects (KBOs) in our Solar system that produce the interplanetary dust that gives rise to the zodiacal light (tracing the inner component of the Solar system debris disk). The presence of these "debris disks" around stars with a wide range of masses, luminosities, and metallicities, with and without binary companions, is evidence that planetesimal formation is a robust process that can take place under a wide range of conditions. This chapter is divided in two parts. Part I discusses how the study of the Solar system debris disk and the study of debris disks around other stars can help us learn about the formation, evolution and diversity of planetary systems by shedding light on the frequency and timing of planetesimal formation, the location and physical properties of the planetesimals, the presence of long-period planets, and the dynamical and collisional evolution of the system. Part II reviews the physical processes that affect dust particles in the gas-free environment of a debris disk and their effect on the dust particle size and spatial distribution.

=== arXiv:1202.6411v1  [2012-02-28]
TITLE  : A Spitzer Space Telescope Study of the Debris Disks around four SDSS White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: Carolyn Brinkworth, Boris Gaensicke, Jon Girven, Don Hoard, Tom Marsh, Stephen Parsons, Detlev Koester
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/750/1/86
ABS    : We present Spitzer Space Telescope data of four isolated white dwarfs that were previously known to harbor circumstellar gaseous disks. IRAC photometry shows a significant infrared excess in all of the systems, SDSS0738+1835, SDSS0845+2257, SDSS1043+0855 and SDSS1617+1620, indicative of a dusty extension to those disks. The 4.5-micron excesses seen in SDSS0738, SDSS0845, and SDSS1617 are 7.5, 5.7 and 4.5 times the white dwarf contribution, respectively. In contrast, in SDSS1043, the measured flux density at 4.5 microns is only 1.7 times the white dwarf contribution. We compare the measured IR excesses in the systems to models of geometrically thin, optically thick disks, and find that we are able to match the measured SEDs to within 3 sigma of the uncertainties, although disks with unfeasibly hot inner dust temperatures generally provide a better fit than those below the dust sublimation temperature. Possible explanations for the dearth of dust around SDSS1043+0855 are briefly discussed. Including our previous study of SDSS1228+1040, all five white dwarfs with gaseous debris disks have significant amounts of dust around them. It is evident that gas and dust can coexist around these relatively warm, relatively young white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:1202.3784v1  [2012-02-16]
TITLE  : Constraints on the Lifetimes of Disks Resulting from Tidally Destroyed Rocky Planetary Bodies
AUTHORS: J. Girven, C. S. Brinkworth, J. Farihi, B. T. Gänsicke, D. W. Hoard, T. R. Marsh, D. Koester
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/749/2/154
ABS    : Spitzer IRAC observations of 15 metal-polluted white dwarfs reveal infrared excesses in the spectral energy distributions of HE 0110-5630, GD 61, and HE 1349-2305. All three of these stars have helium-dominated atmospheres, and their infrared emissions are consistent with warm dust produced by the tidal destruction of (minor) planetary bodies. This study brings the number of metal-polluted, helium and hydrogen atmosphere white dwarfs surveyed with IRAC to 53 and 38 respectively. It also nearly doubles the number of metal-polluted helium-rich white dwarfs found to have closely orbiting dust by Spitzer. From the increased statistics for both atmospheric types with circumstellar dust, we derive a typical disk lifetime of log[t_{disk} (yr)] = 5.6+-1.1 (ranging from 3*10^4 - 5*10^6 yr). This assumes a relatively constant rate of accretion over the timescale where dust persists, which is uncertain. We find that the fraction of highly metal-polluted helium-rich white dwarfs that have an infrared excess detected by Spitzer is only 23 per cent, compared to 48 per cent for metal-polluted hydrogen-rich white dwarfs, and we conclude from this difference that the typical lifetime of dusty disks is somewhat shorter than the diffusion time scales of helium-rich white dwarf. We also find evidence for higher time-averaged accretion rates onto helium-rich stars compared to the instantaneous accretion rates onto hydrogen-rich stars; this is an indication that our picture of evolved star-planetary system interactions is incomplete. We discuss some speculative scenarios that can explain the observations.

=== arXiv:1202.2363v1  [2012-02-10]
TITLE  : Discovery of the Host Cluster for the Fundamental Cepheid Calibrator Zeta Gem
AUTHORS: Daniel J. Majaess, David G. Turner, Wolfgang Gieren, David Balam, David J. Lane
DOI    : 10.1088/2041-8205/748/1/L9
ABS    : New and existing CORAVEL, UBVJHKs, HST, HIP/Tycho, ARO, KPNO, and DAO observations imply that the fundamental Cepheid calibrator Zeta Gem is a cluster member. The following parameters were inferred for Zeta Gem from cluster membership and are tied to new spectral classifications (DAO) established for 26 nearby stars (e.g., HD53588/B7.5IV, HD54692/B9.5IV): E(B-V)=0.02+-0.02, log t=7.85+-0.15, and d=355+-15 pc. The mean distance to Zeta Gem from cluster membership and six recent estimates (e.g., IRSB) is d=363+-9(se)+-26(sd) pc. The results presented here support the color-excess and HST parallax derived for the Cepheid by Benedict et al. (2007). Forthcoming precise proper motions (DASCH) and Chandra/XMM-Newton observations of the broader field may be employed to identify cluster members, bolster the cluster's existence, and provide stronger constraints on the Cepheid's fundamental parameters.

=== arXiv:1202.0557v1  [2012-02-02]
TITLE  : Global Models of Runaway Accretion in White Dwarf Debris Disks
AUTHORS: Brian D. Metzger, Roman R. Rafikov, Konstantin V. Bochkarev
DOI    : 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.20895.x
ABS    : A growing sample of white dwarfs (WDs) with metal-enriched atmospheres are accompanied by excess infrared emission, indicating that they are encircled by a compact dusty disk of solid debris. Such `WD debris disks' are thought to originate from the tidal disruption of asteroids or other minor bodies, but the precise mechanism(s) responsible for transporting matter to the WD surface remains unclear, especially in those systems with the highest inferred metal accretion rates dM_Z/dt ~ 1e8-1e10 g/s. Here we present global time-dependent calculations of the coupled evolution of the gaseous and solid components of WD debris disks. Solids transported inwards (initially due to PR drag) sublimate at tens of WD radii, producing a source of gas that accretes onto the WD surface and viscously spreads outwards in radius, where it overlaps with the solid disk. If the aerodynamic coupling between the solids and gaseous disks is sufficiently strong (and/or the gas viscosity sufficiently weak), then gas builds up near the sublimation radius faster than it can viscously spread away. Since the rate of drag-induced solid accretion increases with gas density, this results in a runaway accretion process, during which the WD accretion rate reaches values orders of magnitude higher than can be achieved by PR drag alone. We explore the evolution of WD debris disks across a wide range of physical conditions and calculate the predicted distribution of observed accretion rates dM_Z/dt, finding reasonable agreement with the current sample. Although the conditions necessary for runaway accretion are at best marginally satisfied given the minimal level of aerodynamic drag between circular gaseous and solid disks, the presence of other stronger forms of solid-gas coupling---such as would result if the gaseous disk is only mildly eccentric---substantially increase the likelihood of runaway accretion.

=== arXiv:1201.6252v1  [2012-01-30]
TITLE  : Detailed compositional analysis of the heavily polluted DBZ white dwarf SDSS J073842.56+183509.06: A window on planet formation?
AUTHORS: P. Dufour, M. Kilic, G. Fontaine, P. Bergeron, C. Melis, J. Bochanski
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/749/1/6
ABS    : We present a new model atmosphere analysis of the most metal contaminated white dwarf known, the DBZ SDSS J073842.56+183509.06. Using new high resolution spectroscopic observations taken with Keck and Magellan, we determine precise atmospheric parameters and measure abundances of 14 elements heavier than helium. We also report new Spitzer mid-infrared photometric data that are used to better constrain the properties of the debris disk orbiting this star. Our detailed analysis, which combines data taken from 7 different observational facilities (GALEX, Gemini, Keck, Magellan, MMT, SDSS and Spitzer) clearly demonstrate that J0738+1835 is accreting large amounts of rocky terrestrial-like material that has been tidally disrupted into a debris disk. We estimate that the body responsible for the photospheric metal contamination was at least as large Ceres, but was much drier, with less than 1% of the mass contained in the form of water ice, indicating that it formed interior to the snow line around its parent star. We also find a correlation between the abundances (relative to Mg and bulk Earth) and the condensation temperature; refractory species are clearly depleted while the more volatile elements are possibly enhanced. This could be the signature of a body that formed in a lower temperature environment than where Earth formed. Alternatively, we could be witnessing the remains of a differentiated body that lost a large part of its outer layers.

=== arXiv:1111.7042v2  [2011-11-30]
TITLE  : The Sagittarius Streams in the Southern Galactic Hemisphere
AUTHORS: Sergey E. Koposov, V. Belokurov, N. W. Evans, G. Gilmore, M. Gieles, M. J. Irwin, G. F. Lewis, M. Niederste-Ostholt
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/750/1/80
ABS    : The structure of the Sagittarius stream in the Southern Galactic hemisphere is analysed with the Sloan Digital Sky Survey Data Release 8. Parallel to the Sagittarius tidal track, but ~ 10deg away, there is another fainter and more metal-poor stream. We provide evidence that the two streams follow similar distance gradients but have distinct morphological properties and stellar populations. The brighter stream is broader, contains more metal-rich stars and has a richer colour-magnitude diagram with multiple turn-offs and a prominent red clump as compared to the fainter stream. Based on the structural properties and the stellar population mix, the stream configuration is similar to the Northern "bifurcation". In the region of the South Galactic Cap, there is overlapping tidal debris from the Cetus Stream, which crosses the Sagittarius stream. Using both photometric and spectroscopic data, we show that the blue straggler population belongs mainly to Sagittarius and the blue horizontal branch stars belong mainly to the Cetus stream in this confused location in the halo.

=== arXiv:1110.6162v1  [2011-10-27]
TITLE  : The WIRED Survey II: Infrared Excesses in the SDSS DR7 White Dwarf Catalog
AUTHORS: J. H. Debes, D. W. Hoard, S. Wachter, D. T. Leisawitz, M. Cohen
DOI    : 10.1088/0067-0049/197/2/38
ABS    : With the launch of the {\em Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer} ({\em WISE}), a new era of detecting planetary debris and brown dwarfs around white dwarfs (WDs) has begun with the {\em WISE} InfraRed Excesses around Degenerates (WIRED) Survey. The WIRED Survey is sensitive to substellar objects and dusty debris around WDs out to distances exceeding 100 pc, well beyond the completeness level of local WDs. In this paper, we present a cross-correlation of the preliminary Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) Data Release 7 (DR7) WD Catalog between the {\em WISE}, Two-Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS), UKIRT Infrared Deep Sky Survey (UKIDSS), and SDSS DR7 photometric catalogs. From $\sim18,000$ input targets, there are {\em WISE} detections comprising 344 "naked" WDs (detection of the WD photosphere only), 1020 candidate WD+M dwarf binaries, 42 candidate WD+brown dwarf (BD) systems, 52 candidate WD+dust disk systems, and 69 targets with indeterminate infrared excess. We classified all of the detected targets through spectral energy distribution model fitting of the merged optical, near-IR, and {\em WISE} photometry. Some of these detections could be the result of contaminating sources within the large ($\approx6\arcsec$) {\em WISE} point spread function; we make a preliminary estimate for the rates of contamination for our WD+BD and WD+disk candidates, and provide notes for each target-of-interest. Each candidate presented here should be confirmed with higher angular resolution infrared imaging or infrared spectroscopy. We also present an overview of the observational characteristics of the detected WDs in the {\em WISE} photometric bands, including the relative frequencies of candidate WD+M, WD+BD, and WD+disk systems.

=== arXiv:1110.4219v1  [2011-10-19]
TITLE  : Dust discs around intermediate mass and Sun-like stars in the 16 Myr old NGC 1960 open cluster
AUTHORS: R. Smith, R. D. Jeffries
DOI    : 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.20032.x
ABS    : We present an analysis of Spitzer IRAC (3.6--8um) and MIPS (24um) imaging of members of the 16(+10/-5)Myr old open cluster NGC 1960 (M36). Models of terrestrial planet formation indicate that rocky planets are likely to achieve their final masses at around 10-30Myr, and thus this cluster is at an interesting epoch for planet formation. We find 21 B-F5 type stars and 14 F6-K9 type stars which have 24um excess emission, and thus determine that &gt;30% of B-F5 type stars and &gt;23% of F6-K9 type stars in this cluster have 24um excess emission. These excess frequencies are similar to those observed in other clusters of similar age. Three early type stars have excesses at near-infrared wavelengths. Analysis of their SEDs confirms that these are true debris discs and not remnant primordial or transitional discs. None of the 61 sun-like stars have confirmed near-infrared excess, and we can place a limit on the frequency of 8um excess emission around sun-like stars of &lt;7%. All of the detected excesses are consistent with emission from debris discs and are not primordial.

=== arXiv:1110.3799v1  [2011-10-17]
TITLE  : The Discovery of a Debris Disk Around the DAV White Dwarf PG 1541+651
AUTHORS: Mukremin Kilic, Adam J. Patterson, Sara Barber, S. K. Leggett, P. Dufour
DOI    : 10.1111/j.1745-3933.2011.01177.x
ABS    : To search for circumstellar disks around evolved stars, we targeted roughly 100 DA white dwarfs from the Palomar Green survey with the Peters Automated Infrared Imaging Telescope (PAIRITEL). Here we report the discovery of a debris disk around one of these targets, the pulsating white dwarf PG 1541+651 (KX Draconis, hereafter PG1541). We detect a significant flux excess around PG1541 in the K-band. Follow-up near-infrared spectroscopic observations obtained at the NASA Infrared Telescope Facility (IRTF) and photometric observations with the warm Spitzer Space Telescope confirm the presence of a warm debris disk within 0.13-0.36 Rsun (11-32x the stellar radius) at an inclination angle of 60deg. At Teff = 11880 K, PG1541 is almost a twin of the DAV white dwarf G29-38, which also hosts a debris disk. All previously known dusty white dwarfs are of the DAZ/DBZ spectral type due to accretion of metals from the disk. High-resolution optical spectroscopy is needed to search for metal absorption lines in PG1541 and to constrain the accretion rate from the disk. PG1541 is only 55 pc away from the Sun and the discovery of its disk in our survey demonstrates that our knowledge of the nearby dusty white dwarf population is far from complete.

=== arXiv:1110.2095v1  [2011-10-10]
TITLE  : A 30 AU radius CO gas hole in the disk around the Herbig Ae star Oph IRS 48
AUTHORS: Joanna M. Brown, Gregory J. Herczeg, Klaus M. Pontoppidan, Ewine F. van Dishoeck
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/744/2/116
ABS    : The physical processes leading to the disappearance of disks around young stars are not well understood. A subclass of transitional disks, the so-called cold disks with large inner dust holes, provide a crucial laboratory for studying disk dissipation processes. IRS 48 has a 30 AU radius hole previously measured from dust continuum imaging at 18.7 micron. Using new optical spectra, we determine that IRS 48 is a pre-main sequence A0 star. In order to characterize this disk's gas distribution, we obtained AO-assisted VLT CRIRES high resolution (R ~100,000) spectra of the CO fundamental rovibrational band at 4.7 micron. All CO emission, including that from isotopologues and vibrationally excited molecules, is off-source and peaks at 30 AU. The gas is thermally excited to a rotational temperature of 260 K and is also strongly UV pumped, showing a vibrational excitation temperature of ~5000 K. We model the kinematics and excitation of the gas and posit that the CO emission arises from the dust hole wall. Prior imaging of UV-excited PAH molecules, usually a gas tracer, within the hole makes the large CO hole even more unexpected.

=== arXiv:1110.0536v1  [2011-10-03]
TITLE  : A Correlation Between Circumstellar Disks and Rotation in the Upper Scorpius OB Association
AUTHORS: S. E. Dahm, Catherine L. Slesnick, R. J. White
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/745/1/56
ABS    : We present projected rotational velocities for 20 early-type (B8-A9) and 74 late-type (F2-M8) members of the ~5 Myr old Upper Scorpius OB Association derived from high dispersion optical spectra obtained with the High Resolution Echelle Spectrometer (HIRES) on Keck I and the Magellan Inamori Kyocera Echelle (MIKE) on the Magellan Clay telescope. The spectroscopic sample is composed of stars and brown dwarfs with infrared signatures of circumstellar disks, both primordial and debris, and non-excess sources of comparable spectral type. We merge projected rotational velocities, accretion diagnostics, and Spitzer Space Telescope Infrared Array Camera (IRAC) and Multiband Imaging Photometer for Spitzer (MIPS) 24 micron photometry to examine the relationship between rotation and circumstellar disks. The rotational velocities are strongly correlated with spectral type, a proxy for mass, such that the median vsini for B8-A9 type stars is: 195(+/-)70 km/s, F2-K4: 37.8(+/-)7.4 km/s, K5-K9: 13.8(+21.3/-8.2) km/s, M0-M5: 16.52(+/-)5.3 km/s, and M5.5-M8: 17.72(+/-)8.1 km/s. We find with a probability of &gt;0.99 that M-type stars and brown dwarfs having infrared excess suggestive of circumstellar disks rotate more slowly than their non-excess counterparts. A similar correlation is present among F2-K9 type stars, but only at the ~97% confidence level. Among the early-type (B8-A9) members, rotational velocities of the debris-disk and non-disk populations are indistinguishable. Considering the late-type (F2-M8) stars and brown dwarfs, we find a low fraction of slowly rotating, non-excess sources relative to younger star forming regions, suggesting that most have spun up following disk dissipation. The few late-type (F2-M5) debris disk sources, which may be representative of stars that have recently dispersed their inner disks, are evenly divided between slow and moderate rotators.

=== arXiv:1110.0019v3  [2011-09-30]
TITLE  : DASCH Discovery of A Possible Nova-like Outburst in A Peculiar Symbiotic Binary
AUTHORS: Sumin Tang, Jonathan Grindlay, Maxwell Moe, Jerome Orosz, Robert Kurucz, Samuel Quinn, Mathieu Servillat
JOURNAL: ApJ, 751, 99 (2012)
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/751/2/99
ABS    : We present photometric and spectroscopic observations of a peculiar variable (designated DASCH J075731.1+201735 or J0757) discovered from our DASCH project using the digitized Harvard College Observatory archival photographic plates. It brightened by about 1.5 magnitudes in B within a year starting in 1942, and then slowly faded back to its pre-outburst brightness from 1943 to the 1950s. The mean brightness level was stable before and after the outburst, and ellipsoidal variations with a period of $P=119.18\pm0.07$ days are seen, suggesting that the star is tidally distorted. Radial-velocity measurements indicate that the orbit is nearly circular ($e=0.02\pm0.01$) with a spectroscopic period that is the same as the photometric period. The binary consists of a $1.1\pm0.3 M_\odot$ M0III star, and a $0.6\pm0.2 M_\odot$ companion, very likely a white dwarf (WD). Unlike other symbiotic binaries, there is no sign of emission lines or a stellar wind in the spectra. With an outburst timescale of ~10 years and estimated B band peak luminosity M_B~0.7, J0757 is different from any other known classic or symbiotic novae. The most probable explanation of the outburst is Hydrogen shell-burning on the WD, although an accretion-powered flare cannot be ruled out.

=== arXiv:1109.4917v1  [2011-09-22]
TITLE  : Spectroscopy of Very Low Mass Stars and Brown Dwarfs in the Lambda Orionis Star Forming Region. I. Enlarging the census down to the planetary mass domain in Collinder 69
AUTHORS: A. Bayo, D. Barrado, J. Stauffer, M. Morales-Calderon, C. Melo, N. Huelamo, H. Bouy, B. Stelzer
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201116617
ABS    : Whilst there is a generally accepted evolutionary scheme for the formation of low-mass stars, the analogous processes when moving down in mass to the brown dwarfs regime are not yet well understood. In this first paper we try to build the most complete and unbiased spectroscopically confirmed census of the population of Collinder 69, the central cluster of the Lambda Orionis star forming region, as a first step in addressing the question of how brown dwarfs and planetary mass objects form. We have studied age dependent features in optical and near-infrared spectra of candidate members to the cluster (such as alkali lines and accretion associated indicators). In addition, we have complemented that study with the analysis of other youth indicators like X-ray emission or mid-infrared excess. We have confirmed the membership to Collinder 69 of \sim90 photometric candidate members. As a byproduct we have determined a temperature scale for young M, very low-mass stars and brown dwarfs. We have assembled one of the most complete Initial Mass Functions from 0.016 to 20 M\odot. And, finally, we have studied the implications of the spatial distribution of the confirmed members on the proposed mechanisms of brown dwarfs formation.

=== arXiv:1108.4481v1  [2011-08-23]
TITLE  : NSV 11154 Is a New R Coronae Borealis Star
AUTHORS: Nutsinee Kijbunchoo, Geoffrey C. Clayton, Timothy C. Vieux, N. Dickerman, T. C. Hillwig, D. L. Welch, Ashley Pagnotta, Sumin Tang
DOI    : 10.1086/662435
ABS    : NSV 11154 has been confirmed as a new member of the rare hydrogen deficient R Coronae Borealis (RCB) stars based on new photometric and spectroscopic data. Using new photometry, as well as archival plates from the Harvard archive, we have constructed the historical lightcurve of NSV 11154 from 1896 to the present. The lightcurve shows the sudden, deep, irregularly spaced declines characteristic of RCB stars. The visible spectrum is typical of a cool (Teff &lt; 5000 K) RCB star showing no hydrogen lines, strong C2 Swan bands, and no evidence of 13C. In addition, the star shows small pulsations typical of an RCB star, and an infrared excess due to circumstellar dust with a temperature of ~800 K. The distance to NSV 11154 is estimated to be ~14.5 kpc. RCB stars are very rare in the Galaxy so each additional star is important to population studies leading to a better understanding the origins of these mysterious stars. Among the known sample of RCB stars, NSV 11154 is unusual in that it lies well above the Galactic plane (5 kpc) and away from the Galactic Center which suggests that its parent population is neither thick disk nor bulge.

=== arXiv:1108.4070v2  [2011-08-19]
TITLE  : Planetary Construction Zones in Occultation: Discovery of an Extrasolar Ring System Transiting a Young Sun-like Star and Future Prospects for Detecting Eclipses by Circumsecondary and Circumplanetary Disks
AUTHORS: Eric E. Mamajek, Alice C. Quillen, Mark J. Pecaut, Fred Moolekamp, Erin L. Scott, Matthew A. Kenworthy, Andrew Collier Cameron, Neil R. Parley
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-6256/143/3/72
ABS    : &lt;abridged&gt; The large relative sizes of circumstellar and circumplanetary disks imply that they might be seen in eclipse in stellar light curves. We estimate that a survey of ~10^4 young (~10 Myr old) post-accretion pre-MS stars monitored for ~10 years should yield at least a few deep eclipses from circumplanetary disks and disks surrounding low mass companion stars. We present photometric and spectroscopic data for a pre-MS K5 star (1SWASP J140747.93-394542.6), a newly discovered ~0.9 Msun member of the ~16 Myr-old Upper Cen-Lup subgroup of Sco-Cen at a kinematic distance of 128 pc. SuperWASP and ASAS light curves for this star show a remarkably long, deep, and complex eclipse event centered on 29 April 2007. At least 5 multi-day dimming events of &gt;0.5 mag are identified, with a &gt;3.3 mag deep eclipse bracketed by two pairs of ~1 mag eclipses symmetrically occurring +-12 days and +-26 days before and after. Hence, significant dimming of the star was taking place on and off over at least a ~54 day period in 2007, and a strong &gt;1 mag dimming event occurred over a ~12 day span. We place a firm lower limit on the period of 850 days (i.e. the orbital radius of the eclipser must be &gt;1.7 AU and orbital velocity must be &lt;22 km/s). The shape of the light curve is similar to the lop-sided eclipses of the Be star EE Cep. We suspect that this new star is being eclipsed by a low-mass object orbited by a dense inner disk, girded by at least 3 dusty rings of lower optical depth. Between these rings are at least two annuli of near-zero optical depth (i.e. gaps), possibly cleared out by planets or moons, depending on the nature of the secondary. For possible periods in the range 2.33-200 yr, the estimated total ring mass is ~8-0.4 Mmoon (if the rings have optical opacity similar to Saturn's rings), and the edge of the outermost detected ring has orbital radius ~0.4-0.09 AU.

=== arXiv:1108.1565v1  [2011-08-07]
TITLE  : Rocky Extrasolar Planetary Compositions Derived from Externally-Polluted White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: B. Klein, M. Jura, D. Koester, B. Zuckerman
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/741/1/64
ABS    : We report Keck High Resolution Echelle Spectrometer data and model atmosphere analysis of two helium-dominated white dwarfs, PG1225-079 and HS2253+8023, whose heavy pollutions most likely derive from the accretion of terrestrial-type planet(esimal)s. For each system, the minimum accreted mass is ~10^22 g, that of a large asteroid. In PG1225-079, Mg, Cr, Mn, Fe and Ni have abundance ratios similar to bulk Earth values, while we measure four refractory elements, Ca, Sc, Ti and V, all at a factor of ~2-3 higher abundance than in the bulk Earth. For HS2253+8023 the swallowed material was compositionally similar to bulk Earth in being more than 85% by mass in the major element species, O, Mg, Si, and Fe, and with abundances in the distinctive proportions of mineral oxides - compelling evidence for an origin in a rocky parent body. Including previous studies we now know of four heavily polluted white dwarfs where the measured oxygen and hydrogen are consistent with the view that the parents bodies formed with little ice, interior to any snow-line in their nebular environments. The growing handful of polluted white dwarf systems with comprehensive abundance measurements form a baseline for characterizing rocky exoplanet compositions that can be compared with bulk Earth.

=== arXiv:1107.5179v2  [2011-07-26]
TITLE  : Far-Infrared to Millimeter Astrophysical Dust Emission. II: Comparison of the Two-Level Systems (TLS) model with Astronomical Data
AUTHORS: D. Paradis, J. -P. Bernard, C. Mény, V. Gromov
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201116862
ABS    : In a previous paper we proposed a new model for the emission by amorphous astronomical dust grains, based on solid-state physics. The model uses a description of the Disordered Charge Distribution (DCD) combined with the presence of Two-Level Systems (TLS) defects in the amorphous solid composing the grains. The goal of this paper is to confront this new model to astronomical observations of different Galactic environments in the FIR/submm, in order to derive a set of canonical model parameters to be used as a Galactic reference to be compared to in future Galactic and extragalactic studies. We confront the TLS model with existing astronomical data. We consider the average emission spectrum at high latitudes in our Galaxy as measured with FIRAS and WMAP, as well as the emission from Galactic compact sources observed with Archeops, for which an inverse relationship between the dust temperature and the emissivity spectral index has been evidenced. We show that, unlike models previously proposed which often invoke two dust components at different temperatures, the TLS model successfully reproduces both the shape of the Galactic SED and its evolution with temperature as observed in the Archeops data. The best TLS model parameters indicate a charge coherence length of \simeq 13 nm and other model parameters in broad agreement with expectations from laboratory studies of dust analogs. We conclude that the millimeter excess emission, which is often attributed to the presence of very cold dust in the diffuse ISM, is likely caused solely by TLS emission in disordered amorphous dust grains. We discuss the implications of the new model, in terms of mass determinations from millimeter continuum observations and the expected variations of the emissivity spectral index with wavelength and dust temperature. The implications for the analysis of the Herschel and Planck satellite data are discussed.

=== arXiv:1107.2497v2  [2011-07-13]
TITLE  : Hybrid stars with the Dyson-Schwinger quark model
AUTHORS: H. Chen, M. Baldo, G. F. Burgio, H. -J. Schulze
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. D 84, 105023 (2011)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevD.84.105023
ABS    : We study the hadron-quark phase transition in the interior of neutron stars. For the hadronic sector, we use a microscopic equation of state involving nucleons and hyperons derived within the Brueckner-Hartree-Fock many-body theory with realistic two-body and three-body forces. For the description of quark matter, we employ the Dyson-Schwinger approach and compare with the MIT bag model. We calculate the structure of neutron star interiors comprising both phases and find that with the Dyson-Schwinger model, the hadron-quark phase transition takes place only when hyperons are excluded, and that a two-solar-mass hybrid star is possible only if the nucleonic equation of state is stiff enough.

=== arXiv:1106.5925v2  [2011-06-29]
TITLE  : From Anderson to anomalous localization in cold atomic gases with effective spin-orbit coupling
AUTHORS: M. J. Edmonds, J. Otterbach, R. G. Unanyan, M. Fleischhauer, M. Titov, P. Ohberg
JOURNAL: New J. Phys. 14 073056, (2012)
DOI    : 10.1088/1367-2630/14/7/073056
ABS    : We study the dynamics of a one-dimensional spin-orbit coupled Schrodinger particle with two internal components moving in a random potential. We show that this model can be implemented by the interaction of cold atoms with external lasers and additional Zeeman and Stark shifts. By direct numerical simulations a crossover from an exponential Anderson-type localization to an anomalous power-law behavior of the intensity correlation is found when the spin-orbit coupling becomes large. The power-law behavior is connected to a Dyson singularity in the density of states emerging at zero energy when the system approaches the quasi-relativistic limit of the random mass Dirac model. We discuss conditions under which the crossover is observable in an experiment with ultracold atoms and construct explicitly the zero-energy state, thus proving its existence under proper conditions.

=== arXiv:1106.5893v1  [2011-06-29]
TITLE  : White dwarfs in the UKIDSS Large Area Survey: The Substellar Companion Fraction
AUTHORS: P. R. Steele, M. R. Burleigh, P. D. Dobbie, R. F. Jameson, M. A. Barstow, R. P. Satterthwaite
DOI    : 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.19225.x
ABS    : We present a near-infrared photometric search for unresolved substellar companions and debris disks around white dwarfs in the UKIRT Infrared Deep Sky Survey Large Area Survey. We cross-correlate the SDSS DR4 and McCook &amp; Sion catalogues of white dwarfs with the UKIDSS DR8 producing 3109 and 163 unique matches respectively. Cooling models are fitted to the optical photometry of a subsample of DA white dwarfs and extended to the near-infrared. A comparison is then made with the observed photometry to identify those stars with a near-infrared excess consistent with the presence of a cool companion or debris disk. Where present, we have estimated the approximate spectral type of any putative companion, or an upper limit on the temperature of a debris disk. In total we identify 14-16 new candidate white dwarf + very low mass stellar systems, 9-11 candidate white dwarf + brown dwarf systems, and 3 candidate white dwarf + debris disks. We place lower limits on the unresolved (&lt;2") companions to all DA white dwarfs and thus assess the sensitivity of UKIDSS to such objects. We use this result to estimate unresolved binary fractions of f(WD+dL)&gt;0.4+/-0.3%, f(WD+dT)&gt;0.2% and f(WD+BD)&gt;0.5+/-0.3%.

=== arXiv:1106.2532v1  [2011-06-13]
TITLE  : Ro-vibrational CO Detected in the $β$~Pictoris Circumstellar Disk
AUTHORS: Matthew R. Troutman, Kenneth H. Hinkle, Joan R. Najita, Terrence W. Rettig, Sean D. Brittain
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/738/1/12
ABS    : We present high resolution near-infrared spectra of $β$ Pictoris - a nearby young star with a debris disk. Fundamental low-J CO absorption lines are detected and strict upper limits are placed on the flux of v=2-1 low-J CO emission lines. The limit on the UV fluorescent emission flux in the v=2-1 lines is used to place a tight constraint on the inner extent of the CO gas. Assuming \ion{H}{1} is the primary collision partner, the subthermal population of the low-J v=0 rotational levels constrains the density of the gas in the disk to $n_{\rm H} = (2.5^{+7.1}_{-1.2})\times10^5$ cm$^{-3}$. If the distribution of hydrogen follows that of the other metals in the disk, we find that the mass of the gas in the disk is $(0.17^{+0.47}_{-0.08})$ M$_\earth$. We compare this mass to the gas mass necessary to brake the metals in the disk through ion-neutral reactions.

=== arXiv:1106.1653v1  [2011-06-08]
TITLE  : Global modeling of radiatively driven accretion of metals from compact debris disks onto the white dwarfs
AUTHORS: Konstantin V. Bochkarev, Roman R. Rafikov
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/741/1/36
ABS    : Recent infrared observations have revealed presence of compact (radii &lt; R_Sun) debris disks around more than a dozen of metal-rich white dwarfs (WD), likely produced by tidal disruption of asteroids. Accretion of high-Z material from these disks may account for the metal contamination of these WDs. It was previously shown using local calculations that the Poynting-Robertson (PR) drag acting on the dense, optically thick disk naturally drives metal accretion onto the WD at the typical rate \dot M_{PR} \approx 10^8 g/s. Here we extend this local analysis by exploring global evolution of the debris disk under the action of the PR drag for a variety of assumptions about the disk properties. We find that massive disks (mass &gt; 10^{20} g), which are optically thick to incident stellar radiation inevitably give rise to metal accretion at rates \dot M &gt; 0.2\dot M_{PR}. The magnitude of \dot M and its time evolution are determined predominantly by the initial pattern of the radial distribution of the debris (i.e. ring-like vs. disk-like) but not by the total mass of the disk. The latter determines only the disk lifetime, which can be several Myr or longer. Evolution of an optically thick disk generically results in the development of a sharp outer edge of the disk. We also find that the low mass (&lt; 10^{20} g), optically thin disks exhibit \dot M &lt;&lt; \dot M_{PR} and evolve on characteristic timescale \sim 10^5-10^6 yr, independent of their total mass.

=== arXiv:1106.0635v3  [2011-06-03]
TITLE  : Taxonomy of the extrasolar planet
AUTHORS: E. Plávalová
DOI    : 10.1089/ast.2011.0708
ABS    : When a star is described as a spectral class G2V, we know that the star is similar to our Sun. We know its approximate mass, temperature, age, and size. When working with an extra-solar planet database, it is very useful to have a taxonomy scale (classification) such as, for example, the Harvard classification for stars. The taxonomy has to be easily interpreted and present the most relevant information about extra-solar planets. I propose the following the extra-solar planet taxonomy scale with four parameters. The first parameter concerns the mass of an extra-solar planet in the form of the units of the mass of other known planets, where M represents the mass of Mercury, E that of Earth, N Neptune, and J Jupiter. The second parameter is the planet's distance from its parent star (semi-major axis) described in logarithm with base 10. The third parameter is the mean Dyson temperature of the extra-solar planet, for which I established four main temperature classes; F represents the Freezing class, W the Water Class, G the Gaseous Class, and R the Roasters Class. I devised one additional class, however: P, the Pulsar Class, which concerns extra-solar planets orbiting pulsar stars. The fourth parameter is eccentricity. If the attributes of the surface of the extra-solar planet are known, we are able to establish this additional parameter where t represents a terrestrial planet, g a gaseous planet, and i an ice planet. According to this taxonomy scale, for example, Earth is 1E0W0t, Neptune is 1N1.5F0i, and extra-solar planet 55 Cnc e is 9E-1.8R1. Key words: Catalogues - Extra-solar planet - Habitable zone - Planets

=== arXiv:1106.0574v1  [2011-06-03]
TITLE  : Infrared Search for Young Brown Dwarf Companions around Young Stellar Objects in the rho Ophiucus Molecular Cloud and the Serpens Molecular Cloud
AUTHORS: Chiaki Shirono, Yoichi Itoh, Yumiko Oasa
DOI    : 10.1093/pasj/63.5.1071
ABS    : We conducted an infrared search for faint companions around 351 young stellar objects in the rho Ophiucus molecular cloud and the Serpens molecular cloud. Nine objects in the Spitzer/IRAC archival images were identified as young stellar companion candidates. They showed an intrinsic infrared excess; one object was extremely red both in the [3.6] - [4.5] color and in the [4.5] - [5.8] color, and two objects were red in the [4.5] - [5.8] color. They were as faint as 15 mag in the [3.6] band. Follow-up K-band spectroscopy revealed that three objects had deep water absorption bands, indicative of low effective temperatures. By comparing the spectra and infrared spectral energy distributions with synthesized spectra of low-temperature objects, we derived the effective temperatures and continuum excess for these objects. It seems highly likely that one of the three objects is a low-mass stellar companion and two objects are young brown dwarf companions associated with the young stellar objects.

=== arXiv:1106.0003v1  [2011-05-31]
TITLE  : DASCH on KU Cyg: a ~5 year dust accretion event in ~1900
AUTHORS: Sumin Tang, Jonathan Grindlay, Edward Los, Mathieu Servillat
JOURNAL: The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 738, Issue 1, article id. 7 (2011)
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/738/1/7
ABS    : KU Cyg is an eclipsing binary consisting of a F-type star accreting through a large accretion disk from a K5III red giant. Here we present the discovery of a 5-yr dip around 1900 found from its 100 yr DASCH (Digital Access to a Sky Century at Harvard) light curve. It showed a ~0.5 mag slow fading from 1899 to 1903, and brightened back around 1904 on a relatively shorter timescale. The light curve shape of the 1899-1904 fading-brightening event differs from the dust production and dispersion process observed in R Coronae Borealis (RCB) stars, which usually has a faster fading and slower recovery, and for KU Cyg is probably related to the accretion disk surrounding the F star. The slow fading in KU Cyg is probably caused by increases in dust extinction in the disk, and the subsequent quick brightening may be due to the evaporation of dust transported inwards through the disk. The extinction excess which caused the fading may arise from increased mass transfer rate in the system, or from dust clump ejections from the K giant.

=== arXiv:1105.2314v1  [2011-05-11]
TITLE  : Stimulation of human red blood cells leads to Ca2+-mediated intercellular adhesion
AUTHORS: Patrick Steffen, Achim Jung, Duc Bach Nguyen, Torsten Müller, Ingolf Bernhardt, Lars Kaestner, Christian Wagner
ABS    : Red blood cells (RBCs) are a major component of blood clots, which form physiologically as a response to injury or pathologically in thrombosis. The active participation of RBCs in thrombus solidification has been previously proposed but not yet experimentally proven. Holographic optical tweezers and single-cell force spectroscopy were used to study potential cell-cell adhesion between RBCs. Irreversible intercellular adhesion of RBCs could be induced by stimulation with lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), a compound known to be released by activated platelets. We identified Ca2+ as an essential player in the signaling cascade by directly inducing Ca2+ influx using A23187. Elevation of the internal Ca2+ concentration leads to an intercellular adhesion of RBCs similar to that induced by LPA stimulation. Using single-cell force spectroscopy, the adhesion of the RBCs was identified to be approximately 100 pN, a value large enough to be of significance inside a blood clot or in pathological situations like the vasco-occlusive crisis in sickle cell disease patients.

=== arXiv:1104.4499v2  [2011-04-22]
TITLE  : Estimating the mass of the debris disc in HD 69830
AUTHORS: Kevin Heng
DOI    : 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.18950.x
ABS    : We present a method to estimate the mass of the debris disc in the HD 69830 system, which also hosts three exoplanets with Neptune-like minimum masses. By considering the range of published stellar ages, we interpret the infrared emission from the debris disc as originating from a steady state, collisional cascade of dust grains. Using dynamical survival models subjected to observational constraints, we estimate the allowed range of disc masses. If the disc has an age of about 1 Gyr, then its mass is several times that of our asteroid belt. The maximum allowed age for the disc and the number of planetesimals it contains are determined by the assumed value for the binding energy of the planetesimals. If one insists on interpreting the disc as being transient, then this mass estimate becomes an upper limit.

=== arXiv:1104.3560v1  [2011-04-18]
TITLE  : A Herschel resolved far-infrared dust ring around HD 207129
AUTHORS: J. P. Marshall, T. Löhne, B. Montesinos, A. V. Krivov, C. Eiroa, O. Absil, G. Bryden, J. Maldonado
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201116673
ABS    : Dusty debris discs around main sequence stars are thought to be the result of continuous collisional grinding of planetesimals in the system. The majority of these systems are unresolved and analysis of the dust properties is limited by the lack of information regarding the dust location.vThe Herschel DUNES key program is observing 133 nearby, Sun-like stars (&lt;20 pc, FGK spectral type) in a volume limited survey to constrain the absolute incidence of cold dust around these stars by detection of far infrared excess emission at flux levels comparable to the Edgeworth-Kuiper belt (EKB). We have observed the Sun-like star HD 207129 with Herschel PACS and SPIRE. In all three PACS bands we resolve a ring-like structure consistent with scattered light observations. Using α Boötis as a reference point spread function (PSF), we deconvolved the images, clearly resolving the inner gap in the disc at both 70 and 100 μm. We have resolved the dust-producing planetesimal belt of a debris disc at 100 μm for the first time. We measure the radial profile and fractional luminosity of the disc, and compare the values to those of discs around stars of similar age and/or spectral type, placing this disc in context of other resolved discs observed by Herschel/DUNES.

=== arXiv:1104.1431v1  [2011-04-07]
TITLE  : Spitzer IRS Spectroscopy of the 10 Myr-old EF Cha Debris Disk: Evidence for Phyllosilicate-Rich Dust in the Terrestrial Zone
AUTHORS: Thayne Currie, Carey M. Lisse, Aurora Sicilia-Aguilar, George H. Rieke, Kate Su
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/734/2/115
ABS    : We describe Spitzer IRS spectroscopic observations of the 10 Myr-old star, EF Cha. Compositional modeling of the spectra from 5 μm to 35 μm confirms that it is surrounded by a luminous debris disk with LD/L\star ~ 10-3, containing dust with temperatures between 225 K and 430 K characteristic of the terrestrial zone. The EF Cha spectrum shows evidence for many solid-state features, unlike most cold, low-luminosity debris disks but like some other 10-20 Myr-old luminous, warm debris disks (e.g. HD 113766A). The EF Cha debris disk is unusually rich in a species or combination of species whose emissivities resemble that of finely powdered, laboratory-measured phyllosilicate species (talc, saponite, and smectite), which are likely produced by aqueous alteration of primordial anhydrous rocky materials. The dust and, by inference, the parent bodies of the debris also contain abundant amorphous silicates and metal sulfides, and possibly water ice. The dust's total olivine to pyroxene ratio of ~ 2 also provides evidence of aqueous alteration. The large mass volume of grains with sizes comparable to or below the radiation blow-out limit implies that planetesimals may be colliding at a rate high enough to yield the emitting dust but not so high as to devolatize the planetesimals via impact processing. Because phyllosilicates are produced by the interactions between anhydrous rock and warm, reactive water, EF Cha's disk is a likely signpost for water delivery to the terrestrial zone of a young planetary system.

=== arXiv:1104.0747v1  [2011-04-05]
TITLE  : Supernovae type Ia: non-standard candles of the Universe
AUTHORS: A. I. Bogomazov, A. V. Tutukov
JOURNAL: Proceedings of Science, Texas-2010
ABS    : We analyze the influence of the evolution of light absorbtion by grey dust in SNe Ia host galaxies and the influence of the evolution of average total mass of coalescing double carbon-oxygen white dwarfs (progenitors of SNe Ia) under the influence of gravitational radiation on the interpretation of Hubble diagrams of SNe Ia. Significant increase in the average energy of SNe Ia due to increase in the total mass of merging dwarfs can be observed at red shift z&gt; 2. The observed dependence of the distance modulus from the red shift in observations of SNe Ia can be explained not only by the assumption about accelerated expansion of the Universe, but also by the evolution of the absorbtion of light by grey dust in various types of host galaxies of SNe Ia, by the effects of observational selection and by the decrease in the average mass of coalescing degenerate dwarfs.

=== arXiv:1103.1596v1  [2011-03-08]
TITLE  : A search for new hot subdwarf stars by means of Virtual Observatory tools
AUTHORS: R. Oreiro, C. Rodríguez-López, E. Solano, A. Ulla, R. Østensen, M. García-Torres
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201016324
ABS    : Hot subdwarf stars are faint, blue objects, and are the main contributors to the far-UV excess observed in elliptical galaxies. They offer an excellent laboratory to study close and wide binary systems, and to scrutinize their interiors through asteroseismology, as some of them undergo stellar oscillations. However, their origins are still uncertain, and increasing the number of detections is crucial to undertake statistical studies. In this work, we aim at defining a strategy to find new, uncatalogued hot subdwarfs. Making use of Virtual Observatory tools we thoroughly search stellar catalogues to retrieve multi-colour photometry and astrometric information of a known sample of blue objects, including hot subdwarfs, white dwarfs, cataclysmic variables and main sequence OB stars. We define a procedure to discriminate among these spectral classes, particularly designed to obtain a hot subdwarf sample with a low contamination factor. In order to check the validity of the method, this procedure is then applied to two test sky regions: the Kepler FoV and to a test region of around (RA:225, DEC:5) deg. As a result, we obtained 38 hot subdwarf candidates, 23 of which had already a spectral classification. We have acquired spectroscopy for three other targets, and four additional ones have an available SDSS spectrum, which we used to determine their spectral type. A temperature estimate is provided for the candidates based on their spectral energy distribution, considering two-atmospheres fit for objects with clear infrared excess. Eventually, out of 30 candidates with spectral classification, 26 objects were confirmed to be hot subdwarfs, yielding a contamination factor of only 13%. The high rate of success demonstrates the validity of the proposed strategy to find new uncatalogued hot subdwarfs. An application of this method to the entire sky will be presented in a forthcoming work.

=== arXiv:1103.1342v2  [2011-03-07]
TITLE  : Anderson and Stoner Published White Dwarf Mass Limits Before Chandrasekhar
AUTHORS: Eric G. Blackman
ABS    : In their engaging recountals of Chandrasekhar's extraordinary career (Physics Today, vol 63, Issue 12, Dec 2010), neither Dyson nor Wali mention that Chandrasekhar was the third person not the first, to publish a white dwarf mass limit incorporating a relativistic treatment of degenerate electrons. As it has become a common misconception that Chandrasekhar was the first, a clarifying reminder on this historical point is warranted. In short, the white dwarf mass limit widely attributed to Chandrasekhar (1931) should be the specific white dwarf mass limit calculated for a polytrope. The insight that a relativistic treatment of degeneracy leads to the existence of a white dwarf mass limit first appeared in papers of W. Anderson (1929) and E.C. Stoner (1930) for a uniform density star. Accordingly, Chandrasekhar (1931) cites Stoner (1930) and points out that the polytrope white dwarf mass limit is less than Stoner's uniform density white dwarf mass limit by about 20%.

=== arXiv:1102.4874v1  [2011-02-23]
TITLE  : Correcting the Astrometry of DASCH scanned plates
AUTHORS: M. Servillat, E. J. Los, J. E. Grindlay, S. Tang, S. Laycock
ABS    : We describe the process implemented in the DASCH pipeline which applies a reliable astrometric correction to each scanned plate. Our first blind astrometric fit resolves the pointing, scale and orientation of the plate in the sky using astrometry. net code. Then we iteratively improve this solution with WCSTools imwcs. Finally, we apply a 6th order polynomial fit with SCAMP to correct the image for distortions. During a test on 140 plates, this process has allowed us to successfully correct 79% of the plates. With further refinements of the process we now reach a 95% success rate after reprocessing all our scanned plates (~11 000 in Nov. 2010). We could extract a lightcurve for 2.85 times more objects than with the previous Pipeline, down to magnitude 17. The resulting median RMS error is 0.13" for objects with mag. 8 to 17.

=== arXiv:1102.4871v1  [2011-02-23]
TITLE  : The DASCH Data Processing Pipeline and Multiple Exposure Plate Processing
AUTHORS: Edward Los, Jonathan Grindlay, Sumin Tang, Mathieu Servillat, Silas Laycock
ABS    : Digital Access to a Sky Century @ Harvard (DASCH) is a project to digitize the collection of approximately 525,000 astronomical plates held at the Harvard College Observatory. This paper presents an overview of the DASCH data processing pipeline, with special emphasis on the processing of multiple-exposure plates. Such plates extended the dynamic range of photograph emulsions and improved photometric accuracy by minimizing variations in plate development procedures. Two approaches are explored in this paper: The repetitive use of astrometry.net (Lang et al. 2010) and local correlation searches. Both procedures have yielded additional quality control checks useful to the pipeline.

=== arXiv:1102.4343v1  [2011-02-21]
TITLE  : Runaway accretion of metals from compact debris disks onto white dwarfs
AUTHORS: Roman R. Rafikov
DOI    : 10.1111/j.1745-3933.2011.01096.x
ABS    : It was recently proposed that metal-rich white dwarfs (WDs) accrete their metals from compact debris disks found to exist around more than a dozen of them. At the same time, elemental abundances measured in atmospheres of some WDs imply vigorous metal accretion at rates up to $10^{11}$ g/s, far in excess of what can be supplied solely by Poynting-Robertson drag acting on such debris disks. To explain this observation we propose a model, in which rapid transport of metals from the disk onto the WD naturally results from interaction between this particulate disk and spatially coexisting disk of metallic gas. The latter is fed by evaporation of debris particles at the sublimation radius located at several tens of WD radii. Because of pressure support gaseous disk orbits WD slower than particulate disk. Resultant azimuthal drift between them at speed ~1 m/s causes aerodynamic drag on the disk of solids and drives inward migration of its constituent particles. Upon reaching the sublimation radius particles evaporate, enhancing the density of metallic gaseous disk and leading to positive feedback. Under favorable circumstances (low viscosity in the disk of metallic gas and efficient aerodynamic coupling between the disks) system evolves in a runaway fashion, destroying debris disk on time scale of $\sim 10^5$ yr, and giving rise to high metal accretion rates up to $10^{10}-10^{11}$ g/s, in agreement with observations.

=== arXiv:1102.3153v1  [2011-02-15]
TITLE  : Metal accretion onto white dwarfs caused by Poynting-Robertson drag on their debris disks
AUTHORS: Roman R. Rafikov
DOI    : 10.1088/2041-8205/732/1/L3
ABS    : Recent discoveries of compact (sizes $&lt;R_\odot$) debris disks around more than a dozen of metal-rich white dwarfs (WDs) suggest that pollution of these stars with metals may be caused by accretion of high-Z material from the disk. But the mechanism responsible for efficient transfer of mass from a particulate disk to the WD atmosphere has not yet been identified. Here we demonstrate that radiation of the WD can effectively drive accretion of matter through the disk towards the sublimation radius (located at several tens of WD radii), where particles evaporate, feeding a disk of metal gas accreting onto the WD. We show that, contrary to some previous claims, Poynting-Robertson (PR) drag on the debris disk is effective at providing metal accretion rate $\dot M_{PR}\sim 10^8$ g/s and higher, scaling quadratically with WD effective temperature. We compare our results with observations and show that, as expected, no WD hosting a particulate debris disk shows evidence of metal accretion rate below that produced by the PR drag. Existence of WDs accreting metals at rates significantly higher than $\dot M_{PR}$ suggests that another mechanism in addition to PR drag drives accretion of high-Z elements in these systems.

=== arXiv:1102.0526v2  [2011-02-02]
TITLE  : Mid and Far Infrared Photometry of Galactic Planetary Nebulae with the AKARI All Sky Survey
AUTHORS: J. P. Phillips, R. A. Marquez-Lugo
JOURNAL: RevMexAA 2011
ABS    : We provide mid- and far-infrared photometry of 857 Galactic planetary nebulae (PNe) using data derived from the AKARI All-Sky Survey. These include fluxes at 9 and 18 μm obtained with the Infrared Camera (IRC), and at 65, 90, 140 and 160 μm using the far-Infrared Surveyor (FIS). It is noted that the IR luminosities of the youngest PNe are comparable to the total luminosities of the central stars, and subsequently decline to ~ 5102 L where D &gt; 0.08 pc. This is consistent with an evolution of PNe dust opacities, and appreciable absorption in young and proto-PNe. We also note that whilst there is little evidence for the evolution in IR/radio flux ratios suggested by previous authors. The fall-off in dust temperatures is similar to that determined in previous studies, whilst levels of Ly heating are &lt; 0.5 of the total energy budget of the grains. There appears to be an evolution in the infrared excess (IRE) as nebulae expand, with the largest values occurring in the most compact PNe.

=== arXiv:1101.4314v1  [2011-01-22]
TITLE  : Sirius B Imaged in the Mid-Infrared: No Evidence for a Remnant Planetary System
AUTHORS: Andrew J. Skemer, Laird M. Close
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/730/1/53
ABS    : Evidence is building that remnants of solar systems might orbit a large percentage of white dwarfs, as the polluted atmospheres of DAZ and DBZ white dwarfs indicate the very recent accretion of metal-rich material. (Zuckerman et al. 2010). Some of these polluted white dwarfs are found to have large mid-infrared excesses from close-in debris disks that are thought to be reservoirs for the metal accretion. These systems are coined DAZd white dwarfs (von Hippel et al. 2007). Here we investigate the claims of Bonnet-Bidaud &amp; Pantin (2008) that Sirius B, the nearest white dwarf to the Sun, might have an infrared excess from a dusty debris disk. Sirius B's companion, Sirius A is commonly observed as a mid-infrared photometric standard in the Southern hemisphere. We combine several years of Gemini/T-ReCS photometric standard observations to produce deep mid-infrared imaging in five ~10 micron filters (broad N + 4 narrowband), which reveal the presence of Sirius B. Our photometry is consistent with the expected photospheric emission such that we constrain any mid-infrared excess to &lt;10% of the photosphere. Thus we conclude that Sirius B does not have a large dusty disk, as seen in DAZd white dwarfs.

=== arXiv:1101.3450v1  [2011-01-18]
TITLE  : Far-infrared imaging of post-AGB stars and (proto)-planetary nebulae with the AKARI Far-Infrared Surveyor
AUTHORS: N. L. J. Cox, D. A. Garcia-Hernandez, P. Garcia-Lario, A. Manchado
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-6256/141/4/111
ABS    : By tracing the distribution of cool dust in the extended envelopes of post-AGB stars and (proto)-planetary nebulae ((P)PNe) we aim to recover, or constrain, the mass loss history experienced by these stars in their recent past. The Far-Infrared Surveyor (FIS) instrument on board the AKARI satellite was used to obtain far-infrared maps for a selected sample of post-AGB stars and (P)PNe. We derived flux densities (aperture photometry) for 13 post-AGB stars and (P)PNe at four far-infrared wavelengths (60, 90, 140, and 160 um). Radial (azimuthally averaged) profiles are used to investigate the presence of extended emission from cool dust. No (detached) extended emission is detected for any target in our sample at levels significant with respect to background and cirrus emission. Only IRAS 21046+4739 reveals tentative excess emission between 30 and 130". Estimates of the total dust and gas mass from the obtained maps indicate that the envelope masses of these stars should be large in order to be detected with the AKARI FIS. Imaging with higher sensitivity and higher spatial resolution is needed to detect and resolve, if present, any cool compact or extended emission associated with these evolved stars.

=== arXiv:1101.2035v1  [2011-01-11]
TITLE  : Planck Early Results: The Galactic Cold Core Population revealed by the first all-sky survey
AUTHORS: Planck Collaboration, P. A. R. Ade, N. Aghanim, M. Arnaud, M. Ashdown, J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi, A. Balbi
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201116472
ABS    : We present the statistical properties of the first version of the Cold Core Catalogue of Planck Objects (C3PO), in terms of their spatial distribution, temperature, distance, mass, and morphology. We also describe the statistics of the Early Cold Core Catalogue (ECC, delivered with the Early Release Compact Source Catalogue, ERCSC) that is the subset of the 915 most reliable detections of the complete catalogue. We have used the CoCoCoDeT algorithm to extract 10783 cold sources. Temperature and dust emission spectral index β values are derived using the fluxes in the IRAS 100 \mum band and the three highest frequency Planck bands. Temperature spans from 7K to 17K, and peaks around 13K. Data are not consistent with a constant value of β over the all temperature range. β ranges from 1.4 to 2.8 with a mean value around 2.1, and several possible scenarios are possible, including β(T) and the effect of multiple T components folded into the measurements. For one third of the objects the distances are obtained. Most of the detections are within 2 kpc in the Solar neighbourhood, but a few are at distances greater than 4 kpc. The cores are distributed from the deep Galactic plane, despite the confusion, to high latitudes (&gt;30$^{\circle}$). The associated mass estimates range from 1 to $10^5$ solar masses. Using their physical properties these cold sources are shown to be cold clumps, defined as the intermediate cold sub-structures between clouds and cores. These cold clumps are not isolated but mostly organized in filaments associated with molecular clouds. The Cold Core Catalogue of Planck Objects (C3PO) is the first unbiased all-sky catalogue of cold objects. It gives an unprecedented statistical view to the properties of these potential pre-stellar clumps and offers a unique possibility for their classification in terms of their intrinsic properties and environment.

=== arXiv:1101.2045v1  [2011-01-11]
TITLE  : Planck Early Results: The Planck View of Nearby Galaxies
AUTHORS: Planck Collaboration, P. A. R. Ade, N. Aghanim, M. Arnaud, M. Ashdown, J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi, A. Balbi
JOURNAL: A&amp;A 536, A16 (2011)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201116454
ABS    : The all-sky coverage of the Planck Early Release Compact Source Catalogue (ERCSC) provides an unsurpassed survey of galaxies at submillimetre (submm) wavelengths, representing a major improvement in the numbers of galaxies detected, as well as the range of far-IR/submm wavelengths over which they have been observed. We here present the first results on the properties of nearby galaxies using these data. We match the ERCSC catalogue to IRAS-detected galaxies in the Imperial IRAS Faint Source Redshift Catalogue (IIFSCz), so that we can measure the spectral energy distributions (SEDs) of these objects from 60 to 850 microns. This produces a list of 1717 galaxies with reliable associations between Planck and IRAS, from which we select a subset of 468 for SED studies, namely those with strong detections in the three highest frequency Planck bands and no evidence of cirrus contamination. The SEDs are fitted using parametric dust models to determine the range of dust temperatures and emissivities. We find evidence for colder dust than has previously been found in external galaxies, with T&lt;20K. Such cold temperatures are found using both the standard single temperature dust model with variable emissivity beta, or a two dust temperature model with beta fixed at 2. We also compare our results to studies of distant submm galaxies (SMGs) which have been claimed to contain cooler dust than their local counterparts. We find that including our sample of 468 galaxies significantly reduces the distinction between the two populations. Fits to SEDs of selected objects using more sophisticated templates derived from radiative transfer models confirm the presence of the colder dust found through parameteric fitting. We thus conclude that cold (T&lt;20K) dust is a significant and largely unexplored component of many nearby galaxies.

=== arXiv:1101.2041v2  [2011-01-11]
TITLE  : Planck Early Results. VII. The Early Release Compact Source Catalog
AUTHORS: Planck Collaboration, P. A. R. Ade, N. Aghanim, M. Arnaud, M. Ashdown, J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi, A. Balbi
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201116474
ABS    : (Abridged) A brief description of the methodology of construction, contents and usage of the Planck Early Release Compact Source Catalogue (ERCSC), including the Early Cold Cores (ECC) and the Early Sunyaev-Zeldovich (ESZ) cluster catalogue is provided. The catalogue is based on data that consist of mapping the entire sky once and 60% of the sky a second time by Planck, thereby comprising the first high sensitivity radio/submillimetre observations of the entire sky. A Monte-Carlo algorithm based on the injection and extraction of artificial sources into the Planck maps was implemented to select reliable sources among all extracted candidates such that the cumulative reliability of the catalogue is &gt;=90%. The 10sigma photometric flux density limit of the catalogue at |b|&gt;30 deg is 0.49, 1.0, 0.67, 0.5, 0.33, 0.28, 0.25, 0.47 and 0.82 Jy at each of the nine frequencies between 30 and 857 GHz. Sources which are up to a factor of ~2 fainter than this limit, and which are present in "clean" regions of the Galaxy where the sky background due to emission from the interstellar medium is low, are included in the ERCSC if they meet the high reliability criterion. The Planck ERCSC sources have known associations to stars with dust shells, stellar cores, radio galaxies, blazars, infrared luminous galaxies and Galactic interstellar medium features. A significant fraction of unclassified sources are also present in the catalogs. In addition, two early release catalogs that contain 915 cold molecular cloud core candidates and 189 SZ cluster candidates that have been generated using multi-frequency algorithms are presented. The entire source list, with more than 15000 unique sources, is ripe for follow-up characterisation with Herschel, ATCA, VLA, SOFIA, ALMA and other ground-based observing facilities.

=== arXiv:1101.0112v4  [2010-12-30]
TITLE  : The degree structure of Weihrauch-reducibility
AUTHORS: Kojiro Higuchi, Arno Pauly
JOURNAL: Logical Methods in Computer Science, Volume 9, Issue 2 (April 2, 2013) lmcs:1124
DOI    : 10.2168/LMCS-9(2:2)2013
ABS    : We answer a question by Vasco Brattka and Guido Gherardi by proving that the Weihrauch-lattice is not a Brouwer algebra. The computable Weihrauch-lattice is also not a Heyting algebra, but the continuous Weihrauch-lattice is. We further investigate the existence of infinite infima and suprema, as well as embeddings of the Medvedev-degrees into the Weihrauch-degrees.

=== arXiv:1012.4859v1  [2010-12-22]
TITLE  : The WIRED Survey I: A Bright IR Excess Due to Dust Around the Heavily Polluted White Dwarf GALEX J193156.8+011745
AUTHORS: J. H. Debes, D. W. Hoard, M. Kilic, S. Wachter, D. T. Leisawitz, M. Cohen, J. D. Kirkpatrick, R. L. Griffith
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/729/1/4
ABS    : With the launch of the Wide-Field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE), a new era of detecting planetary debris around white dwarfs has begun with the WISE InfraRed Excesses around Degenerates (WIRED) Survey. The WIRED Survey will be sensitive to substellar objects and dusty debris around white dwarfs out to distances exceeding 100 pc, well beyond the completeness level of local WDs and covering a large fraction of known WDs detected with the SDSS DR4 white dwarf catalogue. In this paper we report an initial result of the WIRED survey, the detection of the heavily polluted hydrogen white dwarf (spectral type DAZ) GALEX J193156.8+011745 at 3.35 and 4.6 \micron. We find that the excess is consistent with either a narrow dusty ring with an inner radius of 29 $R_{\rm WD}$, outer radius of 40 $R_{\rm WD}$, and a face-on inclination, or a disk with an inclination of 70$^\circ$, an inner radius of 23 $R_{\rm WD}$, and an outer radius of 80 $R_{\rm WD}$. We also report initial optical spectroscopic monitoring of several metal lines present in the photosphere and find no variability in the line strengths or radial velocities of the lines. We rule out all but planetary mass companions to GALEX1931 out to 0.5 AU.

=== arXiv:1012.3631v1  [2010-12-16]
TITLE  : Structure and evolution of debris disks around F-type stars: I. Observations, database and basic evolutionary aspects
AUTHORS: A. Moór, I. Pascucci, Á. Kóspál, P. Ábrahám, T. Csengeri, L. L. Kiss, D. Apai, C. Grady
DOI    : 10.1088/0067-0049/193/1/4
ABS    : Although photometric and spectroscopic surveys with the Spitzer Space Telescope increased remarkably the number of well studied debris disks around A-type and Sun-like stars, detailed analyzes of debris disks around F-type stars remained less frequent. Using the MIPS camera and the IRS spectrograph we searched for debris dust around 82 F-type stars with Spitzer. We found 27 stars that harbor debris disks, nine of which are new discoveries. The dust distribution around two of our stars, HD 50571 and HD 170773, was found to be marginally extended on the 70um MIPS images. Combining the MIPS and IRS measurements with additional infrared and submillimeter data, we achieved excellent spectral coverage for most of our debris systems. We have modeled the excess emission of 22 debris disks using a single temperature dust ring model and of 5 debris systems with two-temperature models. The latter systems may contain two dust rings around the star. In accordance with the expected trends, the fractional luminosity of the disks declines with time, exhibiting a decay rate consistent with the range of model predictions. We found the distribution of radial dust distances as a function of age to be consistent with the predictions of both the self stirred and the planetary stirred disk evolution models. A more comprehensive investigation of the evolution of debris disks around F-type stars, partly based on the presented data set, will be the subject of an upcoming paper.

=== arXiv:1012.3457v2  [2010-12-15]
TITLE  : Object-X: The Brightest Mid-IR Point Source in M33
AUTHORS: Rubab Khan, K. Z. Stanek, C. S. Kochanek, A. Z. Bonanos
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/732/1/43
ABS    : We discuss the nature of the brightest mid-IR point source (which we dub Object X) in the nearby galaxy M33. Although multi-wavelength data on this object have existed in the literature for some time, it has not previously been recognized as the most luminous mid-IR object in M33 because it is entirely unremarkable in both optical and near-IR light. In the Local Group Galaxies Survey, Object X is a faint red source visible in VRI and H-alpha but not U or B. It was easily seen at JHK_s in the 2MASS survey. It is the brightest point source in all four Spitzer IRAC bands and is also visible in the MIPS 24-micron band. Its bolometric luminosity is 5x10^5 L_sun. The source is optically variable on short time scales (tens of days) and is also slightly variable in the mid-IR, indicating that it is a star. Archival photographic plates (from 1949 and 1991) show no optical source, so the star has been obscured for at least half a century. Its properties are similar to those of the Galactic OH/IR star IRC+10420 which has a complex dusty circumstellar structure resulting from episodic low velocity mass ejections. We propose that Object X is a M&gt;30 M_sun evolved star obscured in its own dust ejected during episodic mass loss events over at least half a century. It may emerge from its current ultra-short evolutionary phase as a hotter post-RSG star analogous to M33 Var A. The existence and rarity of such objects can be an important probe of a very brief yet eventful stellar evolutionary phase.

=== arXiv:1012.3456v1  [2010-12-15]
TITLE  : The widespread occurence of water vapor in the circumstellar envelopes of carbon-rich AGB stars: first results from a survey with Herschel/HIFI
AUTHORS: D. A. Neufeld, E. González-Alfonso, G. Melnick, R. Szczerba, M. Schmidt, L. Decin, J. Alcolea, A. de Koter
DOI    : 10.1088/2041-8205/727/2/L29
ABS    : We report the preliminary results of a survey for water vapor in a sample of eight C stars with large mid-IR continuum fluxes: V384 Per, CIT 6, V Hya, Y CVn, IRAS 15194-5115, V Cyg, S Cep, and IRC+40540. This survey, performed using the HIFI instrument on board the Herschel Space Observatory, entailed observations of the lowest transitions of both ortho- and para-water: the 556.936 GHz 1(10)-1(01) and 1113.343 GHz 1(11)-0(00) transitions, respectively. Water vapor was unequivocally detected in all eight of the target stars. Prior to this survey, IRC+10216 was the only carbon-rich AGB star from which thermal water emissions had been discovered, in that case with the use of the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS). Our results indicate that IRC+10216 is not unusual, except insofar as its proximity to Earth leads to a large line flux that was detectable with SWAS. The water spectral line widths are typically similar to those of CO rotational lines, arguing against the vaporization of a Kuiper belt analog (Ford &amp; Neufeld 2001) being the general explanation for water vapor in carbon-rich AGB stars. There is no apparent correlation between the ratio of the integrated water line fluxes to the 6.3 micron continuum flux - a ratio which measures the water outflow rate - and the total mass-loss rate for the stars in our sample.

=== arXiv:1011.6063v1  [2010-11-28]
TITLE  : The progenitor and remnant of the helium nova V445 Puppis
AUTHORS: V. P. Goranskij, S. Yu. Shugarov, A. V. Zharova, P. Kroll, E. A. Barsukova
ABS    : V445 Pup was a peculiar nova with no hydrogen spectral lines during the outburst. The spectrum contained strong emission lines of carbon, oxygen, calcium, sodium, and iron. We have performed digital processing of photographic images of the V445 Pup progenitor using astronomical plate archives. The brightness of the progenitor in the B band was 14.3 mag. It was a periodic variable star, its most probable period being 0.650654+/-0.000011 day. The light curve shape suggests that the progenitor was a common-envelope binary with a spot on the surface and variable surface brightness. The spectral energy distribution of the progenitor between 0.44 and 2.2 micrometers was similar to that of an A0V type star. After the explosion in 2001, the dust was formed in the ejecta, and the star became a strong infrared source. This resulted in the star's fading below 20 mag in the V band. Our CCD BVR observations acquired between 2003 and 2009 suggest that the dust absorption minimum finished in 2004, and the remnant reappeared at the level of 18.5 mag V. The dust dispersed but a star-like object was absent in frames taken in the K band with the VLT adaptive optics. Only expanding ejecta of the explosion were seen in these frames till March 2007. No reddened A0V type star reappeared in the spectral energy distribution. The explosion of V445 Pup in 2000 was a helium flash on the surface of a CO-type white dwarf. Taking into account the results of modern dynamic calculations, we discuss the possibility of a white-dwarf core detonation triggered by the helium flash and the observational evidence for it. Additionally, the common envelope of the system was lost in the explosion. Destruction in the system and mass loss from its components exclude the future SN Ia scenario for V445 Pup.

=== arXiv:1011.5813v1  [2010-11-26]
TITLE  : Disk Evolution in W5: Intermediate Mass Stars at 2-5 Myr
AUTHORS: Xavier P. Koenig, Lori E. Allen
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/726/1/18
ABS    : We present the results of a survey of young intermediate mass stars (age $&lt;$~5 Myr, 1.5 $&lt;M_{\star} \leq $ 15 $M_{\odot}$) in the W5 massive star forming region. We use combined optical, near-infrared and {\it Spitzer} Space Telescope photometry and optical spectroscopy to define a sample of stars of spectral type A and B and examine their infrared excess properties. We find objects with infrared excesses characteristic of optically thick disks, i.e. Herbig AeBe stars. These stars are rare: $&lt;$1.5% of the entire spectroscopic sample of A and B stars, and absent among stars more massive than 2.4 $M_\odot$. 7.5% of the A and B stars possess infrared excesses in a variety of morphologies that suggest their disks are in some transitional phase between an initial, optically thick accretion state and later evolutionary states. We identify four morphological classes based on the wavelength dependence of the observed excess emission above theoretical photospheric levels: (a) the optically thick disks; (b) disks with an optically thin excess over the wavelength range 2 to 24 $\micron$, similar to that shown by Classical Be stars; (c) disks that are optically thin in their inner regions based on their infrared excess at 2-8 $\micron$ and optically thick in their outer regions based on the magnitude of the observed excess emission at 24 $\micron$; (d) disks that exhibit empty inner regions (no excess emission at $λ$ $\leq$ 8 $\micron$) and some measurable excess emission at 24 $\micron$. A sub-class of disks exhibit no significant excess emission at $λ\leq$ 5.8 $\micron$, have excess emission only in the {\it Spitzer} 8 $\micron$ band and no detection at 24 $\micron$. We discuss these spectral energy distribution (SED) types, suggest physical models for disks exhibiting these emission patterns and additional observations to test these theories.

=== arXiv:1010.6067v3  [2010-10-28]
TITLE  : Evidence for Terrestrial Planetary System Remnants at White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: J. Farihi
DOI    : 10.1063/1.3570973
ABS    : The last several years have brought about a dynamic shift in the view of exoplanetary systems in the post-main sequence, perhaps epitomized by the evidence for surviving rocky planetary bodies at white dwarfs. Coinciding with the launch of the Spitzer Space Telescope, both space- and ground-based data have supported a picture whereby asteroid analogs persist at a significant fraction of cool white dwarfs, and are prone to tidal disruption when passing close to the compact stellar remnant. The ensuing debris can produce a detectable infrared excess, and the material gradually falls onto the star, polluting the atmosphere with heavy elements that can be used to determine the bulk composition of the destroyed planetary body. Based on the observations to date, the parent bodies inferred at white dwarfs are best described as asteroids, and have a distinctly rocky composition similar to material found in the inner Solar System. Their minimum masses are typical of large asteroids, and can approach or exceed the mass of Vesta and Ceres, the two largest asteroids in the Solar System. From the number of stars surveyed in various studies, the fraction of white dwarfs that host terrestrial planetary system remnants is at least a few percent, but likely to be in the range 20% to 30%. Therefore, A- and F-type stars form terrestrial planets efficiently, with a frequency at least as high as the remnants detected at their white dwarf descendants.

=== arXiv:1010.5801v1  [2010-10-27]
TITLE  : Substellar Objects in Nearby Young Clusters (SONYC) II: The Brown Dwarf Population of Rho Ophiuchi
AUTHORS: Vincent Geers, Alexander Scholz, Ray Jayawardhana, Eve Lee, David Lafrenière, Motohide Tamura
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/726/1/23
ABS    : SONYC - Substellar Objects in Nearby Young Clusters - is a survey program to investigate the frequency and properties of brown dwarfs down to masses below the Deuterium burning limit in nearby star forming regions. In this second paper, we present results on the ~1 Myr old cluster Rho Ophiuchi, combining our own deep optical and near-infrared imaging using Subaru with photometry from the 2-Micron All Sky Survey and the Spitzer Space Telescope. Of the candidates selected from iJKs photometry, we have confirmed three -- including a new brown dwarf with a mass close to the Deuterium limit -- as likely cluster members through low-resolution infrared spectroscopy. We also identify 27 sub-stellar candidates with mid-infrared excess consistent with disk emission, of which 16 are new and 11 are previously spectroscopically confirmed brown dwarfs. The high and variable extinction makes it difficult to obtain the complete sub-stellar population in this region. However, current data suggest that its ratio of low-mass stars to brown dwarfs in similar to those reported for several other clusters, though higher than what was found for NGC 1333 in Scholz et al. 2009.

=== arXiv:1008.2545v2  [2010-08-15]
TITLE  : White Dwarf - Red Dwarf Systems Resolved with the Hubble Space Telescope. II. Full Snapshot Survey Results
AUTHORS: J. Farihi, D. W. Hoard, S. Wachter
DOI    : 10.1088/0067-0049/190/2/275
ABS    : Results are presented for a Hubble Space Telescope Advanced Camera for Surveys high-resolution imaging campaign of 90 white dwarfs with known or suspected low mass stellar and substellar companions. Of the 72 targets which remain candidate and confirmed white dwarfs with near-infrared excess, 43 are spatially resolved into two or more components, and a total of 12 systems are potentially triples. There is a possible, slight deficit of earlier spectral types (bluer colors) among the spatially unresolved companions, exactly the opposite of expectations if significant mass is transferred to the companion during the common envelope phase. Using the best available distance estimates, the low mass companions to white dwarfs exhibit a bimodal distribution in projected separation. This result supports the hypothesis that during the giant phases of the white dwarf progenitor, any unevolved companions either migrate inward to short periods of hours to days, or outward to periods of hundreds to thousands of years. No intermediate projected separations of a few to several AU are found among these pairs. However, a few double M dwarfs (within triples) are spatially resolved in this range, empirically demonstrating that such separations were readily detectable among the binaries with white dwarfs. A straightforward and testable prediction emerges: all spatially unresolved, low mass stellar and substellar companions to white dwarfs should be in short period orbits. This result has implications for substellar companion and planetary orbital evolution during the post-main sequence lifetime of their stellar hosts.

=== arXiv:1008.0450v1  [2010-08-03]
TITLE  : An Extremely Carbon-rich, Extremely Metal-poor Star in the Segue 1 System
AUTHORS: John E. Norris, Gerard Gilmore, Rosemary F. G. Wyse, David Yong, Anna Frebel
DOI    : 10.1088/2041-8205/722/1/L104
ABS    : We report the analysis of high-resolution, high-S/N spectra of an extremely metal-poor, extremely C-rich red giant, Seg 1-7, in the Segue 1 system - described in the literature alternatively as an unusually extended globular cluster or an ultra-faint dwarf galaxy. The radial velocity of Seg 1-7 coincides precisely with the systemic velocity of Segue 1, and its chemical abundance signature of [Fe/H] = -3.52, [C/Fe] = +2.3, [N/Fe] = +0.8, [Na/Fe] = +0.53, [Mg/Fe] = +0.94, [Al/Fe] = +0.23 and [Ba/Fe] &lt; -1.0 is similar to that of the rare and enigmatic class of Galactic halo objects designated CEMP-no (Carbon-rich, Extremely Metal-Poor and with no enhancement (over solar ratios) of heavy neutron-capture elements). This is the first star in a Milky Way ``satellite'' that unambiguously lies on the metal-poor, C-rich branch of the Aoki et al. (2007) bimodal distribution defined by field halo stars in the ([C/Fe], [Fe/H])-plane. Available data permit us only to identify Seg 1-7 as a member of an ultra-faint dwarf galaxy or as debris from the Sgr dwarf spheroidal galaxy. In either case, this demonstrates that at extremely low abundance, [Fe/H ] &lt; -3.0, star formation and associated chemical evolution proceeded similarly in the progenitors of both the field halo and satellite systems. By extension, this is consistent with other recent suggestions the most metal-poor dwarf spheroidal and ultra-faint dwarf satellites were the building blocks of the Milky Way's outer halo.

=== arXiv:1007.4517v2  [2010-07-26]
TITLE  : Post-main sequence evolution of A star debris discs
AUTHORS: A. Bonsor, M. C. Wyatt
DOI    : 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.17412.x
ABS    : While the population of main sequence debris discs is well constrained, little is known about debris discs around evolved stars. This paper provides a theoretical framework considering the effects of stellar evolution on debris discs, particularly the production and loss of dust within them. Here we repeat a steady state model fit to disc evolution statistics for main sequence A stars, this time using realistic grain optical properties, then evolve that population to consider its detectability at later epochs. Our model predicts that debris discs around giant stars are harder to detect than on the main sequence because radiation pressure is more effective at removing small dust around higher luminosity stars. Just 12% of first ascent giants within 100pc are predicted to have discs detectable with Herschel at 160um. However this is subject to the uncertain effect of sublimation on the disc, which we propose can thus be constrained with such observations. Our model also finds that the rapid decline in stellar luminosity results in only very young white dwarfs having luminous discs. As such systems are on average at larger distances they are hard to detect, but we predict that the stellar parameters most likely to yield a disc detection are a white dwarf at 200pc with cooling age of 0.1Myr, in line with observations of the Helix Nebula. Our model does not predict close-in (&lt;0.01AU) dust, as observed for some white dwarfs, however we find that stellar wind drag leaves significant mass (~10^{-2}Msolar), in bodies up to ~10m in diameter, inside the disc at the end of the AGB phase which may replenish these discs.

=== arXiv:1007.0800v2  [2010-07-06]
TITLE  : New R Coronae Borealis stars discovered in OGLE-III Galactic Bulge fields from their mid- and near- infrared properties
AUTHORS: P. Tisserand, L. Wyrzykowski, P. R. Wood, A. Udalski, M. K. Szymański, M. Kubiak, G. Pietrzyński, I. Soszyński
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201014220
ABS    : An R Coronae Borealis (RCB) star is a rare type of supergiant star that is increasingly thought to be the evolved merger product of two white dwarfs. Recently, many of them have been found distributed in a thin disk structure embedded inside the Galactic Bulge. This unexpected high density can give us more insight into the nature and age of RCB stars. We applied and tested successfully a new technique to find RCB stars based on the particular infrared emission. We demonstrated that RCB stars can now be found without the need of a light curve analysis, and therefore outside optically monitored fields. The selection of RCB candidates was based on their near-infrared excess and on particular mid-infrared emission of RCB shells, using photometric data from the 2MASS and Spitzer/GLIMPSE surveys. The OGLE light curves of all RCB candidates were then inspected visually and the ones presenting large and fast declines were followed-up spectroscopically . We discovered two new R Coronae Borealis stars, but also propose four new candidates. We stress that all of the 7 known RCB stars located in both Spitzer/GLIMPSE and OGLE-III fields were re-discovered, which indicates the high efficiency of our analysis. The proposed new technique to find RCB stars has been successful. It can now be extented to larger area, specially where the instellar extinction is too high to have been monitored by microlensing surveys, i.e the inner part of the Galactic Bulge.

=== arXiv:1006.5244v1  [2010-06-27]
TITLE  : CI observations in the CQ Tau proto-planetary disk: evidence for a very low gas-to-dust ratio ?
AUTHORS: E. Chapillon, B. Parise, S. Guilloteau, A. Dutrey, V. Wakelam
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201014841
ABS    : Gas and dust dissipation processes of proto-planetary disks are hardly known. Transition disks between Class II (proto-planetary disks) and Class III (debris disks) remain difficult to detect. We investigate the carbon chemistry of the peculiar CQ Tau gas disk. It is likely a transition disk because it exhibits weak CO emission with a relatively strong millimeter continuum, indicating that the disk might be currently dissipating its gas content. We used APEX to observe the two CI lines at 492GHz and 809 GHz in the disk orbiting CQ Tau. We compare the observations to several chemical model predictions. We focus our study on the influence of the stellar UV radiation shape and gas-to-dust ratio. We did not detect the CI lines. However, our upper limits are deep enough to exclude high-CI models. The only available models compatible with our limits imply very low gas-to-dust ratio, of the order of a few, only. These observations strengthen the hypothesis that CQ Tau is likely a transition disk and suggest that gas disappears before dust.

=== arXiv:1006.3710v1  [2010-06-18]
TITLE  : The Discovery of the Most Metal-Rich White Dwarf: Composition of a Tidally Disrupted Extrasolar Dwarf Planet
AUTHORS: P. Dufour, M. Kilic, G. Fontaine, P. Bergeron, F. -R. Lachapelle, S. J. Kleinman, S. K. Leggett
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/719/1/803
ABS    : Cool white dwarf stars are usually found to have an outer atmosphere that is practically pure in hydrogen or helium. However, a small fraction have traces of heavy elements that must originate from the accretion of extrinsic material, most probably circumstellar matter. Upon examining thousands of Sloan Digital Sky Survey spectra, we discovered that the helium-atmosphere white dwarf SDSS J073842.56+183509.6 shows the most severe metal pollution ever seen in the outermost layers of such stars. We present here a quantitative analysis of this exciting star by combining high S/N follow-up spectroscopic and photometric observations with model atmospheres and evolutionary models. We determine the global structural properties of our target star, as well as the abundances of the most significant pollutants in its atmosphere, i.e., H, O, Na, Mg, Si, Ca, and Fe. The relative abundances of these elements imply that the source of the accreted material has a composition similar to that of Bulk Earth. We also report the signature of a circumstellar disk revealed through a large infrared excess in JHK photometry. Combined with our inferred estimate of the mass of the accreted material, this strongly suggests that we are witnessing the remains of a tidally disrupted extrasolar body that was as large as Ceres.

=== arXiv:1006.0352v1  [2010-06-02]
TITLE  : A deep radio survey of the AKARI North Ecliptic Pole Field - WSRT 20 cm Radio survey description, observations and data reduction
AUTHORS: Glenn J. White, Chris Pearson, Robert Braun, Stephen Serjeant, Hideo Matsuhara, Toshinobu Takagi, Takao Nakagawa, Russell Shipman
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/200913366
ABS    : The Westerbork Radio Synthesis Telescope, WSRT, has been used to make a deep radio survey of an ~ 1.7 sq degree field coinciding with the AKARI North Ecliptic Pole Deep Field. The observations, data reduction and source count analysis are presented, along with a description of the overall scientific objectives. The survey consisted of 10 pointings, mosaiced with enough overlap to maintain a similar sensitivity across the central region that reached as low as 21 microJy per beam at 1.4 GHz. A catalogue containing 462 sources detected with a resolution of 17"x15" is presented. The differential source counts calculated from the WSRT data have been compared with those from the shallow VLA-NEP survey of Kollgaard et al 1994, and show a pronounced excess for sources fainter than ~ 1 mJy, consistent with the presence of a population of star forming galaxies at sub-mJy flux levels. The AKARI North Ecliptic Pole Deep field is the focus of a major observing campaign conducted across the entire spectral region. The combination of these data sets, along with the deep nature of the radio observations will allow unique studies of a large range of topics including the redshift evolution of the luminosity function of radio sources, the clustering environment of radio galaxies, the nature of obscured radio-loud active galactic nuclei, and the radio/far-infrared correlation for distant galaxies. This catalogue provides the basic data set for a future series of paper dealing with source identifications, morphologies, and the associated properties of the identified radio sources.

=== arXiv:1005.5147v1  [2010-05-27]
TITLE  : Resolving debris discs in the far-infrared: early highlights from the DEBRIS survey
AUTHORS: DEBRIS Collaboration, Brenda Matthews, Bruce Sibthorpe, Grant Kennedy, Neil Phillips, Laura Churcher, Gaspard Duchêne, Jane Greaves
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/201014667
ABS    : We present results from the earliest observations of DEBRIS, a Herschel Key Programme to conduct a volume- and flux-limited survey for debris discs in A-type through M-type stars. PACS images (from chop/nod or scan-mode observations) at 100 and 160 micron are presented toward two A-type stars and one F-type star: beta Leo, beta UMa and eta Corvi. All three stars are known disc hosts. Herschel spatially resolves the dust emission around all three stars (marginally, in the case of beta UMa), providing new information about discs as close as 11 pc with sizes comparable to that of the Solar System. We have combined these data with existing flux density measurements of the discs to refine the SEDs and derive estimates of the fractional luminosities, temperatures and radii of the discs.

=== arXiv:1004.0560v1  [2010-04-05]
TITLE  : Enstatite-rich Warm Debris Dust around HD165014
AUTHORS: Hideaki Fujiwara, Takashi Onaka, Daisuke Ishihara, Takuya Yamashita, Misato Fukagawa, Takao Nakagawa, Hirokazu Kataza, Takafumi Ootsubo
DOI    : 10.1088/2041-8205/714/1/L152
ABS    : We present the Spitzer/Infrared Spectrograph spectrum of the main-sequence star HD165014, which is a warm (&gt;~ 200 K) debris disk candidate discovered by the AKARI All-Sky Survey. The star possesses extremely large excess emission at wavelengths longer than 5 \mum. The detected flux densities at 10 and 20 \mum are ~ 10 and ~ 30 times larger than the predicted photospheric emission, respectively. The excess emission is attributable to the presence of circumstellar warm dust. The dust temperature is estimated as 300-750 K, corresponding to the distance of 0.7-4.4 AU from the central star. Significant fine-structured features are seen in the spectrum and the peak positions are in good agreement with those of crystalline enstatite. Features of crystalline forsterite are not significantly seen. HD165014 is the first debris disk sample that has enstatite as a dominant form of crystalline silicate rather than forsterite. Possible formation of enstatite dust from differentiated parent bodies is suggested according to the solar system analog. The detection of an enstatite-rich debris disk in the current study suggests the presence of large bodies and a variety of silicate dust processing in warm debris disks.

=== arXiv:1003.3374v2  [2010-03-17]
TITLE  : Pulsational Mapping of Calcium Across the Surface of a White Dwarf
AUTHORS: Susan E. Thompson, M. H. Montgomery, T. von Hippel, A. Nitta, J. Dalessio, J. Provencal, W. Strickland, J. A. Holtzman
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/714/1/296
ABS    : We constrain the distribution of calcium across the surface of the white dwarf star G29-38 by combining time series spectroscopy from Gemini-North with global time series photometry from the Whole Earth Telescope. G29-38 is actively accreting metals from a known debris disk. Since the metals sink significantly faster than they mix across the surface, any inhomogeneity in the accretion process will appear as an inhomogeneity of the metals on the surface of the star. We measure the flux amplitudes and the calcium equivalent width amplitudes for two large pulsations excited on G29-38 in 2008. The ratio of these amplitudes best fits a model for polar accretion of calcium and rules out equatorial accretion.

=== arXiv:1003.1949v1  [2010-03-09]
TITLE  : Star-galaxy separation by far-infrared color-color diagrams for the AKARI FIS All-Sky Survey (Bright Source Catalogue Version beta-1)
AUTHORS: Agnieszka Pollo, Piotr Rybka, Tsutomu T. Takeuchi
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/200913428
ABS    : To separate stars and galaxies in the far infrared AKARI All-Sky Survey data, we have selected a sample with the complete color information available in the low extinction regions of the sky and constructed color-color plots for these data. We looked for the method to separate stars and galaxies using the color information. We performed an extensive search for the counterparts of these selected All-Sky Survey sources in the NED and SIMBAD databases. Among 5176 objects, we found 4272 galaxies, 382 other extragalactic objects, 349 Milky Way stars, 50 other Galactic objects, and 101 sources detected before in various wavelengths but of an unknown origin. 22 sources were left unidentified. Then, we checked colors of stars and galaxies in the far-infrared flux-color and color-color plots. In the resulting diagrams, stars form two clearly separated clouds. One of them is easy to be distinguished from galaxies and allows for a simple method of excluding a large part of stars using the far-infrared data. The other smaller branch, overplotting galaxies, consists of stars known to have an infrared excess, like Vega and some fainter stars discovered by IRAS or 2MASS. The color properties of these objects in any case make them very difficult to distinguish from galaxies. We conclude that the FIR color-color diagrams allow for a high-quality star-galaxy separation. With the proposed simple method we can select more that 95 % of galaxies rejecting at least 80 % of stars.

=== arXiv:1002.2069v1  [2010-02-10]
TITLE  : The heavily polluted atmosphere of the DAZ white dwarf GALEX J193156.8+011745
AUTHORS: S. Vennes, A. Kawka, P. Nemeth
DOI    : 10.1111/j.1745-3933.2010.00830.x
ABS    : We report on the discovery of a new heavily polluted white dwarf. The DAZ white dwarf GALEX J193156.8+011745 was identified in a joint GALEX/GSC survey of ultraviolet-excess objects. Optical spectra obtained at ESO NTT show strong absorption lines of magnesium and silicon and a detailed abundance analysis based on VLT-Kueyen UVES spectra reveal super-solar abundances of silicon and magnesium, and near-solar abundances of oxygen, calcium, and iron. The overall abundance pattern bears the signature of ongoing accretion onto the white dwarf atmosphere. The infrared spectral energy distribution shows an excess in the H and K bands likely associated with the accretion source.

=== arXiv:1002.0456v1  [2010-02-02]
TITLE  : A panoramic view of M81: New stellar systems in the debris field
AUTHORS: M. Mouhcine, R. Ibata
ABS    : Using the MegaCam imager on the Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope, we have resolved individual stars in the outskirts of the nearby large spiral galaxy M81 (NGC 3031) well below the tip of the red giant branch of metal-poor stellar populations over 60 kpc * 58 kpc. In this paper, we report the discovery of new young stellar systems in the outskirts of M81. The most prominent feature is a chain of clumps of young stars distributed along the extended southern HI tidal arm connecting M 81 and NGC 3077. The colour-magnitude diagrams of these stellar systems show plumes of bright main sequence stars and red supergiant stars, indicating extended events of star formation. The main sequence turn-offs of the youngest stars in the systems are consistent with ages of ~40 Myr. The newly reported stellar systems show strong similarities with other known young stellar systems in the debris field around M81, with their properties best explained by these systems being of tidal origin.

=== arXiv:1001.4513v1  [2010-01-25]
TITLE  : Can solid body destruction explain abundance discrepancies in planetary nebulae?
AUTHORS: William J. Henney, Grazyna Stasinska
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/711/2/881
ABS    : In planetary nebulae, abundances of oxygen and other heavy elements derived from optical recombination lines are systematically higher than those derived from collisionally excited lines. We investigate the hypothesis that the destruction of solid bodies may produce pockets of cool, high-metallicity gas that could explain these abundance discrepancies. Under the assumption of maximally efficient radiative ablation, we derive two fundamental constraints that the solid bodies must satisfy in order that their evaporation during the planetary nebula phase should generate a high enough gas phase metallicity. A local constraint implies that the bodies must be larger than tens of meters, while a global constraint implies that the total mass of the solid body reservoir must exceed a few hundredths of a solar mass. This mass greatly exceeds the mass of any population of comets or large debris particles expected to be found orbiting evolved low- to intermediate-mass stars. We therefore conclude that contemporaneous solid body destruction cannot explain the observed abundance discrepancies in planetary nebulae. However, similar arguments applied to the sublimation of solid bodies during the preceding asymptotic giant branch (AGB) phase do not lead to such a clear-cut conclusion. In this case, the required reservoir of volatile solids is only one ten-thousandth of a solar mass, which is comparable to the most massive debris disks observed around solar-type stars, implying that this mechanism may contribute to abundance discrepancies in at least some planetary nebulae, so long as mixing of the high metallicity gas is inefficient.

=== arXiv:1001.3652v2  [2010-01-20]
TITLE  : Stars and brown dwarfs in the sigma Orionis cluster. II. A proper motion study
AUTHORS: Jose A. Caballero
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/200913940
ABS    : Aims: I seek to fully know the stellar and substellar populations in the young sigma Orionis open cluster, which is a benchmark for star-forming studies. Because of the very low proper motion of the cluster, late-type dwarfs with appreciable proper motion in the foreground of sigma Orionis can be easily discarded for expensive spectroscopic follow-up. Methods: I use the Aladin sky atlas, USNO-B1, public astrometric catalogues, and photographic plate digitisations to identify stars with proper motions inconsistent with cluster membership in a circular area of radius 30 arcmin centred on the early-type multiple system sigma Ori. Mostly due to the long time baseline, of more than half a century, the errors in the measured proper motions are lower than 2 mas/a. Results: Of the 42 stars selected for astrometric follow-up, 37 of them are proper-motion cluster interlopers. Some USNO-B1 measurements were affected by partially resolved (visual) multiplicity and target faintness. Because of their late spectral types and, hence, red colours, 24 contaminants had been considered as sigma Orionis members at some moment. I discuss how contamination may have affected previous works (especially related to disc frequencies) and the curious presence of lithium absorption in three M-dwarf proper-motion contaminants. Finally, I classify the bright star HD 294297 as a late-F field dwarf unrelated to the cluster based on a new proper motion measurement. Conclusions: Although proper motions cannot be used to confirm membership in sigma Orionis, they can be used instead to discard a number of cluster member candidates without spectroscopy.

=== arXiv:1001.2595v2  [2010-01-15]
TITLE  : The Survival of Water within Extrasolar Minor Planets
AUTHORS: M. Jura, S. Xu
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-6256/140/5/1129
ABS    : We compute that extrasolar minor planets can retain much of their internal H_2O during their host star's red giant evolution. The eventual accretion of a water-rich body or bodies onto a helium white dwarf might supply an observable amount of atmospheric hydrogen, as seems likely for GD 362. More generally, if hydrogen pollution in helium white dwarfs typically results from accretion of large parent bodies rather than interstellar gas as previously supposed, then H_2O probably constitutes at least 10% of the aggregate mass of extrasolar minor planets. One observational test of this possibility is to examine the atmospheres of externally-polluted white dwarfs for oxygen in excess of that likely contributed by oxides such as SiO_2. The relatively high oxygen abundance previously reported in GD 378 plausibly but not uniquely can be explained by accretion of an H_2O-rich parent body or bodies. Future ultraviolet observations of white dwarf pollutions can serve to investigate the hypothesis that environments with liquid water that are suitable habitats for extremophiles are widespread in the Milky Way.

=== arXiv:1001.1395v2  [2010-01-11]
TITLE  : DASCH Discovery of Large Amplitude ~10-100 Year Variability in K Giants
AUTHORS: Sumin Tang, Jonathan Grindlay, Edward Los, Silas Laycock
JOURNAL: ApJ. 710 (2010), L77-L81
DOI    : 10.1088/2041-8205/710/1/L77
ABS    : Here we present the discovery of three unusual long-term variables found in the Digital Access to a Sky Century at Harvard (DASCH) project, with ~1 magnitude variations in their lightcurves on ~10-100 yr timescales. They are all spectroscopically identified as K2III giant stars, probably in the thick disk. Their lightcurves do not match any previously measured for known types of variable stars, or any theoretical model reported for red giants, and instead suggest a new dust formation mechanism or the first direct observation of "short" timescale evolution-driven variability. More theoretical work on the lithium flash near the Red Giant Branch (RGB) bump and the helium shell ignition in the lower Asymptotic Giant Branch (AGB), as well as long term monitoring of K2III thick disk stars is needed.

=== arXiv:0911.4997v2  [2009-11-26]
TITLE  : The Single Flavor Color Superconductivity in a Magnetic Field
AUTHORS: Bo Feng, Defu Hou, Hai-cang Ren, Ping-ping Wu
JOURNAL: Phys.Rev.Lett.105:042001,2010
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.042001
ABS    : We investigate the single flavor color superconductivity in a magnetic field. Because of the absence of the electromagnetic Meissner effect, forming a nonspherical CSC phase, polar, A or planar, does not cost energy of excluding magnetic flux. We found that these nonspherical phases do occupy a significant portion of the phase diagram with respect to magnetic field and temperature and may be implemented under the typical quark density and the magnetic field inside a compact star.

=== arXiv:0911.3426v1  [2009-11-18]
TITLE  : Target selection for the SUNS and DEBRIS surveys for debris discs in the solar neighbourhood
AUTHORS: N. M. Phillips, J. S. Greaves, W. R. F. Dent, B. C. Matthews, W. S. Holland, M. C. Wyatt, B. Sibthorpe
DOI    : 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15641.x
ABS    : Debris discs - analogous to the Asteroid and Kuiper-Edgeworth belts in the Solar system - have so far mostly been identified and studied in thermal emission shortward of 100 um. The Herschel space observatory and the SCUBA-2 camera on the James Clerk Maxwell Telescope will allow efficient photometric surveying at 70 to 850 um, which allow for the detection of cooler discs not yet discovered, and the measurement of disc masses and temperatures when combined with shorter wavelength photometry. The SCUBA-2 Unbiased Nearby Stars (SUNS) survey and the DEBRIS Herschel Open Time Key Project are complimentary legacy surveys observing samples of ~500 nearby stellar systems. To maximise the legacy value of these surveys, great care has gone into the target selection process. This paper describes the target selection process and presents the target lists of these two surveys.

=== arXiv:0911.3271v1  [2009-11-17]
TITLE  : How Common are Extrasolar, Late Heavy Bombardments?
AUTHORS: Mark Booth, Mark C. Wyatt, Alessandro Morbidelli, Amaya Moro-Martín, Harold F. Levison
ABS    : The habitability of planets is strongly affected by impacts from comets and asteroids. Indications from the ages of Moon rocks suggest that the inner Solar System experienced an increased rate of impacts roughly 3.8 Gya known as the Late Heavy Bombardment (LHB). Here we develop a model of how the Solar System would have appeared to a distant observer during its history based on the Nice model of Gomes et al. (2005). We compare our results with observed debris discs. We show that the Solar System would have been amongst the brightest of these systems before the LHB. Comparison with the statistics of debris disc evolution shows that such heavy bombardment events must be rare occurring around less than 12% of Sun-like stars.

=== arXiv:0911.0035v1  [2009-10-30]
TITLE  : V819 Tau: A Rare Weak-Lined T Tauri Star with a Weak Infrared Excess
AUTHORS: E. Furlan, W. J. Forrest, B. A. Sargent, P. Manoj, K. H. Kim, Dan M. Watson
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.706:1194-1200,2009
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/706/2/1194
ABS    : We use Spitzer data to infer that the small infrared excess of V819 Tau, a weak-lined T Tauri star in Taurus, is real and not attributable to a "companion" 10 arcsec to the south. We do not confirm the mid-infrared excess in HBC 427 and V410 X-ray 3, which are also non-accreting T Tauri stars in the same region; instead, for the former object, the excess arises from a red companion 9 arcsec to the east. A single-temperature blackbody fit to the continuum excess of V819 Tau implies a dust temperature of 143 K; however, a better fit is achieved when the weak 10 and 20 micron silicate emission features are also included. We infer a disk of sub-micron silicate grains between about 1 AU and several 100 AU with a constant surface density distribution. The mid-infrared excess of V819 Tau can be successfully modeled with dust composed mostly of small amorphous olivine grains at a temperature of 85 K, and most of the excess emission is optically thin. The disk could still be primordial, but gas-poor and therefore short-lived, or already at the debris disk stage, which would make it one of the youngest debris disk systems known.

=== arXiv:0909.3920v1  [2009-09-22]
TITLE  : Gross-Pitaevskii Equation for a System of Randomly Interacting Cold Bosons
AUTHORS: J. van Baardewijk
ABS    : Random interaction models have been successful in describing the amorphous properties of solids such as spin-glasses and structural glasses. This modelling approach is applied to a system of zero-spin cold bosons moving in an amorphous environment. The bosons are given to interact according to a non-random hard-core interaction. Additionally the bosons are subjected to a random interaction potential similar to that used for glasses. The approach is to apply a combination of replica methods and field theoretic techniques developed for superfluid Bose systems. This leads to an equation for the low-temperature Bose-Einstein condensate which is derived in the Hartree-Fock approximation. The equation is similar to the Gross-Pitaevskii equation, but the hard-core coupling constant is renormalised by the presence of the random interactions in a position dependent way. The amorphous contribution contains the replica diagonal and off-diagonal Green's functions, for which the Dyson equations are formulated.

=== arXiv:0908.0701v1  [2009-08-05]
TITLE  : Spectra and Light Curves of Failed Supernovae
AUTHORS: Chris L. Fryer, Peter J. Brown, Filomena Bufano, Jon A. Dahl, Christopher J. Fontes, Lucille H. Frey, Stephen T. Holland, Aimee L. Hungerford
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/707/1/193
ABS    : Astronomers have proposed a number of mechanisms to produce supernova explosions. Although many of these mechanisms are now not considered primary engines behind supernovae, they do produce transients that will be observed by upcoming ground-based surveys and NASA satellites. Here we present the first radiation-hydrodynamics calculations of the spectra and light curves from three of these "failed" supernovae: supernovae with considerable fallback, accretion induced collapse of white dwarfs, and energetic helium flashes (also known as type .Ia supernovae).

=== arXiv:0906.3744v1  [2009-06-19]
TITLE  : Solar System Analogs Around IRAS-Discovered Debris Disks
AUTHORS: Christine H. Chen, Patrick Sheehan, Dan M. Watson, P. Manoj Puravankara, Joan R. Najita
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.701:1367-1372,2009
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/701/2/1367
ABS    : We have rereduced Spitzer IRS spectra and reanalyzed the SED's of three nearby debris disks: lambda Boo, HD 139664, and HR 8799. We find that that the thermal emission from these objects is well modeled using two single temperature black body components. For HR 8799 -- with no silicate emission features despite a relatively hot inner dust component (Tgr = 150 K) -- we infer the presence of an asteroid belt interior to and a Kuiper Belt exterior to the recently discovered orbiting planets. For HD 139664, which has been imaged in scattered light, we infer the presence of strongly forward scattering grains, consistent with porous grains, if the cold, outer disk component generates both the observed scattered light and thermal emission. Finally, careful analysis of the lambda Boo SED suggests that this system possesses a central clearing, indicating that selective accretion of solids onto the central star does not occur from a dusty disk.

=== arXiv:0906.3292v1  [2009-06-18]
TITLE  : IRTF Observations of White Dwarfs with Possible Near-Infrared Excess
AUTHORS: J. Farihi
DOI    : 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15250.x
ABS    : Near-infrared photometry and spectroscopy is obtained for a heterogeneous sample of nearby white dwarfs with possible excess flux as identified primarily in the Two Micron All Sky Survey. Among the sample of 43 stars are a number of white dwarfs that are either metal-rich, magnetic, or binary suspects. With a few notable exceptions in four (or possibly five) distinct categories, the newly obtained JHK photometric data fail to corroborate the putative excesses, with K_IRTF - K_2MASS = +0.31 mag. Where available, GALEX photometric data are used to better constrain the overall spectral energy distribution of the white dwarfs, enabling any excess near-infrared flux to stand out more readily against the expected stellar photosphere. With superior data, a near-infrared photometric excess is confirmed at three metal-rich white dwarfs and ruled out at nine others. Several new binaries are confirmed or suggested; five white dwarf - red dwarf pairs and five double degenerates. Four apparently single magnetic white dwarfs -- two DA and two DQp -- display modest to strong near-infrared excess (relative to non-magnetic models), which may be better described as two effective temperatures owing to a redistribution of energy in highly magnetic or peculiar atmospheres.

=== arXiv:0906.3365v1  [2009-06-18]
TITLE  : The Long-Lived Disks in the Eta Chamaeleontis Cluster
AUTHORS: A. Sicilia-Aguilar, J. Bouwman, A. Juhasz, Th. Henning, V. Roccatagliata, W. A. Lawson, B. Acke, E. D. Feigelson
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.701:1188-1203,2009
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/701/2/1188
ABS    : We present IRS spectra and revised MIPS photometry for the 18 members of the Eta Chamaeleontis cluster. Aged 8 Myr, the Eta Cha cluster is one of the few nearby regions within the 5-10 Myr age range, during which the disk fraction decreases dramatically and giant planet formation must come to an end. For the 15 low-mass members, we measure a disk fraction ~50%, high for their 8 Myr age, and 4 of the 8 disks lack near-IR excesses, consistent with the empirical definition of "transition'' disks. Most of the disks are comparable to geometrically flat disks. The comparison with regions of different ages suggests that at least some of the "transition" disks may represent the normal type of disk around low-mass stars. Therefore, their flattened structure and inner holes may be related to other factors (initial masses of the disk and the star, environment, binarity), rather than to pure time evolution. We analyze the silicate dust in the disk atmosphere, finding moderate crystalline fractions (~10-30%) and typical grain sizes ~1-3 micron, without any characteristic trend in the composition. These results are common to other regions of different ages, suggesting that the initial grain processing occurs very early in the disk lifetime (&lt;1 Myr). Large grain sizes in the disk atmosphere cannot be used as a proxy for age, but are likely related to higher disk turbulence. The dust mineralogy varies between the 8-12micron and the 20-30 micron features, suggesting high temperature dust processing and little radial mixing. Finally, the analysis of IR and optical data on the B9 star Eta Cha reveals that it is probably surrounded by a young debris disk with a large inner hole, instead of being a classical Be star.

=== arXiv:0906.3307v1  [2009-06-17]
TITLE  : SPS: A software simulator for the Herschel-SPIRE photometer
AUTHORS: B. Sibthorpe, P. Chanial, M. Griffin
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/200911724
ABS    : Instrument simulators are becoming ever more useful for planning and analysing large astronomy survey data. In this paper we present a simulator for the Herschel-SPIRE photometer. We describe the models it uses and the form of the input and output data. The SPIRE photometer simulator is a software package which uses theoretical models, along with flight model test data, to perform numerical simulations of the output time-lines from the instrument in operation on board the Herschel space observatory. A description of the types of uses of the simulator are given, along with information on its past uses. These include example simulations performed in preparation for a high redshift galaxy survey, and a debris disc survey. These are presented as a demonstration of the sort of outputs the simulator is capable of producing.

=== arXiv:0906.1145v1  [2009-06-05]
TITLE  : The discovery of new warm debris disks around F-type stars
AUTHORS: A. Moór, D. Apai, I. Pascucci, P. Ábrahám, C. Grady, Th. Henning, A. Juhász, Cs. Kiss
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.700:L25-L29,2009
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/700/1/L25
ABS    : We report the discovery of four rare debris disks with warm excesses around F-stars, significantly increasing the number of such systems known in the solar neighborhood. Three of the disks are consistent with the predictions of steady state planetesimal disk evolution models. The oldest source, HD 169666, displays a dust fractional luminosity too high to be in steady state and we suggest that this system recently underwent a transient event of dust production. In addition, two spectra of this star separated by ~three years show silicate emission features, indicative of submicron- to micron-sized grains. We argue that such small grains would be rapidly depleted and their presence in both spectra suggests that the production of small dust is continuous over at least on few years timescale. We predict that systems showing variable mid-infrared spectra, if exist, will provide valuable help in distinguishing the possible scenarios proposed for dust replenishment.

=== arXiv:0905.2469v1  [2009-05-15]
TITLE  : IRS Characterization of a Debris Disk around an M-type star in NGC2547
AUTHORS: Paula S. Teixeira, Charles J. Lada, Kenneth Wood, Thomas P. Robitaille, Kevin L. Luhman
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.700:454-459,2009
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/700/1/454
ABS    : We present 5 to 15 micron Spitzer Infrared Spectrograph (IRS) low resolution spectral data of a candidate debris disk around an M4.5 star identified as a likely member of the ~40 Myr old cluster NGC2547. The IRS spectrum shows a silicate emission feature, indicating the presence of warm, small, (sub)micron-sized dust grains in the disk. Of the fifteen previously known candidate debris disks around M-type stars, the one we discuss in this paper is the first to have an observed mid-infrared spectrum and is also the first to have measured silicate emission. We combined the IRS data with ancillary data (optical, JHKs, and Spitzer InfraRed Array Camera and 24 micron data) to build the spectral energy distribution (SED) of the source. Monte Carlo radiation transfer modeling of the SED characterized the dust disk as being very flat (h100=2AU) and extending inward within at least 0.13AU of the central star. Our analysis shows that the disk is collisionally dominated and is likely a debris disk.

=== arXiv:0904.3958v1  [2009-04-27]
TITLE  : The transition from AGB to post-AGB evolution as observed by AKARI and Spitzer
AUTHORS: D. Engels, P. García-Lario, F. Bunzel, D. A. García-Hernández, J. V. Perea-Calderón
ABS    : The AKARI and Spitzer satellites provided an unique opportunity to observe a variety of stars, which are considered as departing from the Asymptotic Giant Branch (AGB) and have started their post-AGB evolution recently. Most of these stars are absent optically and are bright in the mid-IR wavelength range. Spectra of close to 200 objects have been obtained. For all of them the 1-60 micron spectral energy distribution has been constructed using photometric data from various surveys. We report here on the results of Spitzer observations of 88 IRAS selected post-AGB candidates and discuss them in comparison to the results of the AKARI observations of post-AGB candidates reported elsewhere in these proceedings. The dust compositions can be divided broadly in oxygen- and carbon-rich types, but a variety of intermediate types have been found. Among the oxygen-rich stars amorphous dust prevails, but a few sources show emission features from crystalline dust. The spectra from carbon-rich shells may be completely featureless, may show emission features from PAHs or a molecular absorption line from C2H2. We found also sources with a neon emission line at 12.8 micron. More than a third of all sources show a near-infrared excess at &lt; 5 micron and almost all of them show evidence of C-rich dust in their shells. We postulate that the emerging post-AGB wind after the end of AGB evolution contains always carbon-rich dust irrespective of the chemistry of the former AGB star.

=== arXiv:0904.3788v1  [2009-04-24]
TITLE  : Calibration and Performance of the AKARI Far-Infrared Surveyor (FIS) -- Slow-Scan Observation Mode for Point Sources
AUTHORS: Mai Shirahata, Shuji Matsuura, Sunao Hasegawa, Takafumi Ootsubo, Sin'itirou Makiuti, Issei Yamamura, Takao Nakagawa, Mitsunobu Kawada
DOI    : 10.1093/pasj/61.4.737
ABS    : We present the characterization and calibration of the Slow-Scan observation mode of the Far-Infrared Surveyor (FIS) onboard the AKARI satellite. The FIS, one of the two focal-plane instruments on AKARI, has four photometric bands between 50--180 um with two types of Ge:Ga array detectors. In addition to the All-Sky Survey, FIS has also taken detailed far-infrared images of selected targets by using the Slow-Scan mode. The sensitivity of the Slow-Scan mode is one to two orders of magnitude better than that of the All-Sky Survey, because the exposure time on a targeted source is much longer. The point spread functions (PSFs) were obtained by observing several bright point-like objects such as asteroids, stars, and galaxies. The derived full widths at the half maximum (FWHMs) are ~30'' for the two shorter wavelength bands and ~40'' for the two longer wavelength bands, being consistent with those expected by the optical simulation, although a certain amount of excess is seen in the tails of the PSFs. The flux calibration has been performed by the observations of well-established photometric calibration standards (asteroids and stars) in a wide range of fluxes. After establishing the method of aperture photometry, the photometric accuracy for point-sources is better than +-15% in all of the bands expect for the longest wavelength.

=== arXiv:0903.3219v2  [2009-03-18]
TITLE  : PHL 5038: A spatially resolved white dwarf + brown dwarf binary
AUTHORS: P. R. Steele, M. R. Burleigh, J. Farihi, B. T. Gaensicke, R. F. Jameson, P. D. Dobbie, M. A. Barstow
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/200911694
ABS    : A near-infrared excess is detected at the white dwarf PHL5038 in UKIDSS photometry, consistent with the presence of a cool, substellar companion. We have obtained H- and K-grism spectra and images of PHL5038 using NIRI on Gemini North. The target is spatially and spectrally resolved into two components; an 8000K DA white dwarf, and a likely L8 brown dwarf companion, separated by 0.94". The spectral type of the secondary was determined using standard spectral indices for late L and T dwarfs. The projected orbital separation of the binary is 55AU, and so it becomes only the second known wide WD+dL binary to be found after GD165AB. This object could potentially be used as a benchmark for testing substellar evolutionary models at intermediate to older ages.

=== arXiv:0903.1333v1  [2009-03-07]
TITLE  : Hot debris dust around HD 106797
AUTHORS: Hideaki Fujiwara, Takuya Yamashita, Daisuke Ishihara, Takashi Onaka, Hirokazu Kataza, Takafumi Ootsubo, Misato Fukagawa, Jonathan P. Marshall
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/695/1/L88
ABS    : Photometry of the A0 V main-sequence star HD 106797 with AKARI and Gemini/T-ReCS is used to detect excess emission over the expected stellar photospheric emission between 10 and 20 micron, which is best attributed to hot circumstellar debris dust surrounding the star. The temperature of the debris dust is derived as Td ~ 190 K by assuming that the excess emission is approximated by a single temperature blackbody. The derived temperature suggests that the inner radius of the debris disk is ~ 14 AU. The fractional luminosity of the debris disk is 1000 times brighter than that of our own zodiacal cloud. The existence of such a large amount of hot dust around HD 106797 cannot be accounted for by a simple model of the steady state evolution of a debris disk due to collisions, and it is likely that transient events play a significant role. Our data also show a narrow spectral feature between 11 and 12 micron attributable to crystalline silicates, suggesting that dust heating has occurred during the formation and evolution of the debris disk of HD 106797.

=== arXiv:0902.0338v1  [2009-02-02]
TITLE  : Long-wavelength observations of debris discs around sun-like stars
AUTHORS: V. Roccatagliata, Th. Henning, S. Wolf, J. Rodmann, S. Corder, J. M. Carpenter, M. Meyer, D. Dowell
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361/200811018
ABS    : [Abridged] We present two deep surveys of circumstellar discs around solar-type stars at different ages carried out at 350 micron with the CSO and at 1.2 mm with the IRAM 30-m telescope. The aim of this study is to understand the evolution timescale of circumstellar debris discs, and the physical mechanisms responsible for such evolution around solar-type stars. In addition, we perform a detailed characterisation of the detected debris discs. Theoretically, the mass of the disc is expected to decrease with time. In order to test this hypothesis, we performed the generalised Kendall's tau correlation and three different two-sample tests. A characterisation of the detected debris discs has been obtained by computing the collision and Poynting-Robertson timescales and by modelling the spectral energy distribution. The Kendall's tau correlation yields a probability of 76% that the mass of debris discs and their age are correlated. Similarly, the three two-sample tests give a probability between 70 and 83% that younger and older debris systems belong to different parent populations in terms of dust mass. We detected submillimetre/millimetre emission from six debris discs, enabling a detailed SED modelling. Our results on the correlation and evolution of dust mass as a function of age are conditioned by the sensitivity limit of our survey. Deeper millimetre observations are needed to confirm the evolution of debris material around solar-like stars. In the case of the detected discs, the comparison between collision and Poynting-Robertson timescales supports the hypothesis that these discs are collision dominated. All detected debris disc systems show the inner part evacuated from small micron-sized grains.

=== arXiv:0812.2198v1  [2008-12-11]
TITLE  : Infrared Emission by Dust Around lambda Bootis Stars: Debris Disks or Thermally Emitting Nebulae?
AUTHORS: J. R. Martínez-Galarza, I. Kamp, K. Y. L. Su, A. Gáspár, G. Rieke, E. E. Mamajek
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.694:165-173,2009
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/694/1/165
ABS    : We present a model that describes stellar infrared excesses due to heating of the interstellar (IS) dust by a hot star passing through a diffuse IS cloud. This model is applied to six lambda Bootis stars with infrared excesses. Plausible values for the IS medium (ISM) density and relative velocity between the cloud and the star yield fits to the excess emission. This result is consistent with the diffusion/accretion hypothesis that lambda Bootis stars (A- to F-type stars with large underabundances of Fe-peak elements) owe their characteristics to interactions with the ISM. This proposal invokes radiation pressure from the star to repel the IS dust and excavate a paraboloidal dust cavity in the IS cloud, while the metal-poor gas is accreted onto the stellar photosphere. However, the measurements of the infrared excesses can also be fit by planetary debris disk models. A more detailed consideration of the conditions to produce lambda Bootis characteristics indicates that the majority of infrared-excess stars within the Local Bubble probably have debris disks. Nevertheless, more distant stars may often have excesses due to heating of interstellar material such as in our model.

=== arXiv:0812.1262v1  [2008-12-06]
TITLE  : Stellar Age Estimation from ~3 Myr to ~3 Gyr
AUTHORS: Lynne Hillenbrand, Eric Mamajek, John Stauffer, David Soderblom, John Carpenter, Michael Meyer
DOI    : 10.1063/1.3099237
ABS    : We present recent progress on quantitative estimation of stellar ages using ind icators such as theoretical evolutionary tracks, rotation, rotation-driven chrom ospheric and coronal activity, and lithium depletion. Our focus is on roughly so lar-mass and solar-metallicity stars younger than the Sun. We attempt to charac terize the systematic and random error sources and then derive "best" ages alo ng with the dispersion in age arising among the various age estimation methods. Our main application of these techniques is to the evolution of debris disks.

=== arXiv:0811.2005v1  [2008-11-13]
TITLE  : Digital Access to a Sky Century at Harvard. II: Initial Photometry and Astrometry
AUTHORS: S. Laycock, S. Tang, J. Grindlay, E. Los, R. Simcoe, D. Mink
ABS    : Digital Access to a Sky Century @ Harvard (DASCH) is a project to digitize the collection of ~500,000 glass photographic plates held at Harvard College Observatory. The collection spans the time period from 1880 to 1985, during which time every point on the sky has been observed approximately 500 to 1000 times. In this paper we describe the results of the DASCH commissioning run, during which we developed the data-reduction pipeline and fine-tuned the digitzer's performance and operation. This initial run consisted of 500 plates taken from a variety of different plate-series, all containing the open cluster Praeseppe (M44). We report that accurate photometry at the 0.1mag level is possible on the majority of plates, and demonstrate century-long light-curves of various types of variable stars in and around M44.

=== arXiv:0810.3276v1  [2008-10-18]
TITLE  : The Dust cloud around the White Dwarf G 29-38. 2. Spectrum from 5-40 microns and mid-infrared variability
AUTHORS: William T. Reach, Carey Lisse, Ted von Hippel, Fergal Mullally
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.693:697-712,2009
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-637X/693/1/697
ABS    : We model the mineralogy and distribution of dust around the white dwarf G29-39 using the infrared spectrum from 1-35 microns and combining a wide range of materials based on spectral studies of comets and debris disks. In order of their contribution to the mid-infrared emission, the most abundant minerals for G29-38 are amorphous carbon, amorphous and crystalline silicates, water ice, and metal sulfides. The amorphous C can be equivalently replaced by other materials (like metallic Fe) with featureless infrared spectra. The best-fitting crystalline silicate is Fe-rich pyroxene. In order to absorb enough starlight to power the observed emission, the disk must either be much thinner than the stellar radius (so that it can be heated from above and below) or it must have an opening angle wider than 2 degrees. A `moderately optically thick' torus model with mass 2x10^19 g fits the spectrum well. A physically thin (less than the white dwarf radius) and optically thick disk can contribute to the near-infrared continuum only; such a disk cannot explain the longer-wavelength continuum or strong silicate features. The silicate composition contains minerals found from cometary spectra and meteorites, but Fe-rich pyroxene is more abundant than enstatite (Mg-rich pyroxene) or forsterite (Mg-rich olivine) in G29-38, in contrast to what is found in most comet or meteorite mineralogies. Enstatite meteorites may be the most similar solar system materials to the G29-38 dust. Finally, we suggest the surviving core of a `hot jupiter' as an alternative (neither cometary nor asteroidal) origin for the debris, though further theoretical work is needed to determine if this hypothesis is viable.

=== arXiv:0810.2843v1  [2008-10-16]
TITLE  : The calculation of the equation of state of QCD at finite chemical potential and zero temperature
AUTHORS: Hong-shi Zong, Wei-min Sun
JOURNAL: Phys.Rev.D78:054001,2008
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevD.78.054001
ABS    : In this paper, we give a direct method for calculating the partition function, and hence the equation of state (EOS) of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) at finite chemical potential and zero temperature. In the EOS derived in this paper the pressure density is the sum of two terms: the first term ${\cal P}(μ)|_{μ=0}$ (the pressure density at $μ=0$) is a $μ$-independent constant; the second term, which is totally determined by $G_R[μ](p)$ (the renormalized dressed quark propagator at finite $μ$), contains all the nontrivial $μ$-dependence. By applying a general result in the rainbow-ladder approximation of the Dyson-Schwinger approach obtained in our previous study [Phys. Rev. {\bf C 71}, 015205 (2005)], $G_R[μ](p)$ is calculated from the meromorphic quark propagator proposed in [Phys. Rev. {\bf D 70}, 014014 (2004)]. From this the full analytic expression of the EOS of QCD at finite $μ$ and zero $T$ is obtained (apart from the constant term ${\cal P}(μ)|_{μ=0}$ which can in principle be calculated from the CJT effective action). A comparison between our EOS and the cold, perturbative EOS of QCD of Fraga, Pisarski and Schaffner-Bielich is made. It is expected that our EOS can provide a possible new approach for the study of neutron stars.

=== arXiv:0809.2600v1  [2008-09-15]
TITLE  : SDSSJ084539.17+225728.0: the first DBZ white dwarf with a metal-rich gaseous debris disc
AUTHORS: B. T. Gaensicke, D. Koester, T. R. Marsh, A. Rebassa-Mansergas, J. Southworth
JOURNAL: MNRAS 391, L103-L107 (2008)
DOI    : 10.1111/j.1745-3933.2008.00565.x
ABS    : We report the discovery of a third white dwarf hosting a gaseous debris disc, SDSSJ084539.17+225728.0. The typical double-peaked CaII 8498,8542,8662A emission lines can be modelled in terms of a Keplerian gas disc with a radial extent from ~0.5Rsun to ~1.0. The effective temperature of SDSS0845+2257, Teff=18600+-500K, is comparable to the two other white dwarfs with gaseous discs, SDSS1043+0855 and SDSS1228+1040, and hence substantially hotter than the bulk of white dwarfs where dusty debris discs were identified through the presence of infrared excess flux. This may suggest that the conditions to produce emission lines from debris discs in the optical wavelength range are only met for a relatively narrow range in Teff. The observed asymmetry in the line profiles indicates a substantial eccentricity in the disc. Two spectra obtained four years apart reveal a significant change in the shapes and equivalent widths of the line profiles, implying that the circumstellar disc evolves on relatively short time scales. In contrast to SDSS1043+0855 and SDSS1228+1040, SDSS0845+2257 has a helium-dominated atmosphere. We detect photospheric absorption lines of He, Ca, Mg, and Si in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey spectrum, and hence classify SDSS0845+2257 as DBZ white dwarf. The abundances for the three metals determined from model atmosphere fits are Ca/He~1.3x10^-7, Mg/He~6.0x10^-6, and Si/He~8.0x10^-6. From the non-detection of Halpha we derive H/He&lt;3x10^-5, which implies that the hydrogen-to-metal abundance ratio of the circumstellar material is &gt;~1000 times lower than in the Sun. This lends strong support to the hypothesis that the gaseous and dusty debris discs found around roughly a dozen white dwarfs originate from the disruption of rocky planetary material.

=== arXiv:0808.4129v1  [2008-08-29]
TITLE  : On the Crystallinity of Silicate Dust in the Interstellar Medium
AUTHORS: M. P. Li, G. Zhao, Aigen Li
DOI    : 10.1111/j.1745-3933.2007.00382.x
ABS    : An accurate knowledge of the mineralogy (chemical composition and crystal structure) of the silicate dust in the interstellar medium (ISM) is crucial for understanding its origin in evolved stars, the physical and chemical processing in the ISM, and its subsequent incorporation into protostellar nebulae, protoplanetary disks and cometary nuclei where it is subjected to further processing. While an appreciable fraction of silicate dust in evolved stars, in protoplanetary disks around pre-main sequence stars, in debris disks around main sequence stars, and in cometary nuclei is found to be in crystalline form, very recent infrared spectroscopic studies of the dust along the sightline toward the Galactic center source Sgr A* placed an upper limit of ~1.1% on the silicate crystalline fraction, well below the previous estimates of ~5% or ~60% derived from the observed 10 micron absorption profile for the local ISM toward Cyg OB2 No.12. Since the sightline toward SgrA contains molecular cloud materials as revealed by the detection of the 3.1 and 6.0 micron water ice absorption features, we argue that by taking into account the presence of ice mantles on silicate cores, the upper limit on the degree of silicate crystallinity in the ISM is increased to ~3--5%.

=== arXiv:0808.3815v1  [2008-08-28]
TITLE  : NGC 2362: The Terminus of Star Formation
AUTHORS: S. E. Dahm
ABS    : NGC 2362 is a richly populated Galactic cluster, devoid of natal molecular gas and dust. The cluster represents the final product of the star forming process and hosts an unobscured and near-complete initial mass function. NGC 2362 is dominated by the O9 Ib multiple star, tau CMa, as well as several dozen unevolved B-type stars. Distributed throughout the cluster are several hundred suspected intermediate and low-mass pre-main sequence members. Various post-main sequence evolutionary models have been used to infer an age of 5 Myr for the one evolved member, tau CMa. These estimates are in close agreement with the ages derived by fitting pre-main sequence isochrones to the contracting, low-mass stellar population of the cluster. The extremely narrow sequence of stars, which extends more than 9 mag in the optical color-magnitude diagram, suggests that star formation within the cluster occurred rapidly and coevally across the full mass spectrum. Ground-based near infrared and H-alpha emission surveys of NGC 2362 concluded that most (~90%) of the low-mass members have already dissipated their optically-thick, inner(&lt; 1 AU) circumstellar disks. Spitzer IRAC observations of the cluster have confirmed these results, placing an upper limit on the primordial, optically thick disk fraction of the cluster at 7(+/-)2%. The presence of circumstellar disks among candidate members of NGC 2362 is also strongly mass-dependent, such that no stars more massive than 1.2 Msun exhibit significant infrared excess shortward of 8 microns. The well-defined upper main sequence of NGC 2362, its large population of low-mass stars, and the narrow age spread evident in the color-magnitude diagram ensure its role as a standard model of cluster as well as stellar evolution.

=== arXiv:0804.0237v3  [2008-04-01]
TITLE  : Spitzer IRAC Observations of White Dwarfs. II. Massive Planetary and Cold Brown Dwarf Companions to Young and Old Degenerates
AUTHORS: J. Farihi, E. E. Becklin, B. Zuckerman
DOI    : 10.1086/588726
ABS    : This paper presents a sensitive and comprehensive IRAC 3-8 $μ$m photometric survey of white dwarfs for companions in the planetary mass regime with temperatures cooler than the known T dwarfs. The search focuses on descendents of intermediate mass stars with $M\ga3$ $M_{\odot}$ whose inner, few hundred AU regions cannot be probed effectively for massive planets and brown dwarfs by any alternative existing method. Furthermore, examination for mid-infrared excess explores an extensive range of orbital semimajor axes, including the intermediate 5-50 AU range poorly covered and incompletely accessible by other techniques at main sequence or evolved stars. Three samples of white dwarfs are chosen which together represent relatively young as well as older populations of stars: 9 open cluster white dwarfs, 22 high mass field white dwarfs, and 17 metal-rich field white dwarfs. In particular, these targets include: 7 Hyads and 4 field white dwarfs of similar age; 1 Pleiad and 19 field white dwarfs of similar age; van Maanen 2 and 16 similarly metal-rich white dwarfs with ages between 1 and 7 Gyr. No substellar companion candidates were identified at any star. By demanding a 15% minimum photometric excess at 4.5 $μ$m to indicate a companion detection, upper limits in the planetary mass regime are established at 34 of the sample white dwarfs, 20 of which have limits below 10 $M_{\rm J}$ according to substellar cooling models. Specifically, limits below the minimum mass for deuterium burning are established at all Pleiades and Hyadeswhite dwarfs, as well as similarly young field white dwarfs, half a dozen of which receive limits at or below 5 $M_{\rm J}$. Two IRAC epochs at vMa 2 rule out $T\ga200$ K proper motion companions within 1200 AU.

=== arXiv:0803.1674v1  [2008-03-11]
TITLE  : Spitzer/MIPS Observations of Stars in the Beta Pictoris Moving Group
AUTHORS: L. M. Rebull, K. R. Stapelfeldt, M. W. Werner, V. G. Mannings, C. Chen, J. R. Stauffer, P. S. Smith, I. Song
DOI    : 10.1086/588182
ABS    : We present Multiband Imaging Photometer for Spitzer (MIPS) observations at 24 and 70 microns for 30 stars, and at 160 microns for a subset of 12 stars, in the nearby (~30 pc), young (~12 Myr) Beta Pictoris Moving Group (BPMG). In several cases, the new MIPS measurements resolve source confusion and background contamination issues in the IRAS data for this sample. We find that 7 members have 24 micron excesses, implying a debris disk fraction of 23%, and that at least 11 have 70 micron excesses (disk fraction of &gt;=37%). Five disks are detected at 160 microns (out of a biased sample of 12 stars observed), with a range of 160/70 flux ratios. The disk fraction at 24 and 70 microns, and the size of the excesses measured at each wavelength, are both consistent with an "inside-out" infrared excess decrease with time, wherein the shorter-wavelength excesses disappear before longer-wavelength excesses, and consistent with the overall decrease of infrared excess frequency with stellar age, as seen in Spitzer studies of other young stellar groups. Assuming that the infrared excesses are entirely due to circumstellar disks, we characterize the disk properties using simple models and fractional infrared luminosities. Optically thick disks, seen in the younger TW Hya and eta Cha associations, are entirely absent in the BPMG. Additional flux density measurements at 24 and 70 microns are reported for nine Tucanae-Horologium Association member stars. Since this is &lt;20% of the association membership, limited analysis on the complete disk fraction of this association is possible.

=== arXiv:0802.4075v1  [2008-02-27]
TITLE  : Pollution of single white dwarfs by accretion of many small asteroids
AUTHORS: M. Jura
DOI    : 10.1088/0004-6256/135/5/1785
ABS    : Extrapolating from the solar system's asteroid belt, we propose that externally-contaminated white dwarfs without an infrared excess may be experiencing continuous accretion of gas-phase material that ultimately is derived from the tidal destruction of multiple small asteroids. If this scenario is correct, then observations of metal-polluted white dwarfs may lead to determining the bulk elemental compositions of ensembles of extrasolar minor planets.

=== arXiv:0801.4759v2  [2008-01-30]
TITLE  : Optical afterglow luminosities in the Swift epoch: confirming clustering and bimodality
AUTHORS: M. Nardini, G. Ghisellini, G. Ghirlanda
DOI    : 10.1111/j.1745-3933.2008.00467.x
ABS    : We show that Gamma Ray Bursts (GRBs) of known redshift and rest frame optical extinction detected by the Swift satellite fully confirm earlier results concerning the distribution of the optical afterglow luminosity at 12 hours after trigger (rest frame time). This distribution is bimodal and relatively narrow, especially for the high luminosity branch. This is intriguing, given that Swift GRBs have, on average, a redshift larger than pre-Swift ones, and is unexpected in the common scenario explaining the GRB afterglow. We investigate if the observed distribution can be the result of selection effects affecting a unimodal parent luminosity distribution, and find that either the distribution is intrinsically bimodal, or most (60 per cent) of the bursts are absorbed by a substantial amount of grey dust. In both cases we suggest that most dark bursts should belong to the underluminous optical family.

=== arXiv:0710.4364v1  [2007-10-24]
TITLE  : Stellar Objects of Extragalactic Origin in the Galactic Halo
AUTHORS: V. A. Marsakov, T. V. Borkova
JOURNAL: Odessa Astron.Pub.20:134,2007
ABS    : We identified globular clusters and field stars of extragalactic origin and investigated their chemical, physical, and kinematical properties. This objects as supposed was captured by the Galaxy at different times from debris of the dwarf satellite galaxies disrupted by its tidal forces. The results are follows. (1) The majorities of metal-poor stellar objects in the Galaxy have an extragalactic origin. (2) The masses of the accreted globular clusters decrease with the removal from the center and the plane of the Galaxy. (3) The relative abundances of chemical elements in the accreted and genetically connected stars are essentially distinguished. (4) The accreted field stars demonstrate the decrease of the relative magnesium abundanses with an increase in sizes and inclinations of their orbits. (5) The stars of the Centaurus moving group were born from the matter, in which star formation rate was considerably lower than in the early Galaxy. On the base of these properties was made a conclusion that with the decrease of the masses of the dwarf galaxies in them simultaneously decrease the average masses of globular clusters and the maximum masses of supernova SNe II. Namely latter fact leads to the decrease of the relative abundances of α-elements in their metal-poor stars.

=== arXiv:0710.2892v1  [2007-10-15]
TITLE  : On the Diversity of the Taurus Transitional Disks: UX Tau A &amp; Lk Ca 15
AUTHORS: C. Espaillat, N. Calvet, P. D'Alessio, J. Hernandez, C. Qi, L. Hartmann, E. Furlan, D. M. Watson
DOI    : 10.1086/524360
ABS    : The recently recognized class of "transitional disk" systems consists of young starswith optically-thick outer disks but inner disks which are mostly devoid of small dust. Here we introduce a further class of "pre-transitional disks" with significant near-infrared excesses which indicate the presence of an optically thick inner disk separated from an optically thick outer disk; thus, the spectral energy distributions of pre-transitional disks suggest the incipient development of disk gaps rather than inner holes. In UX Tau A, our analysis of the Spitzer IRS spectrum finds that the near-infrared excess is produced by an inner optically thick disk and a gap of ~56 AU is present. The Spitzer IRS spectrum of LkCa 15 is suggestive of a gap of ~46 AU, confirming previous millimeter imaging. In addition, UX Tau A contains crystalline silicates in its disk at radii &gt;~ 56 AU which poses a challenge to our understanding of the production of this crystalline material. In contrast, LkCa 15's silicates are amorphous and pristine. UX Tau A and LkCa 15 increase our knowledge of the diversity of dust clearing in low-mass star formation.

=== arXiv:0709.2076v2  [2007-09-13]
TITLE  : The Stellar Content of Galaxy Halos: A Comparison between LambdaCDM Models and Observations of M31
AUTHORS: Andreea S. Font, Kathryn V. Johnston, Annette M. N. Ferguson, James S. Bullock, Brant E. Robertson, Jason Tumlinson, Puragra Guhathakurta
DOI    : 10.1086/524102
ABS    : Recent observations have revealed that high surface-brightness, metal-rich debris is present over large regions of the Andromeda (M31) stellar halo. We use a set of numerical models to determine whether extended metal-rich debris is expected to exist in galaxy halos formed in a hierarchical LambdaCDM universe. We identify tidal debris in the simulations according to the current best surface brightness detection limits in M31 and demonstrate that bright features in the outer halo regions usually originate from single satellites, with very little contamination from other sources due to the low probability of tidal streams from two overlapping accretion events. In contrast, high-surface brightness features in the inner halo often originate from multiple progenitors. We also compare the age and metallicity distribution of the debris with the well-mixed stellar halos in which they reside. We find that high-surface brightness tidal debris is produced almost exclusively by relatively high mass progenitors (Mstar ~ 10^7- 10^9 Msun) and thus is expected to be of moderate- to high-metallicity. Similarly, in our models the smooth inner halo is expected to be metal-rich as this region has been built up mainly from massive satellites. Our results imply that the stellar populations of substructure observed around external galaxies with current techniques should not resemble old and metal-poor dwarf spheroidal satellites, nor the underlying component of the stellar halo.

=== arXiv:0709.0912v1  [2007-09-06]
TITLE  : Spitzer observations of the Orion OB1 association: disk census in the low mass stars
AUTHORS: Jesus Hernandez, Nuria Calvet, C. Briceno, L. Hartmann, A. K. Vivas, J. Muzerolle, J. Downes, L. Allen
DOI    : 10.1086/522882
ABS    : We present new Spitzer Space Telescope observations of two fields in the Orion OB1 association. We report here IRAC/MIPS observations for 115 confirmed members and 41 photometric candidates of the ~10 Myr 25 Orionis aggregate in the OB1a subassociation, and 106 confirmed members and 65 photometric candidates of the 5 Myr region located in the OB1b subassociation. The 25 Orionis aggregate shows a disk frequency of 6% while the field in the OB1b subassociation shows a disk frequency of 13%. Combining IRAC, MIPS and 2MASS photometry we place stars bearing disks in several classes: stars with optically thick disks (class II systems), stars with an inner transitional disks (transitional disk candidates) and stars with "evolved disks"; the last exhibit smaller IRAC/MIPS excesses than class II systems. In all, we identify 1 transitional disk candidate in the 25 Orionis aggregate and 3 in the OB1b field; this represents ~10% of the disk bearing stars, indicating that the transitional disk phase can be relatively fast. We find that the frequency of disks is a function of the stellar mass, suggesting a maximum around stars with spectral type M0. Comparing the infrared excess in the IRAC bands among several stellar groups we find that inner disk emission decays with stellar age, showing a correlation with the respective disk frequencies. The disk emission at the IRAC and MIPS bands in several stellar groups indicates that disk dissipation takes place faster in the inner region of the disks. Comparison with models of irradiated accretion disks, computed with several degrees of settling, suggests that the decrease in the overall accretion rate observed in young stellar groups is not sufficient to explain the weak disk emission observed in the IRAC bands for disk bearing stars with ages 5 Myr or older.

=== arXiv:0709.0811v1  [2007-09-06]
TITLE  : Survival of icy grains in debris discs. The role of photosputtering
AUTHORS: Anna Grigorieva, Ph. Thebault, P. Artymowicz, A. Brandeker
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361:20077686
ABS    : We put theoretical constraints on the presence and survival of icy grains in debris discs. Particular attention is paid to UV sputtering of water ice, which has so far not been studied in detail in this context. We present a photosputtering model based on available experimental and theoretical studies. We quantitatively estimate the erosion rate of icy and ice-silicate grains, under the influence of both sublimation and photosputtering, as a function of grain size, composition and distance from the star. The effect of erosion on the grain's location is investigated through numerical simulations coupling the grain size to its dynamical evolution. Our model predicts that photodesorption efficiently destroy ice in optically thin discs, even far beyond the sublimation snow line. For the reference case of beta Pictoris, we find that only &gt; 5mm grains can keep their icy component for the age of the system in the 50-150AU region. When taking into account the collisional reprocessing of grains, we show that the water ice survival on grains improves (grains down to ~ 20 um might be partially icy). However, estimates of the amount of gas photosputtering would produce on such a hypothetical population of big icy grains lead to values for the OI column density that strongly exceed observational constraints for beta Pic, thus ruling out the presence of a significant amount of icy grains in this system. Erosion rates and icy grains survival timescales are also given for a set of 11 other debris disc systems. We show that, with the possible exception of M stars, photosputtering cannot be neglected in calculations of icy grain lifetimes.

=== arXiv:0708.3004v1  [2007-08-22]
TITLE  : The Far-Infrared Surveyor (FIS) for AKARI
AUTHORS: Mitsunobu Kawada, Hajime Baba, Peter D. Barthel, David Clements, Martin Cohen, Yasuo Doi, Elysandra Figueredo, Mikio Fujiwara
DOI    : 10.1093/pasj/59.sp2.S389
ABS    : The Far-Infrared Surveyor (FIS) is one of two focal plane instruments on the AKARI satellite. FIS has four photometric bands at 65, 90, 140, and 160 um, and uses two kinds of array detectors. The FIS arrays and optics are designed to sweep the sky with high spatial resolution and redundancy. The actual scan width is more than eight arcmin, and the pixel pitch is matches the diffraction limit of the telescope. Derived point spread functions (PSFs) from observations of asteroids are similar to the optical model. Significant excesses, however, are clearly seen around tails of the PSFs, whose contributions are about 30% of the total power. All FIS functions are operating well in orbit, and its performance meets the laboratory characterizations, except for the two longer wavelength bands, which are not performing as well as characterized. Furthermore, the FIS has a spectroscopic capability using a Fourier transform spectrometer (FTS). Because the FTS takes advantage of the optics and detectors of the photometer, it can simultaneously make a spectral map. This paper summarizes the in-flight technical and operational performance of the FIS.

=== arXiv:0707.2733v1  [2007-07-18]
TITLE  : Origin of the Metallicity Dependence of Exoplanet Host Stars in the Protoplanetary Disk Mass Distribution
AUTHORS: M. C. Wyatt, C. J. Clarke, J. S. Greaves
ABS    : The probability of a star hosting a planet that is detectable in radial velocity surveys increases Ppl(Z) oc 10^2Z, where Z is metallicity. Core accretion models reproduce this trend, since the protoplanetary disk of a high metallicity star has a high density of solids and so forms cores which accrete gas before the primordial gas disk dissipates. This paper considers the origin of the form of Ppl(Z). We introduce a simple model in which detectable planets form when the mass of solids in the protoplanetary disk, Ms, exceeds a critical value. In this model the form of Ppl(Z) is a direct reflection of the distribution of protoplanetary disk masses, Mg, and the observed Ppl(Z) is reproduced if P(Mg&gt;Mg') oc 1/Mg'^2. We argue that a protoplanetary disk's sub-mm dust mass is a pristine indicator of the mass available for planet-building and find the observed sub-mm disk mass distribution is consistent with the observed Ppl(Z) if Ms&gt;0.5M_J is required to form detectable planets. Any planet formation model which imposes a critical solid mass for planet formation would reproduce the observed Ppl(Z), and core accretion models are empirically consistent with a threshold criterion. We identify 7 protoplanetary disks which, by rigid application of this criterion, would be expected to form detectable planets. A testable prediction is that Ppl(Z) should flatten both for Z&gt;0.5dex and as more distant and lower mass planets are discovered. Further, combining this model with one in which the evolution of a star's debris disk is also influenced by the solid mass in its protoplanetary disk, results in the prediction that debris disks detected around stars with planets should be more infrared luminous than those around stars without planets in tentative agreement with recent observations.

=== arXiv:0707.0066v2  [2007-06-30]
TITLE  : First detection of galaxy-galaxy-galaxy lensing in RCS. A new tool for studying the matter environment of galaxy pairs
AUTHORS: P. Simon, P. Watts, P. Schneider, H. Hoekstra, M. D. Gladders, H. K. C. Yee, B. C. Hsieh, H. Lin
JOURNAL: Astron.Astrophys.479:655-667,2008
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361:20078197
ABS    : The weak gravitational lensing effect, small coherent distortions of galaxy images by means of a gravitational tidal field, can be used to study the relation between the matter and galaxy distribution. In this context, weak lensing has so far only been used for considering a second-order correlation function that relates the matter density and galaxy number density as a function of separation. We implement two new, third-order correlation functions that have recently been suggested in the literature, and apply them to the Red-Sequence Cluster Survey. We demonstrate that it is possible, even with already existing data, to make significant measurements of third-order lensing correlations. We develop an optimised computer code for the correlation functions. To test its reliability a set of tests are performed. The correlation functions are transformed to aperture statistics, which allow easy tests for remaining systematics in the data. In order to further verify the robustness of our measurement, the signal is shown to vanish when randomising the source ellipticities. Finally, the lensing signal is compared to crude predictions based on the halo-model. On angular scales between roughly 1 arcmin and 11 arcmin a significant third-order correlation between two lens positions and one source ellipticity is found. We discuss this correlation function as a novel tool to study the average matter environment of pairs of galaxies. Correlating two source ellipticities and one lens position yields a less significant but nevertheless detectable signal on a scale of 4 arcmin. Both signals lie roughly within the range expected by theory which supports their cosmological origin.[ABRIDGED]

=== arXiv:0705.3023v1  [2007-05-21]
TITLE  : The Dust and Gas Around beta Pictoris
AUTHORS: C. H. Chen, A. Li, C. Bohac, K. H. Kim, D. M. Watson, J. van Cleve, J. Houck, K. Stapelfeldt
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.666:466-474,2007
DOI    : 10.1086/519989
ABS    : We have obtained Spitzer IRS 5.5 - 35 micron spectroscopy of the debris disk around beta Pictoris. In addition to the 10 micron silicate emission feature originally observed from the ground, we also detect the crystalline silicate emission bands at 28 micron and 33.5 micron. This is the first time that the silicate bands at wavelengths longer than 10 micron have ever been seen in the beta Pictoris disk. The observed dust emission is well reproduced by a dust model consisting of fluffy cometary and crystalline olivine aggregates. We searched for line emission from molecular hydrogen and atomic [S I], Fe II, and Si II gas but detected none. We place a 3 sigma upper limit of &lt;17 Earth masses on the H2 S(1) gas mass, assuming an excitation temperature of Tex = 100 K. This suggests that there is less gas in this system than is required to form the envelope of Jupiter. We hypothesize that some of the atomic Na I gas observed in Keplerian rotation around beta Pictoris may be produced by photon-stimulated desorption from circumstellar dust grains.

=== arXiv:0705.0380v1  [2007-05-02]
TITLE  : HD 98800: A 10-Myr-Old Transition Disk
AUTHORS: E. Furlan, B. Sargent, N. Calvet, W. J. Forrest, P. D'Alessio, L. Hartmann, D. M. Watson, J. D. Green
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.664:1176-1184,2007
DOI    : 10.1086/519301
ABS    : We present the mid-infrared spectrum, obtained with the Spitzer Infrared Spectrograph (IRS), of HD 98800, a quadruple star system located in the 10-Myr-old TW Hydrae association. It has a known mid-infrared excess that arises from a circumbinary disk around the B components of the system. The IRS spectrum confirms that the disk around HD 98800 B displays no excess emission below about 5.5 micron, implying an optically thick disk wall at 5.9 AU and an inner, cleared-out region; however, some optically thin dust, consisting mainly of 3-micron-sized silicate dust grains, orbits the binary in a ring between 1.5 and 2 AU. The peculiar structure and apparent lack of gas in the HD 98800 B disk suggests that this system is likely already at the debris disks stage, with a tidally truncated circumbinary disk of larger dust particles and an inner, second-generation dust ring, possibly held up by the resonances of a planet. The unusually large infrared excess can be explained by gravitational perturbations of the Aa+Ab pair puffing up the outer dust ring and causing frequent collisions among the larger particles.

=== arXiv:0704.3294v1  [2007-04-25]
TITLE  : AGN Variability Surveys: DASCH from BATSS to EXIST
AUTHORS: Jonathan E. Grindlay
ABS    : Active galactic nuclei (AGN) are variable on a wide range of timescales, though relatively few systematic variability surveys have been conducted. Previous broad-band (both spectral and temporal) variability surveys of AGN are limited in their temporal and spectral bandwidth, despite their promise for probing the central engine and black hole mass. We outline optimal properties for variability studies and provide a brief summary of three new variability surveys, two (BATSS and DASCH) about to begin and the third (EXIST) possible within the next decade, which will open new windows on the physics and fundamental properties of AGN.

=== arXiv:0704.1170v1  [2007-04-10]
TITLE  : Externally-polluted white dwarfs with dust disks
AUTHORS: M. Jura, J. Farihi, B. Zuckerman
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.663:1285-1290,2007
DOI    : 10.1086/518767
ABS    : We report Spitzer Space Telescope photometry of eleven externally-polluted white dwarfs. Of the nine stars for which we have IRAC photometry, we find that GD 40, GD 133 and PG 1015+161 each has an infrared excess that can be understood as arising from a flat, opaque, dusty disk. GD 56 also has an infrared excess characteristic of circumstellar dust, but a flat-disk model cannot reproduce the data unless there are grains as warm as 1700 K and perhaps not even then. Our data support the previous suggestion that the metals in the atmosphere of GD 40 are the result of accretion of a tidally-disrupted asteroid with a chondritic composition.

=== arXiv:0703538v2  [2007-03-20]
TITLE  : The Troublesome Broadband Evolution of GRB 061126: Does a Grey Burst Imply Grey Dust?
AUTHORS: D. A. Perley, J. S. Bloom, N. R. Butler, L. K. Pollack, J. Holtzman, C. H. Blake, D. Kocevski, W. T. Vestrand
DOI    : 10.1086/523929
ABS    : We report on observations of a gamma-ray burst (GRB 061126) with an extremely bright (R ~ 12 mag at peak) early-time optical afterglow. The optical afterglow is already fading as a power law 22 seconds after the trigger, with no detectable prompt contribution in our first exposure, which was coincident with a large prompt-emission gamma-ray pulse. The optical--infrared photometric spectral energy distribution is an excellent fit to a power law, but it exhibits a moderate red-to-blue evolution in the spectral index at about 500 s after the burst. This color change is contemporaneous with a switch from a relatively fast decay to slower decay. The rapidly decaying early afterglow is broadly consistent with synchrotron emission from a reverse shock, but a bright forward-shock component predicted by the intermediate- to late-time X-ray observations under the assumptions of standard afterglow models is not observed. Indeed, despite its remarkable early-time brightness, this burst would qualify as a dark burst at later times on the basis of its nearly flat optical-to-X-ray spectral index. Our photometric spectral energy distribution provides no evidence of host-galaxy extinction, requiring either large quantities of grey dust in the host system (at redshift 1.1588 +/- 0.0006, based upon our late-time Keck spectroscopy) or separate physical origins for the X-ray and optical afterglows.

=== arXiv:0703473v1  [2007-03-18]
TITLE  : The New Class of Dusty DAZ White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: Ted von Hippel, Marc J. Kuchner, Mukremin Kilic, Fergal Mullally, William T. Reach
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.662:544-551,2007
DOI    : 10.1086/518108
ABS    : Our mid-infrared survey of 124 white dwarfs with the Spitzer Space Telescope and the IRAC imager has revealed an infrared excess associated with the white dwarf WD 2115-560 naturally explained by circumstellar dust. This object is the fourth white dwarf observed to have circumstellar dust. All four are DAZ white dwarfs, i.e. they have both photospheric Balmer lines and photospheric metal lines. We discuss these four objects as a class, which we abbreviate "DAZd", where the "d" stands for "dust". Using an optically-thick, geometrically-thin disk model analogous to Saturn's rings, we find that the inner disk edges are at &gt;~0.1 to 0.2 Ro and that the outer disk edges are ~0.3 to 0.6 Ro. This model naturally explains the accretion rates and lifetimes of the detected WD disks and the accretion rates inferred from photospheric metal abundances.

=== arXiv:0703383v1  [2007-03-15]
TITLE  : Extra-Solar Kuiper Belt Dust Disks
AUTHORS: Amaya Moro-Martin, Mark C. Wyatt, Renu Malhotra, David E. Trilling
ABS    : The dust disks observed around mature stars are evidence that plantesimals are present in these systems on spatial scales that are similar to that of the asteroids and the KBOs in the Solar System. These dust disks (a.k.a. ``debris disks'') present a wide range of sizes, morphologies and properties. It is inferred that their dust mass declines with time as the dust-producing planetesimals get depleted, and that this decline can be punctuated by large spikes that are produced as a result of individual collisional events. The lack of solid state features indicate that, generally, the dust in these disks have sizes larger than approximately 10 microns, but exceptionally, strong silicate features in some disks suggest the presence of large quantities of small grains, thought to be the result of recent collisions. Spatially resolved observations of debris disks show a diversity of structural features, such as inner cavities, warps, offsets, brightness asymmetries, spirals, rings and clumps. There is growing evidence that, in some cases, these structures are the result of the dynamical perturbations of a massive planet. Our Solar System also harbors a debris disk and some of its properties resemble those of extra-solar debris disks. From the cratering record, we can infer that its dust mass has decayed with time, and that there was at least one major ``spike'' in the past during the Late Heavy Bombardment. This offers a unique opportunity to use extra-solar debris disks to shed some light in how the Solar System might have looked in the past. Similarly, our knowledge of the Solar System is influencing our understanding of the types of processes which might be at play in the extra-solar debris disks.

=== arXiv:0702448v1  [2007-02-16]
TITLE  : The Extended Star Formation History of the Andromeda Spheroid at Twenty One Kiloparsecs on the Minor Axis
AUTHORS: Thomas M. Brown, Ed Smith, Henry C. Ferguson, Puragra Guhathakurta, Jasonjot S. Kalirai, R. Michael Rich, Alvio Renzini, Allen V. Sweigart
DOI    : 10.1086/515395
ABS    : Using the HST ACS, we have obtained deep optical images of a southeast minor-axis field in the Andromeda Galaxy, 21 kpc from the nucleus. In both star counts and metallicity, this field represents a transition zone between the metal-rich, highly-disturbed inner spheroid that dominates within 15 kpc and the metal-poor, diffuse population that dominates beyond 30 kpc. The color-magnitude diagram reaches well below the oldest main-sequence turnoff in the population, allowing a reconstruction of the star formation history in this field. Compared to the spheroid population at 11 kpc, the population at 21 kpc is ~1.3 Gyr older and ~0.2 dex more metal-poor, on average. However, like the population at 11 kpc, the population at 21 kpc exhibits an extended star formation history; one third of the stars are younger than 10 Gyr, although only a few percent are younger than 8 Gyr. The relatively wide range of metallicity and age is inconsistent with a single, rapid star-formation episode, and instead suggests that the spheroid even at 21 kpc is dominated by the debris of earlier merging events likely occurring more than 8 Gyr ago.

=== arXiv:0701591v1  [2007-01-20]
TITLE  : Swift GRBs: the early afterglow spectral energy distribution
AUTHORS: G. Tagliaferri, D. Malesani, S. D. Vergani, S. Campana, G. Chincarini, S. Covino, C. Guidorzi, A. Moretti
JOURNAL: Nuovo Cim.B121:1163-1170,2006
DOI    : 10.1393/ncb/i2007-10235-8
ABS    : We present the first results of a program to systematically study the optical-to-X-ray spectral energy distribution (SED) of Swift GRB afterglows with known redshift. The goal is to study the properties of the GRB explosion and of the intervening absorbing material. In this report we present the preliminary analysis on 23 afterglows. Thanks to Swift, we could build the SED at early times after the GRB (minutes to hours). We derived the Hydrogen column densities and the spectral slopes from the X-ray spectrum. We then constrained the visual extinction by requiring that the combined optical/X-ray SED is due to synchrotron, namely either a single power law or a broken power law with a slope change by 0.5. We confirm a low dust-to-metal ratio, smaller than in the SMC, even from the analysis of data taken significantly earlier than previously possible. Our analysis does not support the existence of ``grey'' dust. We also find that the synchrotron spectrum works remarkably well to explain afterglow SEDs. We clearly see, however, that during the X-ray steep decay phases and the flares, the X-ray radiation cannot be due only to afterglow emission.

=== arXiv:0701549v1  [2007-01-18]
TITLE  : A Dusty Disk Around WD1150-153: Explaining the Metals in White Dwarfs by Accretion from the Interstellar Medium versus Debris Disks
AUTHORS: Mukremin Kilic, Seth Redfield
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.660:641-650,2007
DOI    : 10.1086/513008
ABS    : We report the discovery of excess K-band radiation from a metal-rich DAV white dwarf star, WD1150-153. Our near infrared spectroscopic observations show that the excess radiation cannot be explained by a (sub)stellar companion, and is likely to be caused by a debris disk similar to the other DAZ white dwarfs with circumstellar debris disks. We find that the fraction of DAZ white dwarfs with detectable debris disks is at least 14%. We also revisit the problem of explaining the metals in white dwarf photospheres by accretion from the interstellar medium (ISM). We use the observed interstellar column densities toward stars in close angular proximity and similar distance as DAZ white dwarfs to constrain the contribution of accretion from the ISM. We find no correlation between the accretion density required to supply metals observed in DAZs with the densities observed in their interstellar environment, indicating that ISM accretion alone cannot explain the presence of metals in nearby DAZ white dwarfs. Although ISM accretion will certainly contribute, our analysis indicates that it is not the dominant source of metals for most DAZ white dwarfs. Instead, the growing number of circumstellar debris disks around DAZs suggests that circumstellar material may play a more dominant role in polluting the white dwarf atmospheres.

=== arXiv:0701476v1  [2007-01-16]
TITLE  : Spitzer Space Telescope study of disks in the young $σ$ Orionis cluster
AUTHORS: Jesus Hernandez, L. Hartmann, T. Megeath, R. Gutermuth, J. Muzerolle, N. Calvet, A. K. Vivas, C. Briceno
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.662:1067-1081,2007
DOI    : 10.1086/513735
ABS    : We report new Spitzer Space Telescope observations from the IRAC and MIPS instruments of the young (~ 3 Myr) sigma Orionis cluster. We identify 336 stars as members of the cluster using optical and near-infrared color magnitude diagrams. Using the spectral energy distribution (SED) slopes in the IRAC spectral range, we place objects in several classes: non-excess stars, stars with optically thick disks(like classical T Tauri stars), class I (protostellar) candidates, and stars with ``evolved disks''; the last exhibit smaller IRAC excesses than optically thick disk systems. In general, this classification agrees with the location expected in IRAC-MIPS color-color diagrams for these objects. We find that the evolved disk systems are mostly a combination of objects with optically thick but non-flared disks, suggesting grain growth and/or settling, and transition disks, systems in which the inner disk is partially or fully cleared of small dust. In all, we identify 7 transition disk candidates and 3 possible debris disk systems. As in other young stellar populations, the fraction of disks depends on the stellar mass, ranging from ~10% for stars in the Herbig Ae/Be mass range (&gt;2 msun) to ~35% in the T Tauri mass range (1-0.1 msun). We find that the disk fraction does not decrease significantly toward the brown dwarf candidates (&lt;0.1 msun). The IRAC infrared excesses found in stellar clusters and associations with and without central high mass stars are similar, suggesting that external photoevaporation is not very important in many clusters. Finally, we find no correlation between the X-ray luminosity and the disk infrared excess, suggesting that the X-rays are not strongly affected by disk accretion.

=== arXiv:0701321v1  [2007-01-11]
TITLE  : Silicate Dust in Evolved Protoplanetary Disks: Growth, Sedimentation, and Accretion
AUTHORS: Aurora Sicilia-Aguilar, L. W. Hartmann, Dan Watson, Chris Bohac, Thomas Henning, Jeroen Bouwman
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.659:1637-1660,2007
DOI    : 10.1086/512121
ABS    : We present the Spitzer IRS spectra for 33 young stars in Tr 37 and NGC 7160. The sample includes the high- and intermediate-mass stars with MIPS 24 microns excess, the only known active accretor in the 12 Myr-old cluster NGC 7160, and 19 low-mass stars with disks in the 4 Myr-old cluster Tr 37. We examine the 10 microns silicate feature, present in the whole sample of low-mass star and in 3 of the high- and intermediate-mass targets, and we find that PAH emission is detectable only in the Herbig Be star. We analyze the composition and size of the warm photospheric silicate grains by fitting the 10 microns silicate feature, and study the possible correlations between the silicate characteristics and the stellar and disk properties (age, SED slope, accretion rate, spectral type). We find indications of dust settling with age and of the effect of turbulent enrichment of the disk atmosphere with large grains. Crystalline grains are only small contributors to the total silicate mass in all disks, and do not seem to correlate with any other property, except maybe binarity. We also observe that spectra with very weak silicate emission are at least 3 times more frequent among M stars than among earlier spectral types, which may be an evidence of inner disk evolution. Finally, we find that 5 of the high- and intermediate-mass stars have SEDs and IRS spectra consistent with debris disk models involving planet formation, which could indicate debris disk formation at ages as early as 4 Myr.

=== arXiv:0701259v2  [2007-01-09]
TITLE  : Redshift-distance relations from type Ia supernova observations. New constraints on grey dust models
AUTHORS: A. R. Robaina, J. Cepa
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361:20065292
ABS    : Extinction due to intergalactic grey dust has been proposed as an alternative to accelerated expansion to account for the dimming of \s fluxes beyond $z \simeq 0.5$. The ``replenishing'' grey dust model, although fitting the observational data, does not seem to be based on physical assumptions. For this reason, in this paper we propose a new grey dust model whose dust distribution follows the comoving SFR density evolution, a reasonably established phenomenon. This new model is compared with the updated photometric data sample from the High Z Supernova Search Team (HZT). Also, using pairs of supernovae at different redshifts, the possibility of any ``patchy'' distribution proposed to explain the discrepancies between the ``high $z$'' dust model and the \s observations at very high redshift ($z \ge 0.9$) is ruled out. Finally, the data are compared with different models with and without dark energy and a best fit to a universe with adimensional parameters $Ω_{\mathrm{m0}} = 0.31$ and $Ω_{\mathrm{Λ0}} = 0.69$ is obtained, from which an age of the universe of $t_{0} \simeq 14.6 \times 10^{9}$ years is derived. This age is compatible with the age of the globular clusters using an equation of state $ω= -1$ and it obviates the need to resort to any kind of phantom energy.

=== arXiv:0611906v1  [2006-11-29]
TITLE  : Near-Infrared Photometric Analyses of White Dwarf Stars
AUTHORS: P. -E. Tremblay, P. Bergeron
ABS    : We review the available near- and mid- infrared photometry data sets for white dwarfs from the Two Micron All-Sky Survey (2MASS) Point Source Catalog and the Spitzer Space Telescope. These data sets have been widely used to search for white dwarfs with an infrared excess as well as to characterize the atmosphere of cool white dwarfs. We evaluate the reliability of the 2MASS photometry by performing a statistical comparison with published JHK CIT magnitudes, and by carrying out a detailed model atmosphere analysis of the available photometry. We then present a critical examination of various results published in the literature including data from the Spitzer Space Telescope.

=== arXiv:0611899v1  [2006-11-29]
TITLE  : Infrared Photometric Analysis of White Dwarfs from The Two Micron All Sky Survey and the Spitzer Space Telescope
AUTHORS: P. -E. Tremblay, P. Bergeron
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.657:1013-1025,2007
DOI    : 10.1086/511330
ABS    : We review the available near- and mid-infrared photometry for white dwarfs obtained from the Two Micron All-Sky Survey (2MASS) and by the Spitzer Space Telescope. Both data sets have recently been used to seek white dwarfs with infrared excesses due to the presence of unresolved companions or circumstellar disks, and also to derive the atmospheric parameters of cool white dwarfs. We first attempt to evaluate the reliability of the 2MASS photometry by comparing it with an independent set of published JHK CIT magnitudes for 160 cool white dwarf stars, and also by comparing the data with the predictions of detailed model atmosphere calculations. The possibility of using 2MASS to identify unresolved M dwarf companions or circumstellar disks is then discussed. We also revisit the analysis of 46 binary candidates from Wachter et al. using the synthetic flux method and confirm the large near-infrared excesses in most objects. We perform a similar analysis by fitting Spitzer 4.5 and 8 micron photometric observations of white dwarfs with our grid of model atmospheres, and demonstrate the reliability of both the Spitzer data and the theoretical calculations up to 8 micron. Finally, we search for massive disks resulting from the merger of two white dwarfs in a 2MASS sample composed of 57 massive degenerates, and show that massive disks are uncommon in such stars.

=== arXiv:0611682v1  [2006-11-21]
TITLE  : New Debris Disks Around Nearby Main Sequence Stars: Impact on The Direct Detection of Planets
AUTHORS: C. Beichman, G. Bryden, K. Stapelfeldt
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.652:1674-1693,2006
DOI    : 10.1086/508449
ABS    : Using the MIPS instrument on the Spitzer telescope, we have searched for infrared excesses around a sample of 82 stars, mostly F, G, and K main-sequence field stars, along with a small number of nearby M stars. These stars were selected for their suitability for future observations by a variety of planet-finding techniques. These observations provide information on the asteroidal and cometary material orbiting these stars - data that can be correlated with any planets that may eventually be found. We have found significant excess 70um emission toward 12 stars. Combined with an earlier study, we find an overall 70um excess detection rate of $13 \pm 3$% for mature cool stars. Unlike the trend for planets to be found preferentially toward stars with high metallicity, the incidence of debris disks is uncorrelated with metallicity. By newly identifying 4 of these stars as having weak 24um excesses (fluxes $\sim$10% above the stellar photosphere), we confirm a trend found in earlier studies wherein a weak 24um excess is associated with a strong 70um excess. Interestingly, we find no evidence for debris disks around 23 stars cooler than K1, a result that is bolstered by a lack of excess around any of the 38 K1-M6 stars in 2 companion surveys. One motivation for this study is the fact that strong zodiacal emission can make it hard or impossible to detect planets directly with future observatories like the {\it Terrestrial Planet Finder (TPF)}. The observations reported here exclude a few stars with very high levels of emission, $&gt;$1,000 times the emission of our zodiacal cloud, from direct planet searches. For the remainder of the sample, we set relatively high limits on dust emission from asteroid belt counterparts.

=== arXiv:0610102v2  [2006-10-04]
TITLE  : Transience of hot dust around sun-like stars
AUTHORS: M. C. Wyatt, R. Smith, J. S. Greaves, C. A. Beichman, G. Bryden, C. M. Lisse
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.658:569-583,2007
DOI    : 10.1086/510999
ABS    : There is currently debate over whether the dust content of planetary systems is stochastically regenerated or originates in planetesimal belts evolving in steady state. In this paper a simple model for the steady state evolution of debris disks due to collisions is developed and confronted with the properties of the emerging population of 7 sun-like stars that have hot dust &lt;10AU. The model shows there is a maximum possible disk mass at a given age, since more massive primordial disks process their mass faster. The corresponding maximum dust luminosity is f_max=0.00016r^(7/3)/t_age. The majority (4/7) of the hot disks exceed this limit by &gt;1000 and so cannot be the products of massive asteroid belts, rather the following systems must be undergoing transient events characterized by an unusually high dust content near the star: eta Corvi, HD69830, HD72905 and BD+20307. It is also shown that the hot dust cannot originate in a recent collision in an asteroid belt, since there is also a maximum rate at which collisions of sufficient magnitude to reproduce a given dust luminosity can occur. Further it is shown that the planetesimal belt feeding the dust in these systems must be located further from the star than the dust, typically at &gt;2AU. Other notable properties of the 4 hot dust systems are: two also have a planetesimal belt at &gt;10AU (eta Corvi and HD72905); one has 3 Neptune mass planets at &lt;1AU (HD69830); all exhibit strong silicate features in the mid-IR. We consider the most likely origin for the dust in these systems to be a dynamical instability which scattered planetesimals inwards from a more distant planetesimal belt in an event akin to the Late Heavy Bombardment in our own system, the dust being released from such planetesimals in collisions and possibly also sublimation.

=== arXiv:0609555v4  [2006-09-19]
TITLE  : Characterization of Dusty Debris Disks: the IRAS and Hipparcos Catalogs
AUTHORS: Joseph H. Rhee, Inseok Song, B. Zuckerman, Michael McElwain
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.660:1556-1571,2007
DOI    : 10.1086/509912
ABS    : Dusty debris disks around main-sequence stars are signposts for the existence of planetesimals and exoplanets. From cross-correlating \hip stars with the \iras catalogs, we identify 146 stars within 120 pc of Earth that show excess emission at 60 $\micron$. This search took special precautions to avoid false positives. Our sample is reasonably well distributed from late B to early K-type stars, but it contains very few later type stars. Even though \iras flew more than 20 years ago and many astronomers have cross-correlated its catalogs with stellar catalogs, we were still able to newly identify debris disks at as many as 33 main-sequence stars; of these, 32 are within 100 pc of Earth. The power of an all-sky survey satellite like \iras is evident when comparing our 33 new debris disks with the total of only 22 dusty debris disk stars detected first with the more sensitive, but pointed, satellite \iso. Our investigation focuses on the mass, dimensions, and evolution of dusty debris disks.

=== arXiv:0609372v1  [2006-09-13]
TITLE  : Evidence for Mass-dependent Circumstellar Disk Evolution in the 5 Myr-old Upper Scorpius OB Association
AUTHORS: John M. Carpenter, Eric E. Mamajek, Lynne A. Hillenbrand, Michael R. Meyer
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.651:L49-L52,2006
DOI    : 10.1086/509121
ABS    : We present 4.5, 8, and 16um photometry from the Spitzer Space Telescope for 204 stars in the Upper Scorpius OB Association. The data are used to investigate the frequency and properties of circumstellar disks around stars with masses between ~ 0.1 and 20 Msun at an age of ~ 5 Myr. We identify 35 stars that have emission at 8um or 16um in excess of the stellar photosphere. The lower mass stars (~ 0.1-1.2 Msun) appear surrounded by primordial optically thick disks based on the excess emission characteristics. Stars more massive than ~ 1.8 Msun have lower fractional excess luminosities suggesting that the inner ~ 10 AU of the disk has been largely depleted of primordial material. None of the G and F stars (~ 1.2-1.8 Msun) in our sample have an infrared excess at wavelengths &lt;= 16um. These results indicate that the mechanisms for dispersing primordial optically thick disks operate less efficiently on average for low mass stars, and that longer time scales are available for the buildup of planetary systems in the terrestrial zone for stars with masses &lt; 1 Msun.

=== arXiv:0609233v1  [2006-09-08]
TITLE  : Mid-IR Observations of T Tauri stars: Probing the Star-Disk Connection in Rotational Evolution
AUTHORS: Praveen Kundurthy, Michael R. Meyer, Massimo Robberto, Steven V. W. Beckwith, Tom Herbst
JOURNAL: Astron.J.132:2469-2477,2006
DOI    : 10.1086/508607
ABS    : We present mid-IR N-band $(λ_{eff} = 10.2\micron)$ photometry of a carefully selected sample of T Tauri stars thought to be single from the Taurus-Auriga molecular cloud. Infrared excesses in these stars are generally attributed to circumstellar dust-disks. Combining observations at 2.16$\micron$ (K$_{s}$-band) and 10.2$\micron$ (N-band) we probe a region in the circumstellar dust-disk from a few stellar radii through the terrestrial planet zone (0.02-1.0AU). By analyzing the distribution of the $(K_{s}-N)$ color index with respect to previously measured photometric rotation periods we investigate what role circumstellar disks play in the rotational evolution of the central star. The resulting positive correlation between these two variables is consistent with the notion that a star-disk interaction facilitates the regulation of angular momentum during the T Tauri stage. We also demonstrate, how including non-single stars in such an analysis will \textit{weaken} any correlation in the relation between $(K_{s}-N)$ color and period. To further understand disk properties we also present SEDs for a few objects with new ground based M-band $(λ_{eff} = 4.8\micron)$ and Q-band $(λ_{eff} = 20\micron)$ data and compare them to a geometrically thin, optically-thick disk model.

=== arXiv:0608334v3  [2006-08-15]
TITLE  : Hypoconstrained Jammed Packings of Nonspherical Hard Particles: Ellipses and Ellipsoids
AUTHORS: A. Donev, R. Connelly, F. H. Stillinger, S. Torquato
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevE.75.051304
ABS    : Continuing on recent computational and experimental work on jammed packings of hard ellipsoids [Donev et al., Science, vol. 303, 990-993] we consider jamming in packings of smooth strictly convex nonspherical hard particles. We explain why the isocounting conjecture, which states that for large disordered jammed packings the average contact number per particle is twice the number of degrees of freedom per particle (\bar{Z}=2d_{f}), does not apply to nonspherical particles. We develop first- and second-order conditions for jamming, and demonstrate that packings of nonspherical particles can be jammed even though they are hypoconstrained (\bar{Z}&lt;2d_{f}). We apply an algorithm using these conditions to computer-generated hypoconstrained ellipsoid and ellipse packings and demonstrate that our algorithm does produce jammed packings, even close to the sphere point. We also consider packings that are nearly jammed and draw connections to packings of deformable (but stiff) particles. Finally, we consider the jamming conditions for nearly spherical particles and explain quantitatively the behavior we observe in the vicinity of the sphere point.

=== arXiv:0608132v2  [2006-08-11]
TITLE  : Morphology of the nonspherically decaying radiation beam generated by a rotating superluminal source
AUTHORS: Houshang Ardavan, Arzhang Ardavan, John Singleton, Joseph Fasel, Andrea Schmidt
DOI    : 10.1364/JOSAA.24.002443
ABS    : We consider the nonspherically decaying radiation field that is generated by a polarization current with a superluminally rotating distribution pattern in vacuum, a field that decays with the distance $\subP{R}$ from its source as $\subP{R}^{-1/2}$, instead of $\subP{R}^{-1}$. It is shown (i) that the nonspherical decay of this emission remains in force at all distances from its source independently of the frequency of the radiation, (ii) that the part of the source that makes the main contribution toward the value of the nonspherically decaying field has a filamentary structure whose radial and azimuthal widths become narrower (as $\subP{R}^{-2}$ and $\subP{R}^{-3}$, respectively), the farther the observer is from the source, (iii) that the loci on which the waves emanating from this filament interfere constructively delineate a radiation `subbeam' that is nondiffracting in the polar direction, (iv) that the cross-sectional area of each nondiffracting subbeam increases as $\subP{R}$, instead of $\subP{R}^2$, so that the requirements of conservation of energy are met by the nonspherically decaying radiation automatically, and (v) that the overall radiation beam within which the field decays nonspherically consists, in general, of the incoherent superposition of such coherent nondiffracting subbeams. These findings are related to the recent construction and use of superluminal sources in the laboratory and numerical models of the emission from them. We also briefly discuss the relevance of these results to the giant pulses received from pulsars.

=== arXiv:0607224v1  [2006-07-20]
TITLE  : Extraction of Spectral Functions from Dyson-Schwinger Studies via the Maximum Entropy Method
AUTHORS: Dominik Nickel
JOURNAL: AnnalsPhys.322:1949-1960,2007
DOI    : 10.1016/j.aop.2006.09.002
ABS    : It is shown how to apply the Maximum Entropy Method (MEM) to numerical Dyson-Schwinger studies for the extraction of spectral functions of correlators from their corresponding Euclidean propagators. Differences to the application in lattice QCD are emphasized and, as an example, the spectral functions of massless quarks in cold and dense matter are presented.

=== arXiv:0607173v1  [2006-07-10]
TITLE  : A long-period, violently-variable X-ray source in a young SNR
AUTHORS: A. De Luca, P. A. Caraveo, S. Mereghetti, A. Tiengo, G. F. Bignami
DOI    : 10.1126/science.1129185
ABS    : Observations with the Newton X-ray Multimirror Mission (XMM) show a strong periodic modulation at 6.67+/-0.03 hours of the X-ray source at the centre of the 2,000-year-old supernova remnant RCW 103. No fast pulsations are visible. If genetically tied to the supernova remnant, the source could either be an X-ray binary, comprising a compact object and a low-mass star in an eccentric orbit, or an isolated neutron star. In the latter case, its age-period combination would point to a peculiar magnetar, dramatically slowed-down, possibly by a supernova debris disc. Both scenarios require non-standard assumptions on the formation and evolution of compact objects in supernova explosions.

=== arXiv:0607152v1  [2006-07-07]
TITLE  : Spectroscopy of Young Planetary Mass Candidates with Disks
AUTHORS: Ray Jayawardhana, Valentin D. Ivanov
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.647:L167-L170,2006
DOI    : 10.1086/507522
ABS    : It is now well established that many young brown dwarfs exhibit characteristics similar to classical T Tauri stars, including infrared excess from disks and emission lines related to accretion. Whether the same holds true for even lower mass objects, namely those near and below the Deuterium-burning limit, is an important question. Here we present optical spectra of six isolated planetary mass candidates in Chamaeleon II, Lupus I and Ophiuchus star-forming regions, recently identified by Allers and collaborators to harbor substantial mid-infrared excesses. Our spectra, from ESO's Very Large Telescope and New Technology Telescope, show that four of the targets have spectral types in the ~M9-L1 range, and three of those also exhibit H_alpha. Their luminosities are consistent with masses of ~5-15 M_{Jupiter} according to models of Chabrier, Baraffe and co-workers, thus placing these four objects among the lowest mass brown dwarfs known to be surrounded by circum-sub-stellar disks. Our findings bolster the idea that free-floating planetary mass objects could have infancies remarkably similar to those of Sun-like stars and suggest the intriguing possibility of planet formation around primaries whose masses are comparable to those of extra-solar giant planets. Another target appears to be a brown dwarf (~M8) with prominent H_alpha emission, possibly arising from accretion. The sixth candidate is likely a background source, underlining the need for spectroscopic confirmation.

=== arXiv:0607151v1  [2006-07-07]
TITLE  : Detection of a Variable Infrared Excess Around SDSS 121209.31+013627.7
AUTHORS: J. H. Debes, M. Lopez-Morales, A. Z. Bonanos, A. J. Weinberger
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.647:L147-L150,2006
DOI    : 10.1086/507486
ABS    : We present near-infrared $JHK_s$ photometry and light curves of the candidate magnetic white dwarf+brown dwarf binary SDSS J121209.31+013627.7 and report on the detection of near-infrared excess and variability in the $K_s-$band. The observed near-infrared excess can be explained by the presence of an L7 brown dwarf and an extra emission source. The $J$ and $H$ light curves appear flat, which rules out eclipses deeper than 0.2 mag and the presence of an accretion hot spot on the white dwarf. From the variable $K_s$ lightcurve, we get a refined period for the system of 88$\pm$1 minutes. We show that the observed variability in $K_s-$band can be explained by cyclotron emission, which can be modeled by a small spot on the surface of the white dwarf. SDSS 1212 exhibits similarities to the ultra-short period polar EF Eridani, however the lack of evidence for Roche-lobe overflow accretion suggests it may be a pre-polar.

=== arXiv:0606102v2  [2006-06-06]
TITLE  : Macroengineering in the Galactic Context: A New Agenda for Astrobiology
AUTHORS: Milan M. Cirkovic
ABS    : We hereby consider the problem of detectability of macro-engineering projects over interstellar distances, in the context of Search for ExtraTerrestrial Intelligence (SETI). Freeman J. Dyson and his imaginative precursors, like Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, Olaf Stapledon or John B. S. Haldane, suggested macro-engineering projects as focal points in the context of extrapolations about the future of humanity and, by analogy, other intelligent species in the Milky Way. We emphasize that the search for signposts of extraterrestrial macro-engineering projects is not an optional pursuit within the family of ongoing and planned SETI projects; inter alia, the failure of the orthodox SETI thus far clearly indicates this. Instead, this approach (for which we suggest a name of "Dysonian") should be the front-line and mainstay of any cogent SETI strategy in future, being significantly more promising than searches for directed, intentional radio or microwave emissions. This is in accord with our improved astrophysical understanding of the structure and evolution of the Galactic Habitable Zone, as well as with the recent wake-up call of Steven J. Dick to investigate consequences of postbiological evolution for astrobiology in general and SETI programs in particular. The benefits this multidisciplinary approach may bear for astrobiologists, evolutionary theorists and macro-engineers are also briefly highlighted.

=== arXiv:0605277v1  [2006-05-10]
TITLE  : Spitzer IRS Spectroscopy of IRAS-Discovered Debris Disks
AUTHORS: C. H. Chen, B. A. Sargent, C. Bohac, K. H. Kim, E. Leibensperger, M. Jura, J. Najita, W. J. Forrest
DOI    : 10.1086/505751
ABS    : We have obtained Spitzer Space Telescope IRS 5.5 - 35 micron spectra of 59 main sequence stars that possess IRAS 60 micron excess. The spectra of five objects possess spectral features that are well-modeled using micron-sized grains and silicates with crystalline mass fractions 0% - 80%, consistent with T-Tauri and Herbig AeBe stars. With the exception of eta Crv, these objects are young with ages &lt;50 Myr. The spectra for the majority of objects are featureless, suggesting that the emitting grains probably have radii a &gt; 10 micron. We have modeled the excess continua using a continuous disk with a uniform surface density distribution, expected if Poynting-Robertson and stellar wind drag are the dominant grain removal processes, and using a single temperature black body, expected if the dust is located in a narrow ring around the star. The IRS spectra of many objects are better modeled with a single temperature black body, suggesting that the disks possess inner holes. The distribution of grain temperatures, based on our black body fits, peaks at Tgr = 110 - 130 K. Since the timescale for ice sublimation of micron-sized grains with Tgr &gt; 110 K is a fraction of a Myr, the lack of warmer material may be explained if the grains are icy. If planets dynamically clear the central portions of debris disks, then the frequency of planets around other stars is probably high. We estimate that the majority of debris disk systems possess parent body masses, MPB &lt; 1 Mearth. The low inferred parent body masses suggest that planet formation is an efficient process. (abridged abstract)

=== arXiv:0605110v2  [2006-05-03]
TITLE  : Analytical protostellar disk models 1: the effect of internal dissipation and surface irradiation on the structure of disks and the location of the snow line around Sun-like stars
AUTHORS: Pascale Garaud, Douglas N. C. Lin
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.654:606-624,2006
DOI    : 10.1086/509041
ABS    : We construct a new set of self-consistent analytical disk models by taking into account both viscous and radiative sources of thermal energy. We analyze the non-isothermal structure of the disk across the mid-plane for optically thick disks, and use the standard two-temperature model in the case of optically thin disks. We deduce a set of general formula for the relationship between the mass accretion rate and the surface density profile. Our results recover those of Chiang &amp; Goldreich in the optically thin regions, but extend their work for the opaque regions of the disk. For the purpose of illustration, we apply our theory in this paper to determine the structure of protostellar disks around T Tauri stars under a state of steady accretion and derive the corresponding radial distribution function of various disk properties such as surface density and temperature near the mid-plane. We calculate the position of the snow line around a sun-like T Tauri star, and deduce that it can evolve from well outside 10 AU during FU Orionis outbursts, to about 4 AU during passive accretion phase, to the present-day orbital radius of Venus and finally re-expand to over 2.2 AU during the protostellar- to-debris disk transition. This non-monotonous evolution of the snow line may provide some novel and deterministic explanation for the total water content and its isotopic composition of both Venus and the Earth. In the optically thin, outermost regions of the disk we find that the surface density profile of the dust varies roughly as 1/r, which is consistent with mm observations of spatially resolved disk of Mundy et al. (2000).

=== arXiv:0603774v1  [2006-03-28]
TITLE  : Debris Disks Around White Dwarfs: The DAZ Connection
AUTHORS: Mukremin Kilic, Ted von Hippel, S. K. Leggett, D. E. Winget
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J. 646 (2006) 474-479
DOI    : 10.1086/504682
ABS    : We present near-infrared spectroscopic observations of 20 previously known DAZ white dwarfs obtained at the NASA Infrared Telescope Facility. Two of these white dwarfs (G29-38 and GD362) are known to display significant K-band excesses due to circumstellar debris disks. Here we report the discovery of excess K-band radiation from another DAZ white dwarf, WD0408-041 (GD56). Using spectroscopic observations, we show that the excess radiation cannot be explained by a stellar or substellar companion, and is likely to be caused by a warm debris disk. Our observations strengthen the connection between the debris disk phenomena and the observed metal abundances in cool DAZ white dwarfs. However, we do not find any excess infrared emission from the most metal rich DAZs with $T_{\rm eff}=$ 16000 -- 20000 K. This suggests that the metal abundances in warmer DAZ white dwarfs may require another explanation.

=== arXiv:0602078v2  [2006-02-20]
TITLE  : Evolution of 3D Boson Stars with Waveform Extraction
AUTHORS: Jayashree Balakrishna, Ruxandra Bondarescu, Gregory Daues, F. Siddhartha Guzman, Edward Seidel
JOURNAL: Class.Quant.Grav. 23 (2006) 2631-2652
DOI    : 10.1088/0264-9381/23/7/024
ABS    : Numerical results from a study of boson stars under nonspherical perturbations using a fully general relativistic 3D code are presented together with the analysis of emitted gravitational radiation. We have constructed a simulation code suitable for the study of scalar fields in space-times of general symmetry by bringing together components for addressing the initial value problem, the full evolution system and the detection and analysis of gravitational waves. Within a series of numerical simulations, we explicitly extract the Zerilli and Newman-Penrose scalar $Ψ_4$ gravitational waveforms when the stars are subjected to different types of perturbations. Boson star systems have rapidly decaying nonradial quasinormal modes and thus the complete gravitational waveform could be extracted for all configurations studied. The gravitational waves emitted from stable, critical, and unstable boson star configurations are analyzed and the numerically observed quasinormal mode frequencies are compared with known linear perturbation results. The superposition of the high frequency nonspherical modes on the lower frequency spherical modes was observed in the metric oscillations when perturbations with radial and nonradial components were applied. The collapse of unstable boson stars to black holes was simulated. The apparent horizons were observed to be slightly nonspherical when initially detected and became spherical as the system evolved. The application of nonradial perturbations proportional to spherical harmonics is observed not to affect the collapse time. An unstable star subjected to a large perturbation was observed to migrate to a stable configuration.

=== arXiv:0602249v2  [2006-02-10]
TITLE  : Young, Low-Mass Brown Dwarfs with Mid-Infrared Excesses
AUTHORS: K. N. Allers, J. E. Kessler-Silacci, L. A. Cieza, D. T. Jaffe
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J. 644 (2006) 364-377
DOI    : 10.1086/503355
ABS    : We have combined new I, J, H, and Ks imaging of portions of the Chamaeleon II, Lupus I, and Ophiuchus star-forming clouds with 3.6 to 24 micron imaging from the Spitzer Legacy Program, "From Molecular Clouds to Planet Forming Disks", to identify a sample of 19 young stars, brown dwarfs and sub-brown dwarfs showing mid-infrared excess emission. The resulting sample includes sources with luminosities of 0.5&gt;log(L/Lsun)&gt;-3.1. Six of the more luminous sources in our sample have been previously identified by other surveys for young stars and brown dwarfs. Five of the sources in our sample have nominal masses at or below the deuterium burning limit (~12 M_J). Over three decades in luminosity, our sources have an approximately constant ratio of excess to stellar luminosity. We compare our observed SEDs to theoretical models of a central source with a passive irradiated circumstellar disk and test the effects of disk inclination, disk flaring, and the size of the inner disk hole on the strength/shape of the excess. The observed SEDs of all but one of our sources are well fit by models of flared and/or flat disks.

=== arXiv:0511672v1  [2005-11-23]
TITLE  : The very low-mass population of the Corona Australis and Chamaeleon II star forming regions
AUTHORS: Belén López Martí, Jochen Eislöffel, Reinhard Mundt
JOURNAL: Astron.Astrophys.444:175-186,2005
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361:20053465
ABS    : We present the results of a deep optical survey in the Corona Australis and Chamaeleon II star forming regions. Our optical photometry is combined with available near- and mid-infrared photometry to identify very low-mass candidate members in these dark clouds. In our Chamaeleon II field, only one object exhibits clear H-alpha emission, but the discrepancy between its optical and near-infrared colours suggests that it might be a foreground star. We also identify two objects without H-alpha emission that could be planetary mass members of Chamaeleon II. In Corona Australis, we find ten stars and three brown dwarf candidates in the Coronet cluster. Five of our new members are identified with ISOCAM sources. Only two of them have a mid-infrared excess, indicating the presence of an accretion disk. On the other hand, one brown dwarf candidate has a faint close companion, seen only in our deepest I-band image. For many of the candidates in both clouds, membership could not be inferred from their H-alpha emission or near-infrared colours; these objects need spectroscopic confirmation of their status.

=== arXiv:0511638v1  [2005-11-21]
TITLE  : Observations of IC348: The Disk Population at 2-3 Million Years
AUTHORS: C. J. Lada, A. A. Muench, K. L. Luhman, L. Allen, L. Hartmann, T. Megeath, P. Myers, G. Fazio
JOURNAL: Astron.J.131:1574-1607,2006
DOI    : 10.1086/499808
ABS    : We present near and mid-infrared photometry obtained with the Spitzer Space Telescope of 300 known members of the IC348 cluster. We merge this photometry with existing ground-based optical and near-infrared photometry in order to construct optical-infrared spectral energy distributions (SEDs) for all the cluster members and present a complete atlas of these SEDs. We employ these observations to both investigate the frequency and nature of the circumstellar disk population in the cluster. The observations are sufficiently sensitive to enable the first detailed measurement of the disk frequency for very low mass stars at the peak of the stellar IMF. Using measurements of infrared excess between 3.6 and 8 microns we find the total frequency of disk-bearing stars in the cluster to be 50 +/- 6%. However, only 30 +/- 4% of the member stars are surrounded by optically thick, primordial disks, while the remaining disk-bearing stars are surrounded by what appear to be optically thin,anemic disks. The disk fraction appears to be a function of spectral type and stellar mass. The disk longevity and thus conditions for planet formation appear to be most favorable for stars which are of comparable mass to the sun. The optically thick disks around later type (&gt; M4) stars appear to be less flared than the disks around earlier type stars. This may indicate a greater degree of dust settling and a more advanced evolutionary state for the late M disk population. Finally we find that the presence of an optically thick dust disk is correlated with gaseous accretion as measured by the strength of Halpha emission. These results suggest that it is more likely for dust disks to persist in the absence of active gaseous accretion than for active accretion to persist in the absence of dusty disks.

=== arXiv:0511564v1  [2005-11-18]
TITLE  : Effects of Dust Growth and Settling in T Tauri Disks
AUTHORS: Paola D'Alessio, Nuria Calvet, Lee Hartmann, Ramiro Franco-Hernandez, Hermelinda Servin
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.638:314-335,2006
DOI    : 10.1086/498861
ABS    : We present self-consistent disk models for T Tauri stars which include a parameterized treatment of dust settling and grain growth, building on techniques developed in a series of papers by D'Alessio etal. The models incorporate depleted distributions of dust in upper disk layers along with larger-sized particles near the disk midplane, as expected theoretically and as we suggested earlier is necessary to account for mm-wave emission, SEDs, scattered light images, and silicate emission features simultaneously. By comparing the models with recent mid- and near-IR observations, we find that the dust to gas mass ratio of small grains at the upper layers should be &lt; 10 % of the standard value. The grains that have disappeared from the upper layers increase the dust to gas mass ratio of the disk interior; if those grains grow to maximum sizes of the order of mm during the settling process, then both the millimeter-wave fluxes and spectral slopes can be consistently explained. Depletion and growth of grains can also enhance the ionization of upper layers, enhancing the possibility of the magnetorotational instability for driving disk accretion.

=== arXiv:0511250v1  [2005-11-09]
TITLE  : Formation and Evolution of Planetary Systems (FEPS): Primordial Warm Dust Evolution From 3-30 Myr around Sun-like Stars
AUTHORS: M. D. Silverstone, M. R. Meyer, E. E. Mamajek, D. C. Hines, L. A. Hillenbrand, J. Najita, I. Pascucci, J. Bouwman
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.639:1138-1146,2006
DOI    : 10.1086/499418
ABS    : We present data obtained with the Infrared Array Camera (IRAC) aboard the Spitzer Space Telescope (Spitzer) for a sample of 74 young (t &lt; 30 Myr old) Sun-like (0.7 &lt; M(star)/M(Sun) &lt; 1.5) stars. These are a sub-set of the observations that comprise the Spitzer Legacy science program entitled the Formation and Evolution of Planetary Systems (FEPS). Using IRAC we study the fraction of young stars that exhibit 3.6-8.0 micron infrared emission in excess of that expected from the stellar photosphere, as a function of age from 3-30 Myr. The most straightforward interpretation of such excess emission is the presence of hot (300-1000K) dust in the inner regions (&lt; 3 AU) of a circumstellar disk. Five out of the 74 young stars show a strong infrared excess, four of which have estimated ages of 3-10 Myr. While we detect excesses from 5 optically thick disks, and photospheric emission from the remainder of our sample, we do not detect any excess emission from optically thin disks at these wavelengths. We compare our results with accretion disk fractions detected in previous studies, and use the ensemble results to place additional constraints on the dissipation timescales for optically-thick, primordial disks.

=== arXiv:0509188v1  [2005-09-07]
TITLE  : Excess Infrared Radiation from a Massive DAZ White Dwarf: GD362 - a Debris Disk?
AUTHORS: Mukremin Kilic, Ted von Hippel, S. K. Leggett, D. E. Winget
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.632:L115-L118,2005
DOI    : 10.1086/497825
ABS    : We report the discovery of excess K-band radiation from a massive DAZ white dwarf star, GD362. Combining infrared photometric and spectroscopic observations, we show that the excess radiation cannot be explained by a stellar or substellar companion, and is likely to be caused by a debris disk. This would be only the second such system known, discovered 18 years after G29-38, the only single white dwarf currently known to be orbited by circumstellar dust. Both of these systems favor a model with accretion from a surrounding debris disk to explain the metal abundances observed in DAZ white dwarfs. Nevertheless, observations of more DAZs in the mid-infrared are required to test if this model can explain all DAZs.

=== arXiv:0508527v2  [2005-08-24]
TITLE  : Dark cloud cores and gravitational decoupling from turbulent flows
AUTHORS: Eric Keto, George Field
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.635:1151-1165,2005
DOI    : 10.1086/497566
ABS    : We test the hypothesis that the starless cores may be gravitationally bound clouds supported largely by thermal pressure by comparing observed molecular line spectra to theoretical spectra produced by a simulation that includes hydrodynamics, radiative cooling, variable molecular abundance, and radiative transfer in a simple one-dimensional model. The results suggest that the starless cores can be divided into two categories: stable starless cores that are in approximate equilibrium and will not evolve to form protostars, and unstable pre-stellar cores that are proceeding toward gravitational collapse and the formation of protostars. The starless cores might be formed from the interstellar medium as objects at the lower end of the inertial cascade of interstellar turbulence. Additionally, we identify a thermal instability in the starless cores. Under par ticular conditions of density and mass, a core may be unstable to expansion if the density is just above the critical density for the collisional coupling of the gas and dust so that as the core expands the gas-dust coupling that cools the gas is reduced and the gas warms, further driving the expansion.

=== arXiv:0508511v1  [2005-08-24]
TITLE  : Very low-mass members of the Lupus 3 cloud
AUTHORS: Belén López Martí, Jochen Eislöffel, Reinhard Mundt
JOURNAL: Astron.Astrophys.440:139-149,2005
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361:20042299
ABS    : We report on a multi-band survey for very low-mass stars and brown dwarfs in the Lupus 3 cloud with the Wide Field Imager (WFI) at the ESO/MPG 2.2m telescope on La Silla Observatory (Chile). Our multiband optical photometry is combined with available 2MASS JHK photometry to identify 19 new young stars and 3 brown dwarf candidates as probable members of this star forming region. Our objects are mostly clustered around the cloud core. Stars and brown dwarfs have similar levels of H-alpha emission, probably a signature of accretion. One object, a brown dwarf candidate, exhibits a near-infrared excess, which may indicate the presence of a disk, but its H-alpha emission cannot be confirmed due to its faintness in the optical passbands. We also find two visual pairs of probable Lupus 3 members that may be wide binaries.

=== arXiv:0508284v2  [2005-08-12]
TITLE  : Timing the bright X-ray population of the core of M31 with XMM-Newton
AUTHORS: R. Barnard, U. Kolb, J. P. Osborne
ABS    : All 63 discrete X-ray sources brighter than L_{\rm X} = 5x10^{36} erg/s in any of four XMM-Newton observations of the core of M31 were surveyed for time variability over time-scales of seconds to thousands of seconds, and for intensity variations between observations. This population is likely to be dominated by low mass X-ray binaries (LMXBs). Analysis of the shapes of power density spectra (PDS) of these sources allows us to determine whether they are accreting at a high or low rate; in the observed frequency range a broken power law (Type A) PDS indicates a low accretion rate while a simple power law (Type B) indicates a high accretion rate. We obtained the 0.3--10 keV luminosities of the sources by modelling their spectral energy distributions. The luminosity function for Type A PDS appears to consist of two populations, which we tentatively classify as neutron star and black hole LMXBs. We find that 46 sources are likely X-ray binaries, 13 with possible black hole primaries. Remarkably, 5 out of the 13 black hole candidates appear persistently bright; there are no persistently bright black hole LMXBs known in our Galaxy. The lightcurves of 55 X-ray sources had a probability of variability &gt;99% in at least one observation. Also, 57 of the sources show a luminosity variation &gt; ~5$σ$ between observations; 7 of these are classed as transients, since they are absent in at least one observation, and vary in luminosity by a factor of &gt; ~10. Scaling this sample with the known Galactic LMXBs, we find that the M31 sample has ~50% of the dippers, Z-sources and transients.

=== arXiv:0507635v2  [2005-07-27]
TITLE  : Mid-Infrared Observations of the White Dwarf Brown Dwarf Binary GD 1400
AUTHORS: J. Farihi, B. Zuckerman, E. E. Becklin
DOI    : 10.1086/491707
ABS    : Fluxes are measured for the DA white dwarf plus brown dwarf pair GD 1400 with the Infrared Array Camera on the {\em Spitzer Space Telescope}. GD 1400 displays an infrared excess over the entire $3-8μ$m region consistent with the presence of a mid- to late-type L dwarf companion. A discussion is given regarding current knowledge of this unique system.

=== arXiv:0507355v1  [2005-07-14]
TITLE  : Discovery of a Nearly Edge-On Disk Around HD 32297
AUTHORS: Glenn Schneider, Murray D. Silverstone, Dean C. Hines
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.629:L117-L120,2005
DOI    : 10.1086/452631
ABS    : We report the discovery of a nearly edge-on disk about the A0 star HD 32297 seen in light scattered by the disk grains revealed in NICMOS PSF-subtracted coronagraphic images. The disk extends to a distance of at least 400 AU (3.3") along its major axis with a 1.1 micron flux density of 4.81 +/-0.57 mJy beyond a radius of 0.3" from the coronagraphically occulted star. The fraction of 1.1 micron starlight scattered by the disk, 0.0033 +/- 0.0004, is comparable to its fractional excess emission at 25 + 60 micron of ~ 0.0027 as measured from IRAS data. The disk appears to be inclined 10.5 degrees +/- 2.5 degrees from an edge-on viewing geometry, with its major axis oriented 236.5 degrees +/- 1 degree eastward of north. The disk exhibits unequal brightness in opposing sides and a break in the surface brightness profile along NE-side disk major axis. Such asymmetries might implicate the existence of one or more (unseen) planetary mass companions.

=== arXiv:0506017v2  [2005-06-01]
TITLE  : Low Luminosity Companions to White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: J. Farihi, E. E. Becklin, B. Zuckerman
DOI    : 10.1086/444362
ABS    : This paper presents results of a near-infrared imaging survey for low mass stellar and substellar companions to white dwarfs. A wide field proper motion survey of 261 white dwarfs was capable of directly detecting companions at orbital separations between $\sim100$ and 5000 AU with masses as low as 0.05 $M_{\odot}$, while a deep near field search of 86 white dwarfs was capable of directly detecting companions at separations between $\sim50$ and 1100 AU with masses as low as 0.02 $M_{\odot}$. Additionally, all white dwarf targets were examined for near-infrared excess emission, a technique capable of detecting companions at arbitrarily close separations down to masses of 0.05 $M_{\odot}$. No brown dwarf candidates were detected, which implies a brown dwarf companion fraction of $&lt;0.5$% for white dwarfs. In contrast, the stellar companion fraction of white dwarfs as measured by this survey is 22%, uncorrected for bias. Moreover, most of the known and suspected stellar companions to white dwarfs are low mass stars whose masses are only slightly greater than the masses of brown dwarfs. Twenty previously unknown stellar companions were detected, five of which are confirmed or likely white dwarfs themselves, while fifteen are confirmed or likely low mass stars. Similar to the distribution of cool field dwarfs as a function of spectral type, the number of cool unevolved dwarf companions peaks at mid-M type. Based on the present work, relative to this peak, field L dwarfs appear to be roughly 2-3 times more abundant than companion L dwarfs. Additionally, there is no evidence that the initial companion masses have been altered by post main sequence binary interactions.

=== arXiv:0504426v1  [2005-04-19]
TITLE  : A Mid-Infrared Imaging Survey of Embedded Young Stellar Objects in the Rho Ophiuchi Cloud Core
AUTHORS: Mary Barsony, Michael E. Ressler, Kenneth A. Marsh
DOI    : 10.1086/431351
ABS    : Results of a comprehensive, new, ground-based mid-infrared imaging survey of the young stellar population of the Rho Ophiuchi cloud are presented. Data were acquired at the Palomar 5-m and at the Keck 10-m telescopes with the MIRLIN and LWS instruments, at 0.25 arcsec and 0.25 arcsec resolutions, respectively. Of 172 survey objects, 85 were detected. Among the 22 multiple systems observed, 15 were resolved and their individual component fluxes determined. A plot of the frequency distribution of the detected objects with SED spectral slope shows that YSOs spend ~400,000 yr in the Flat Spectrum phase, clearing out their remnant infall envelopes. Mid-infrared variability is found among a significant fraction of the surveyed objects, and is found to occur for all SED classes with optically thick disks. Large-amplitude near-infrared variability, also found for all SED classes with optically thick disks, seems to occur with somewhat higher frequency at the earlier evolutionary stages. Although a general trend of mid-infrared excess and NIR veiling exists proceeding through SED classes, with Class I objects generally exhibiting K-veilings &gt; 1, Flat Spectrum objects with K-veilings &gt; 0.58, and Class III objects with K-veilings =0, Class II objects exhibit the widest range of K-band veiling values, 0-4.5. However, the highly variable value of veiling that a single source can exhibit in any of the SED classes in which active disk accretion can take place is striking, and is direct observational evidence for highly time-variable accretion activity in disks. Finally, by comparing mid-infrared vs. near-infrared excesses in a subsample with well-determined effective temperatures and extinction values, disk clearing mechanisms are explored. The results are consistent with disk clearing proceeding from the inside-out.

=== arXiv:0504139v1  [2005-04-06]
TITLE  : Restframe I-band Hubble diagram for type Ia supernovae up to redshift z ~0.5
AUTHORS: The Supernova Cosmology Project, :, S. Nobili, R. Amanullah, G. Garavini, A. Goobar, C. Lidman, V. Stanishev
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361:20042463
ABS    : We present a novel technique for fitting restframe I-band light curves on a data set of 42 Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia). Using the result of the fit, we construct a Hubble diagram with 26 SNe from the subset at 0.01&lt; z&lt;0.1. Adding two SNe at z~0.5 yields results consistent with a flat Lambda-dominated``concordance universe'' ($Ω_M,Ω_Λ$)=(0.25,0.75). For one of these, SN 2000fr, new near infrared data are presented. The high redshift supernova NIR data are also used to test for systematic effects in the use of SNe Ia as distance estimators. A flat, Lambda=0, universe where the faintness of supernovae at z~0.5 is due to grey dust homogeneously distributed in the intergalactic medium is disfavoured based on the high-z Hubble diagram using this small data-set. However, the uncertainties are large and no firm conclusion may be drawn. We explore the possibility of setting limits on intergalactic dust based on B-I and B-V colour measurements, and conclude that about 20 well measured SNe are needed to give statistically significant results. We also show that the high redshift restframe I-band data points are better fit by light curve templates that show a prominent second peak, suggesting that they are not intrinsically underluminous.

=== arXiv:0502312v1  [2005-02-16]
TITLE  : A Dark Hydrogen Cloud in the Virgo Cluster
AUTHORS: Robert Minchin, Jonathan Davies, Michael Disney, Peter Boyce, Diego Garcia, Christine Jordan, Virginia Kilborn, Robert Lang
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J. 622 (2005) L21-L24
DOI    : 10.1086/429538
ABS    : VIRGOHI21 is an HI source detected in the Virgo Cluster survey of Davies et al. (2004) which has a neutral hydrogen mass of 10^8 M_solar and a velocity width of Delta V_20 = 220 km/s. From the Tully-Fisher relation, a galaxy with this velocity width would be expected to be 12th magnitude or brighter; however deep CCD imaging has failed to turn up a counterpart down to a surface-brightness level of 27.5 B mag/sq. arcsec. The HI observations show that it is extended over at least 16 kpc which, if the system is bound, gives it a minimum dynamical mass of ~10^11 M_solar and a mass to light ratio of M_dyn/L_B &gt; 500 M_solar/L_solar. If it is tidal debris then the putative parents have vanished; the remaining viable explanation is that VIRGOHI21 is a dark halo that does not contain the expected bright galaxy. This object was found because of the low column density limit of our survey, a limit much lower than that achieved by all-sky surveys such as HIPASS. Further such sensitive surveys might turn up a significant number of the dark matter halos predicted by Dark Matter models.

=== arXiv:0412669v2  [2004-12-30]
TITLE  : Cool Customers in the Stellar Graveyard II: Limits to Substellar Objects Around Nearby DAZ White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: J. H. Debes, S. Sigurdsson, B. Woodgate
JOURNAL: Astron.J.130:1221-1230,2005
DOI    : 10.1086/432660
ABS    : Results from a concerted Hubble Space Telescope (HST) survey of nearby white dwarfs for substellar objects is presented. A total of 7 DAZ white dwarfs with distances of $&lt;$ 50 pc had high contrast and high spatial resolution NICMOS coronagraphic images taken to search for candidate substellar objects at separations $\ltorder$10\arcsec away. Limits to unresolved companions are derived through analysis of 2MASS photometry of the white dwarfs compared to expected fluxes based on the WDs effective temperature, distance, and gravity. From our survey with HST we find several candidate companions, which have been or will be followed up with second epoch observations. We find that for four of the white dwarfs we are sensitive to planetary companions $\gtorder$10 M$_{Jup}$, and sensitive to companions $&gt;$ 18 M$_{Jup}$ for all of the targets. The lack of significant near infrared excesses for our targets limits any kind of unresolved companions present to be substellar. In light of these results we make several comments on the possibility of determining the origin of white dwarfs with metals in their atmospheres.

=== arXiv:0412668v2  [2004-12-30]
TITLE  : Cool Customers in the Stellar Graveyard I: Limits to Extrasolar Planets Around the White Dwarf G29-38
AUTHORS: J. H. Debes, S. Sigurdsson, B. Woodgate
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J. 633 (2005) 1168-1174
DOI    : 10.1086/491640
ABS    : We present high contrast images of the hydrogen white dwarf G 29-38 taken in the near infrared with the Hubble Space Telescope and the Gemini North Telescope as part of a high contrast imaging search for substellar objects in orbit around nearby white dwarfs. We review the current limits on planetary companions for G29-38, the only nearby white dwarf with an infrared excess due to a dust disk. We add our recent observations to these limits to produce extremely tight constraints on the types of possible companions that could be present. No objects $&gt;$ 6 M$_{Jup}$ are detected in our data at projected separations $&gt;$ 12 AU, and no objects $&gt;$ 16 M$_{Jup}$ are detected for separations from 3 to 12 AU, assuming a total system age of 1 Gyr. Limits for companions at separations $&lt;$ 3 AU come from a combination of 2MASS photometry and previous studies of G29-38's pulsations. Our imaging with Gemini cannot confirm a tentative claim for the presence of a low mass brown dwarf. These observations demonstrate that a careful combination of several techniques can probe nearby white dwarfs for large planets and low mass brown dwarfs.

=== arXiv:0412498v1  [2004-12-17]
TITLE  : The History of the Mysterious Eclipses of KH 15D II. Asiago, Kiso, Kitt Peak, Mt. Wilson, Palomar, Tautenburg and Rozhen Observatories, 1954-97
AUTHORS: John Asher Johnson, Joshua N. Winn, Francesca Rampazzi, Cesare Barbieri, Hiroyuki Mito, Ken-ichi Tarusawa, Milcho Tsvetkov, Ana Borisova
DOI    : 10.1086/428597
ABS    : The unusual pre-main-sequence binary star named KH 15D undergoes remarkably deep and long-lasting periodic eclipses. Some clues about the reason for these eclipses have come from the observed evolution of the system's light curve over the last century. Here we present UBVRI photometry of KH 15D based on photographic plates from various observatories, ranging in time from 1954 to 1997. The system has been variable at the ~1 mag level since at least 1965. There is no evidence for color variations, with a typical limit of Delta(B-V) &lt; 0.2 mag. We confirm some previously published results that were based on a smaller sample of plates: from approximately 1965 to 1990, the total flux was modulated with the 48-day orbital period of the binary, but the maximum flux was larger, the fractional variations were smaller, and the phase of minimum flux was shifted by almost a half-cycle relative to the modern light curve. All these results are consistent with the recently proposed theory that KH 15D is being occulted by an inclined, precessing, circumbinary ring.

=== arXiv:0412040v1  [2004-12-01]
TITLE  : The Centers of Early-Type Galaxies with HST. V. New WFPC2 Photometry
AUTHORS: Tod R. Lauer, S. M. Faber, Karl Gebhardt, Douglas Richstone, Scott Tremaine, Edward A. Ajhar, M. C. Aller, Ralf Bender
DOI    : 10.1086/429565
ABS    : We analyze HST+WFPC2 images of 77 early-type galaxies. Brightness profiles are classed into "core" or "power-law" forms. Cores are typically rounder than power-law galaxies. Nearly all power-laws with central ellipticity &gt;=0.3 have stellar disks, implying that disks are present in power-laws with epsilon &lt;0.3, but are not visible due to unfavorable geometry. A few low-luminosity core galaxies also have disks; these may be transition forms from power-laws. Cores and power-laws both have twisting isophotes at small radii. Core galaxies have somewhat weaker color gradients than power-laws. Nuclei are found in 29% of the cores and 60% of the power-laws. Nuclei are typically bluer than the surrounding galaxy. NGC 4073 and 4382 have central minima in their intrinsic starlight distributions; NGC 4382 resembles the double nucleus of M31. In general, the peak brightness location is coincident with the photocenter of the core to &lt;1 pc. Five galaxies, however, have centers significantly displaced from their cores; these may be unresolved asymmetric double nuclei. Central dust is visible in half of the galaxies. The presence and strength of dust correlates with nuclear emission. The prevalence of dust and its morphology suggests that dust clouds form, settle to the center, and disappear repeatedly on ~10^8 yr timescales. We discuss the hypothesis that cores are created by the decay of a massive black hole binary. Apart from their brightness profiles, there are no strong differences between cores and power-laws that demand this scenario; however, the rounder shapes of cores, their lack of disks, and their reduced color gradients may be consistent with it.

=== arXiv:0412033v1  [2004-12-01]
TITLE  : 8--13 um spectroscopy of YSOs: Evolution of the silicate feature
AUTHORS: J. E. Kessler-Silacci, L. A. Hillenbrand, G. A. Blake, M. R. Meyer
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J. 622 (2005) 404-429
DOI    : 10.1086/427793
ABS    : In order to investigate possible connections between dust processing and disk properties, 8--13 um spectra of 34 young stars, with a range of circumstellar environments and spectral types A to M, were obtained using the Long Wavelength Spectrometer at the W. M. Keck Observatory. The broad 9.7 um amorphous silicate feature which dominates this wavelength regime evolves from absorption in young, embedded sources, to emission in optically revealed stars, and to complete absence in older debris disk systems for both low- and intermediate-mass stars. The peak wavelength and FWHM are centered about 9.7 and ~2.3 um, corresponding to amorphous olivine, with a larger spread in FWHM for embedded sources and in peak wavelength for disks. In a few of our objects that have been previously identified as class I low-mass YSOs, the observed silicate feature is complex, with absorption near 9.5 um and emission peaking around 10 um. Although most of the emission spectra show broad classical features attributed to amorphous silicates, variations in the shape/strength may be linked to dust processing, including grain growth and/or silicate crystallization. We study quantitatively the evidence for evolutionary trends in the 8--13 um spectra through a variety of spectral shape diagnostics. Based on the lack of correlation between these diagnostics and broad-band infrared luminosity characteristics for silicate emission sources, we conclude that although spectral signatures of dust processing are present, they can not be connected clearly to disk evolutionary stage (for optically thick disks) or optical depth (for optically thin disks). The diagnostics of silicate absorption features (other than the central wavelength of the feature), however, are tightly correlated with optical depth.

=== arXiv:0411059v1  [2004-11-16]
TITLE  : Analysis and Applications of the Generalised Dyson Mapping
AUTHORS: I. Snyman
ABS    : Generalised Dyson boson-fermion mappings are considered. These are techniques used in the analysis of the quantum many-body problem, and are instances of so-called boson expansion methods. A generalised Dyson boson-fermion mapping is a one-to-one linear but non-unitary operator that can be applied to vectors representing the states of a many-fermion system. A vector representing a fermion system maps onto a vector that represents a state of a many-body system that contains both bosons and fermions. The motivation for doing such a mapping is the hope that it will reveal some property of the system that simplifies its analysis and that was hidden in the original form. The aims of this text are to review the theory of generalized Dyson boson-fermion mappings and to find a useful application for a generalized Dyson boson-fermion mapping, by considering a non-trivial model, namely the Richardson model for superconductivity. It is the first time that a boson expansion technique is implemented for a system where the roles of both collective and non-collective fermion pairs are important. The Dyson mapping uncovers non-trivial properties of the system that aid the construction of time-independent as well as time-dependent perturbation expansions. The time-independent expansions agree with results that other authors have obtained through methods other than boson expansions. The time-dependent expansions might in future prove useful in understanding aspects of the dynamics of ultra-cold fermi gases, when time-dependent magnetic fields are used to vary the atom-atom interaction strenght.

=== arXiv:0410501v2  [2004-10-21]
TITLE  : Limiting the dimming of distant type Ia supernovae
AUTHORS: Linda Ostman, Edvard Mortsell
JOURNAL: JCAP 0502 (2005) 005
DOI    : 10.1088/1475-7516/2005/02/005
ABS    : Distant supernovae have been observed to be fainter than what is expected in a matter dominated universe. The most likely explanation is that the universe is dominated by an energy component with negative pressure -- dark energy. However, there are several astrophysical processes that could, in principle, affect the measurements and in order to be able to take advantage of the growing supernova statistics, the control of systematic effects is crucial. We discuss two of these; extinction due to intergalactic grey dust and dimming due to photon-axion oscillations and show how their effect on supernova observations can be constrained using observed quasar colours and spectra. For a wide range of intergalactic dust models, we are able to rule out any dimming larger than 0.2 magnitudes for a type Ia supernova at z=1. The corresponding limit for intergalactic Milky Way type dust is 0.03 mag. For the more speculative model of photons mixing with axions, we find that the effect is independent of photon energy for certain combinations of parameter values and a dimming as large as 0.6 magnitudes cannot be ruled out. These effects can have profound implications for the possibility of constraining dark energy properties using supernova observations.

=== arXiv:0410008v1  [2004-10-02]
TITLE  : Dynamics of few-body states in a medium
AUTHORS: M. Beyer, S. Mattiello, S. Strauss, T. Frederico, H. J. Weber, P. Schuck, S. A. Sofianos
DOI    : 10.1063/1.1932976
ABS    : Strongly interacting matter such as nuclear or quark matter leads to few-body bound states and correlations of the constituents. As a consequence quantum chromodynamics has a rich phase structure with spontaneous symmetry breaking, superconductivity, condensates of different kinds. All this appears in many astrophysical scenarios. Among them is the formation of hadrns during the early stage of the Universe, the structure of a neutron star, the formation of nuclei during a supernova explosion. Some of these extreme conditions can be simulated in heavy ion colliders. To treat such a hot and dense system we use the Green function formalism of many-body theory. It turns out that a systematic Dyson expansion of the Green functions leads to modified few-body equations that are capable to describe phase transitions, condensates, cluster formation and more. These equations include self energy corrections and Pauli blocking. We apply this method to nonrelativistic and relativistic matter. The latter one is treated on the light front. Because of the medium and the inevitable truncation of space, the few-body dynamics and states depend on the thermodynamic parameters of the medium.

=== arXiv:0408567v2  [2004-08-30]
TITLE  : Accretion relicts in the solar neighbourhood: debris from omegaCen's parent galaxy
AUTHORS: Andres Meza, Julio F. Navarro, Mario G. Abadi, Matthias Steinmetz
JOURNAL: Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc. 359 (2005) 93-103
DOI    : 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2005.08869.x
ABS    : We use numerical simulations to investigate the orbital characteristics of tidal debris from satellites whose orbits are dragged into the plane of galactic disks by dynamical friction before disruption. We find that these satellites may deposit a significant fraction of their stars into the disk components of a galaxy, and use our results to motivate the search for accretion relicts in samples of metal-poor disk stars in the vicinity of the Sun. Satellites disrupted on very eccentric orbits coplanar with the disk are expected to shed stars in "trails" of distinct orbital energy and angular momentum during each pericentric passage. To an observer located between the pericenter and apocenter of such orbits, these trails would show as distinct groupings of stars with low vertical velocity and a broad, symmetric, often double-peaked distribution of Galactocentric radial velocities. One group of stars with these characteristics stands out in available compilations of nearby metal-poor stars. These stars have specific angular momenta similar to that of the globular cluster omegaCen, long hypothesized to be the nucleus of a dwarf galaxy disrupted by the Milky Way tidal field. In addition to their kindred kinematics, stars in the omegaCen group share distinct chemical abundance characteristics, and trace a well-defined track in the [alpha/Fe] versus [Fe/H] plane, consistent with simple closed-box enrichment models and a protracted star formation history. The dynamical and chemical coherence of this group suggests that it consists of stars that once belonged to the dwarf that brought omegaCen into the Galaxy. The presence of this and other "tidal relicts" in the solar neighbourhood suggest an extra-Galactic origin for the presence of nearby stars with odd kinematics and chemistry.

=== arXiv:0408061v3  [2004-08-24]
TITLE  : Simulation of Transitions between "Pasta" Phases in Dense Matter
AUTHORS: Gentaro Watanabe, Toshiki Maruyama, Katsuhiko Sato, Kenji Yasuoka, Toshikazu Ebisuzaki
JOURNAL: Phys.Rev.Lett. 94 (2005) 031101
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.94.031101
ABS    : Calculations of equilibrium properties of dense matter predict that at subnuclear densities nuclei can be rodlike or slablike. To investigate whether transitions between phases with non-spherical nuclei can occur during the collapse of a star, we perform quantum molecular dynamic simulations of the compression of dense matter. We have succeeded in simulating the transitions between rodlike and slablike nuclei and between slablike nuclei and cylindrical bubbles. Our results strongly suggest that non-spherical nuclei can be formed in the inner cores of collapsing stars.

=== arXiv:0408029v1  [2004-08-11]
TITLE  : Thermodynamic inequalities for nuclear rotation
AUTHORS: V. G. Nosov, A. M. Kamchatnov
JOURNAL: Sov.Phys.JETP 53 (1981) 221-227
ABS    : The strictly reversible, thermodynamically equilibrium nature of the free rotation of a body makes it possible to obtain a number of bounds on the rotational characteristics within individual rotational bands of nonspherical nuclei. As a result, the bounds between which the possible values of the critical spin $J_c$ lie can be expressed exclusively in terms of a restricted number of the experimentally most accessible data on the lower phase $J&lt;J_c$ for a given nuclide. The bounds are tested on the ground-state rotational bands (yrast lines) of even-even nuclei, in which the corresponding phase transition (backbending) has already been observed experimentally. For nuclei with pronounced non-sphericity, all the bounds are invariably confirmed. For the ground-state rotational bands for which the phase transition point $J =J_c$ has not yet been reached, predictions are made for the corresponding values of $J_c^{min}$ and, especially, $J_c^{max}$. The specific features of excited rotational bands, and also the bands of odd nuclei are discussed.

=== arXiv:0406460v2  [2004-06-21]
TITLE  : Evolution of Young Brown Dwarf Disks in the Mid-Infrared
AUTHORS: Michael F. Sterzik, Ilaria Pascucci, Daniel Apai, Nicole van der Bliek, Cornelis P. Dullemond
JOURNAL: Astron.Astrophys. 427 (2004) 245-250
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361:20041502
ABS    : We have imaged two bona-fide brown dwarfs with TReCS/GEMINI-S and find mid-infrared excess emission that can be explained by optically thick dust disk models. In the case of the young ($\approx$2Myr) Cha H$α$1 we measure fluxes at 10.4$μ$m and 12.3$μ$m that are fully consistent with a standard flared disk model and prominent silicate emission. For the $\approx$ 10Myr old brown dwarf 2MASS1207-3932 located in the TW Hydrae association we find excess emission at 8.7$μ$m and 10.4$μ$m with respect to its photosphere, and confirm disk accretion as likely cause of its strong activity. Disks around brown dwarfs likely last at least as long as their low-mass stellar counterparts in the T-Tauri phase. Grain growth, dust settling, and evolution of the geometry of brown dwarfs disks may appear on a timescale of 10Myr and can be witnessed by observations in the mid-infrared.

=== arXiv:0406138v1  [2004-06-07]
TITLE  : The state of protoplanetary material 10 Myr after stellar formation: circumstellar disks in the TW Hydrae association
AUTHORS: K. I. Uchida, N. Calvet, L. Hartmann, F. Kemper, W. J. Forrest, D. M. Watson, P. D'Alessio, C. H. Chen
DOI    : 10.1086/422888
ABS    : We have used the Spitzer Infrared Spectrograph to observe seven members of the TW Hya association, the nearest stellar association whose age ($\sim$ 10 Myr) is similar to the timescales thought to apply to planet formation and disk dissipation. Only two of the seven targets display infrared excess emission, indicating that substantial amounts of dust still exist closer to the stars than is characteristic of debris disks; however, in both objects we confirm an abrupt short-wavelength edge to the excess, as is seen in disks with cleared-out central regions. The mid-infrared excesses in the spectra of Hen 3-600 and TW Hya include crystalline silicate emission features, indicating that the grains have undergone significant thermal processing. We offer a detailed comparison between the spectra of TW Hya and Hen 3-600, and a model that corroborates the spectral shape and our previous understanding of the radial structure of these protoplanetary disks.

=== arXiv:0405001v1  [2004-05-01]
TITLE  : Relation between the critical spin and angular velocity of a nucleus immediately after backbending
AUTHORS: V. G. Nosov, A. M. Kamchatnov
JOURNAL: Sov.Phys.JETP 49 (1979) 765-769
ABS    : In nonspherical nuclei at $J = J_c + 0$ the relationship between the angular momentum and angular velocity immediately after backbending is the same as in the limiting case $J - J_c\to\infty$. This indicates that there is a unique type of cancellation of the deviations from a rigid-body moment of inertia in the upper phase $J&gt;J_c$. An integral relationship is found which expresses this cancellation quantitatively. This formula permits $J_c$ to be calculated for the rotational bands of the even-even nuclei studied and the results are in agreement with those obtained by other methods of locating the Curie point. For the ground state band of W$^{170}$ the cancellation of the reciprocals of the true and rigid-body moments of inertia can be verified directly. The condition for the stability of the rotation of a nonspherical nucleus is analyzed in the Appendix in close connection with the problem of a reasonable definition of the concept of a variable moment of inertia.

=== arXiv:0404557v1  [2004-04-28]
TITLE  : Flared Disks and Silicate Emission in Young Brown Dwarfs
AUTHORS: Subhanjoy Mohanty, Ray Jayawardhana, Antonella Natta, Takuya Fujiyoshi, Motohide Tamura, David Barrado y Navascues
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J. 609 (2004) L33-L36
DOI    : 10.1086/422555
ABS    : We present mid-infrared photometry of three very young brown dwarfs located in the $ρ$ Ophiuchi star-forming region -- GY5, GY11 and GY310 --obtained with the Subaru 8-meter telescope. All three sources were detected at 8.6 and 11.7$μ$m, confirming the presence of significant mid-infrared excess arising from optically thick dusty disks. The spectral energy distributions of both GY310 and GY11 exhibit strong evidence of flared disks; flat disks can be ruled out for these two brown dwarfs. The data for GY5 show large scatter, and are marginally consistent with both flared and flat configurations. Inner holes a few substellar radii in size are indicated in all three cases (and especially in GY11), in agreement with magnetospheric accretion models. Finally, our 9.7$μ$m flux for GY310 implies silicate emission from small grains on the disk surface (though the data do not completely preclude larger grains with no silicate feature). Our results demonstrate that disks around young substellar objects are analogous to those girdling classical T Tauri stars, and exhibit a similar range of disk geometries and dust properties.

=== arXiv:0404191v1  [2004-04-08]
TITLE  : The Observation of Circumstellar Disks: Dust and Gas Components
AUTHORS: Anne Dutrey, Alain Lecavelier des Etangs, Jean-Charles Augereau
ABS    : Since the 1990's, protoplanetary disks and planetary disks have been intensively observed from the optical to the millimetre wavelength and many models have been developed to investigate their gas and dust properties and dynamics. These studies remain empirical and rely on poor statistics with only a few well known objects. However, the late phases of the stellar formation are among the most critical for the formation of planetary systems. Therefore, we believe it is timely to tentatively summarize the observed properties of circumstellar disks around young stars from the protoplanetary to the planetary phases. Our main concern is to present the physical properties considered as observationally robust and to show their main physical differences associated to an evolutionary scheme. We also describe areas still poorly understood such as how protoplanetary disks disappear to lead to planetary disks and eventually planets.

=== arXiv:0401318v1  [2004-01-15]
TITLE  : A Search for Warm Circumstellar Disks in the TW Hydrae Association
AUTHORS: A. J. Weinberger, E. E. Becklin, B. Zuckerman, I. Song
DOI    : 10.1086/382519
ABS    : A search for previously undetected optically thin disks around stars in the nearby, young, TW Hydrae Association was conducted around sixteen stars with sensitive 12 and 18 micron photometry. The survey could detect Zodiacal-like dust, with temperature 200-300 K, at levels of L(IR)/L(*)=7e-3. Possible mid-infrared excess emission from TWA 17 was detected at the 2-sigma level, but none of the other stars showed evidence for circumstellar dust. The rapid disappearance of large amounts of dust around the K and M-type stars in this sample may mean that any planet formation in the terrestrial planet region was completed very quickly. There appears to be a bi-modal distribution of dust disks in TWA with stars having either copious or negligible warm dust.

=== arXiv:0312443v2  [2003-12-17]
TITLE  : Cosmic distance-duality as probe of exotic physics and acceleration
AUTHORS: Bruce A. Bassett, Martin Kunz
JOURNAL: Phys.Rev. D69 (2004) 101305
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevD.69.101305
ABS    : In cosmology, distances based on standard candles (e.g. supernovae) and standard rulers (e.g. baryon oscillations) agree as long as three conditions are met: (1) photon number is conserved, (2) gravity is described by a metric theory with (3) photons travelling on unique null geodesics. This is the content of distance-duality (the reciprocity relation) which can be violated by exotic physics. Here we analyse the implications of the latest cosmological data sets for distance-duality. While broadly in agreement and confirming acceleration we find a 2-sigma violation caused by excess brightening of SN-Ia at z &gt; 0.5, perhaps due to lensing magnification bias. This brightening has been interpreted as evidence for a late-time transition in the dark energy but because it is not seen in the d_A data we argue against such an interpretation. Our results do, however, rule out significant SN-Ia evolution and extinction: the "replenishing" grey-dust model with no cosmic acceleration is excluded at more than 4-sigma despite this being the best-fit to SN-Ia data alone, thereby illustrating the power of distance-duality even with current data sets.

=== arXiv:0312026v1  [2003-12-01]
TITLE  : The brown dwarf population in the Chamaeleon I cloud
AUTHORS: B. López Martí, J. Eislöffel, A. Scholz, R. Mundt
JOURNAL: Astron.Astrophys. 416 (2004) 555-576
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361:20031720
ABS    : We present the results of a multiband survey for brown dwarfs in the Chamaeleon I dark cloud with the Wide Field Imager (WFI) camera at the ESO/MPG 2.2-m telescope on La Silla (Chile). The survey has revealed a substantial population of brown dwarfs in this southern star forming region. Candidates were selected from R, I and H-alpha imaging observations. We also observed in two medium-band filters, M855 and M915, for the purpose of spectral type determination. The former filter covers a wavelength range containing spectral features characteristic of M-dwarfs, while the latter lies in a relatively featureless wavelength region for these late-type objects. A correlation was found between spectral type and (M855-M915) colour index for mid- to late M-type objects and early L-type dwarfs. With this method, we identify most of our object candidates as being of spectral type M5 or later. Our results show that there is no strong drop in the number of objects for the latest spectral types, hence brown dwarfs may be as abundant as low-mass stars in this region. Also, both kind of objects have a similar spatial distribution. We derive an index $α= 0.6 \pm 0.1$ of the mass function in this region of dispersed star formation, in good agreement with the values obtained in other star forming regions and young clusters. Some of the brown dwarfs have strong H-alpha emission, suggesting mass accretion. For objects with published infrared photometry, we find that strong H-alpha emission is related to a mid-infrared excess, indicative of the existence of a circumstellar disk.

=== arXiv:0311107v2  [2003-11-04]
TITLE  : The Extragalactic Origin of the Arcturus Group
AUTHORS: Julio F. Navarro, Amina Helmi, Kenneth C. Freeman, .
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J. 601 (2004) L43-L46
DOI    : 10.1086/381751
ABS    : We reanalyze the group of stars associated kinematically with Arcturus (Eggen 1971), and confirm that they constitute a peculiar grouping of metal-poor stars with similar apocentric radius, common angular momentum, and distinct metal abundance patterns. These properties are consistent with those expected for a group of stars originating from the debris of a disrupted satellite. The Arcturus group stands out clearly in the catalog of Beers et al. (2000) as well as in other compilations of metal-poor stars in the solar neighborhood. Its angular momentum appears too low to arise from dynamical perturbations induced by the Galactic bar, and coincides with that of the kinematically-peculiar population of stars identified above and below the Galactic plane by Gilmore, Wyse &amp; Norris (2002): the Arcturus group is in all likelihood the solar neighborhood extension of such population. Further analysis is needed to confirm our proposal that Arcturus, together with some of the brightest stars in the night sky, may have formed beyond the confines of the Galaxy. However, validating the extragalactic origin of the Arcturus group would lend support to the prevalence of accretion events envisioned in hierarchical models of galaxy formation, and would suggest that early mergers may have contributed a substantial fraction of the old and metal-deficient stars in the Galactic disk.

=== arXiv:0309453v1  [2003-09-16]
TITLE  : Ten-Micron Observations of Nearby Young Stars
AUTHORS: Stanimir A. Metchev, Lynne A. Hillenbrand, Michael R. Meyer
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.600:435-450,2004
DOI    : 10.1086/379788
ABS    : (abridged) We present new 10-micron photometry of 21 nearby young stars obtained at the Palomar 5-meter and at the Keck I 10-meter telescopes as part of a program to search for dust in the habitable zone of young stars. Thirteen of the stars are in the F-K spectral type range ("solar analogs"), 4 have B or A spectral types, and 4 have spectral type M. We confirm existing IRAS 12-micron and ground-based 10-micron photometry for 10 of the stars, and present new insight into this spectral regime for the rest. Excess emission at 10 micron is not found in any of the young solar analogs, except for a possible 2.4-sigma detection in the G5V star HD 88638. The G2V star HD 107146, which does not display a 10-micron excess, is identified as a new Vega-like candidate, based on our 10-micron photospheric detection, combined with previously unidentified 60-micron and 100-micron IRAS excesses. Among the early-type stars, a 10-micron excess is detected only in HD 109573A (HR 4796A), confirming prior observations; among the M dwarfs, excesses are confirmed in AA Tau, CD -40 8434, and Hen 3-600A. A previously suggested N band excess in the M3 dwarf CD -33 7795 is shown to be consistent with photospheric emission.

=== arXiv:0308046v2  [2003-08-04]
TITLE  : Constraints on intergalactic dust from quasar colours
AUTHORS: Edvard Mortsell, Ariel Goobar
JOURNAL: JCAP 0309:009,2003
DOI    : 10.1088/1475-7516/2003/09/009
ABS    : Colour measurements of quasars are used to constrain the abundance and properties of intergalactic dust and the related extinction effects on high-z sources. For Type Ia supernovae at z = 1, we derive an upper limit on the possible dimming from intergalactic dust of dm=0.2, ruling out the ``grey'' dust scenario as being solely responsible for the observed faintness of high-z SNIa.

=== arXiv:0307341v1  [2003-07-18]
TITLE  : KH15D: a star eclipsed by a large scale dusty vortex?
AUTHORS: P. Barge, M. Viton
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.593:L117-L120,2003
DOI    : 10.1086/378285
ABS    : We propose that the large photometric variations of KH15D are due to an eclipsing swarm of solid particles trapped in giant gaseous vortex rotating at \~0.2 AU from the star. The efficiency of the capture-in-vortex mechanism easily explains the observed large optical depth. The weaker opacity at mid-eclipse is consistent with a size segregation of the particles toward the center of the vortex. This dusty structure must extend over ~1/3 of an orbit to account for the long eclipse duration. The estimated size of the trapped particles is found to range from 1 to 10cm, consistent with the gray extinction of the star. The observations of KH15D support the idea that giant vortices can grow in circumstellar disks and play a central role in planet formation.

=== arXiv:0306573v1  [2003-06-27]
TITLE  : Radio-Excess IRAS Galaxies: PMN/FSC Sample Selection
AUTHORS: Catherine L. Drake, Peter J. McGregor, Michael A. Dopita, W. J. M. van Breugel
JOURNAL: Astron.J.126:2237,2003
DOI    : 10.1086/378714
ABS    : A sample of 178 extragalactic objects is defined by correlating the 60 micron IRAS FSC with the 5 GHz PMN catalog. Of these, 98 objects lie above the radio/far-infrared relation for radio-quiet objects. These radio-excess galaxies and quasars have a uniform distribution of radio excesses and appear to be a new population of active galaxies not present in previous radio/far-infrared samples. The radio-excess objects extend over the full range of far-infrared luminosities seen in extragalactic objects. Objects with small radio excesses are more likely to have far-infrared colors similar to starbursts, while objects with large radio excesses have far-infrared colors typical of pure AGN. Some of the most far-infrared luminous radio-excess objects have the highest far-infrared optical depths. These are good candidates to search for hidden broad line regions in polarized light or via near-infrared spectroscopy. Some low far-infrared luminosity radio-excess objects appear to derive a dominant fraction of their far-infrared emission from star formation, despite the dominance of the AGN at radio wavelengths. Many of the radio-excess objects have sizes likely to be smaller than the optical host, but show optically thin radio emission. We draw parallels between these objects and high radio luminosity Compact Steep-Spectrum (CSS) and GigaHertz Peaked-Spectrum (GPS) objects. Radio sources with these characteristics may be young AGN in which the radio activity has begun only recently. Alternatively, high central densities in the host galaxies may be confining the radio sources to compact sizes. We discuss future observations required to distinguish between these possibilities and determine the nature of radio-excess objects.

=== arXiv:0305037v2  [2003-05-02]
TITLE  : Interaction-induced decoherence of atomic Bloch oscillations
AUTHORS: A. Buchleitner, A. R. Kolovsky
JOURNAL: Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 253002 (2003)
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.91.253002
ABS    : We show that the energy spectrum of the Bose-Hubbard model amended by a static field exhibits Wigner-Dyson level statistics. In itself a characteristic signature of quantum chaos, this induces the irreversible decay of Bloch oscillations of cold, interacting atoms loaded into an optical lattice, and provides a Hamiltonian model for interaction induced decoherence.

=== arXiv:0303114v1  [2003-03-05]
TITLE  : SCUBA Observations of Dust around Lindroos Stars: Evidence for a Substantial Submillimetre Disc Population
AUTHORS: M. C. Wyatt, W. R. F. Dent, J. S. Greaves
JOURNAL: Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc. 342 (2003) 876
DOI    : 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2003.06595.x
ABS    : We have observed 22 Lindroos stars with SCUBA on the JCMT to search for evidence of dust discs. Stars in this sample are the less massive companions of B-type primaries and have ages of 10-170Myr. Dust was detected around three of these stars (HD74067, HD112412 and HD99803B). The emission around HD74067 is centrally peaked and is approximately symmetrically distributed out to ~70". This emission either arises from a two component disc, one circumstellar and the other circumbinary with dust masses of 0.3 and &gt;27Mearth respectively, or an unrelated background object. The other two detections we attribute to circumsecondary discs with masses of 0.04 and 0.3Mearth; a circumprimary disc is also present around HD112413 with a similar mass to that around the companion HD112412. Cross-correlation of our sample with the IRAS catalogs only showed evidence for dust emission at 25um and 60um toward one star (HD1438); none of the sub-mm detections were evident in the far-IR data implying that these discs are cold (&lt;40K assuming beta=1). Our sub-mm detections are some of the first of dust discs surrounding evolved stars that were not detected by IRAS or ISO and imply that 9-14% of stars could harbour previously undetected dust discs that await discovery in unbiased sub-mm surveys. If these discs are protoplanetary remnants, rather than secondary debris discs, dust lifetime arguments show that they must be devoid of small &lt;0.1mm grains. Thus it may be possible to determine the origin of these discs from their spectral energy distributions. The low dust masses for this sample support the picture that protoplanetary dust discs are depleted to the levels of the brightest debris discs (~1Mearth) within 10Myr.

=== arXiv:0302402v1  [2003-02-19]
TITLE  : Discovery of Two Distant Type Ia Supernovae in the Hubble Deep Field North with the Advanced Camera for Surveys
AUTHORS: John P. Blakeslee, Zlatan I. Tsvetanov, Adam G. Riess, Holland C. Ford, Garth D. Illingworth, Daniel Magee, John L. Tonry, N. Benitez
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J. 589 (2003) 693-703
DOI    : 10.1086/374797
ABS    : We present observations of the first two supernovae discovered with the recently installed Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS) on the Hubble Space Telescope. The supernovae were found in Wide Field Camera images of the Hubble Deep Field North taken with the F775W, F850LP, and G800L optical elements as part of the ACS guaranteed time observation program. Spectra extracted from the ACS G800L grism exposures confirm that the objects are Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) at redshifts z=0.47 and z=0.95. Follow-up HST observations have been conducted with ACS in F775W and F850LP and with NICMOS in the near-infrared F110W bandpass, yielding a total of 9 flux measurements in the 3 bandpasses over a period of 50 days in the observed frame. We discuss many of the important issues in doing accurate photometry with the ACS. We analyze the multi-band light curves using two different fitting methods to calibrate the supernovae luminosities and place them on the SNe Ia Hubble diagram. The resulting distances are consistent with the redshift-distance relation of the accelerating universe model, although evolving intergalactic grey dust remains as a less likely possibility. The relative ease with which these SNe Ia were found, confirmed, and monitored demonstrates the potential ACS holds for revolutionizing the field of high-redshift SNe Ia, and therefore of testing the accelerating universe cosmology and constraining the "epoch of deceleration".

=== arXiv:0301233v2  [2003-01-14]
TITLE  : The bi-variate luminosity-color distribution of IRAS galaxies, and implications for the high redshift Universe
AUTHORS: S. C. Chapman, G. Helou, G. F. Lewis, D. A. Dale
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.588:186-198,2003
DOI    : 10.1086/374038
ABS    : We present a characterization of the local luminosity-color, bi-variate distribution of IRAS galaxies from the 1.2Jy sample, selected at 60 micron. The S60/S100 infrared color is used as the best single parameter description of the IR spectral energy distribution of galaxies. We derive an analytical form of the distribution and use it to constrain the effect of the IR color distribution on evolution models for high redshift, farIR luminous galaxies. Our adopted evolution retains the locally observed correlation between luminosity and color, such that the larger characteristic luminosities at higher redshift have a warmer characteristic color. The width of the color distribution at a given luminosity remains constant for all redshifts. We demonstrate that there is the potential for both hotter and colder sources to be missed in cosmological surveys. An evolving bi-variate luminosity function coupled with the cold source bias of sub-mm selected surveys suggests the existence of a large population of cold sources appearing in such surveys. Likewise, a hot source bias for most SIRTF wavebands together with a bi-variate model suggests an excess of hot sources being selected. We test the evolutionary form against available data for higher redshift, farIR galaxies. The data do not reveal evidence for any strong evolution in the characteristic luminosity-color distribution as a function of redshift over 0&lt;z&lt;1. However, there is marginal evidence for a broadening of the color distribution at higher redshifts, consistent with our locally characterized trend of a broadening in the IR color distribution at the highest luminosities.

=== arXiv:0211624v2  [2002-11-28]
TITLE  : The 2dF QSO Redshift Survey - X. Lensing of Background QSOs by Galaxy Groups
AUTHORS: A. D. Myers, P. J. Outram, T. Shanks, B. J. Boyle, S. M. Croom, N. S. Loaring, L. Miller, R. J. Smith
JOURNAL: Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc.342:467,2003
DOI    : 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2003.06584.x
ABS    : We cross-correlate QSOs from the 2dF Survey with galaxy groups. The galaxy samples are limited to B &lt; 20.5. We use an objective algorithm to detect galaxy groups. A 3sigma anti-correlation is observed between QSOs and galaxy groups. This paucity of faint QSOs around groups is neither a selection effect nor due to restrictions on the placement of 2dF fibres. By observing the colours of QSOs on the scales of the anti-correlation, we limit dust in galaxy groups, finding a maximum reddening of E(b_j-r) &lt; 0.012 at the 95% level. The small amount of dust thus inferred is insufficient to cause the anti-correlation, supporting the suggestion by Croom &amp; Shanks that the signal is due to gravitational lensing. The possibility remains that tailored dust models, such as grey dust, heavy patches of dust or a combination of dust and lensing, could explain the anti-correlation. Assuming the signal is caused by lensing rather than dust, we measure the average velocity dispersion of a Singular Isothermal Sphere that would cause the anti-correlation as around 1150 km/s. Simulations reject 600 km/s at the 5% significance level. We also model foreground lenses as NFW haloes and measure the typical mass within 1.5 Mpc/h of the halo centre as M_{1.5} = (1.2 +/- 0.9) x 10^{15} solarmasses/h. Regardless of whether we utilise a SIS or NFW dark matter profile, our model favours more mass in groups than accounted for in a universe with density parameter Omega_m = 0.3. Detailed simulations and galaxy group redshifts will significantly reduce the current systematic uncertainties in these $Ω_m$ estimates. Reducing the remaining uncertainty will require larger QSO and galaxy group surveys (abridged).

=== arXiv:0209275v1  [2002-09-13]
TITLE  : Probing Disk Accretion in Young Brown Dwarfs
AUTHORS: Ray Jayawardhana, Subhanjoy Mohanty, Gibor Basri
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J. 578 (2002) L141-L144
DOI    : 10.1086/344707
ABS    : We present high-resolution optical spectra of 15 objects near or below the sub-stellar limit in the Upper Scorpius and $ρ$ Ophiuchus star-forming regions. These spectra, obtained with the HIRES instrument on the Keck I telescope, are used to investigate disk accretion, rotation and activity in young very low mass objects. We report the detection of a broad, asymmetric H$α$ emission line in the $ρ$ Oph source GY 5 which is also known to harbor mid-infrared excess, consistent with the presence of an accreting disk. The H$α$ profiles of the Upper Sco objects suggest little or no on-going accretion. Our results imply that if most brown dwarfs are born with disks, their accretion rates decrease rapidly, at timescales comparable to or smaller than those for T Tauri disks. The Upper Sco brown dwarfs appear to be rotating faster than their somewhat younger counterparts in Taurus, consistent with spin-up due to contraction following disk unlocking. The H$α$ activity is comparable to saturated activity levels in field M dwarfs with similar spectral type and rotation rates. Comparison of our data with published (albeit lower-resolution) spectra of a few of the same objects from other epochs suggests possible variability in accretion/activity indicators.

=== arXiv:0207626v1  [2002-07-29]
TITLE  : Detection of Molecular Hydrogen Orbiting a "Naked" T Tauri Star
AUTHORS: Jeffrey S. Bary, David A. Weintraub, Joel H. Kastner
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J. 576 (2002) L73-L76
DOI    : 10.1086/343064
ABS    : Astronomers have established that for a few million years newborn stars possess disks of orbiting gas and dust. Such disks, which are likely sites of planet formation, appear to disappear once these stars reach ages of 5-10 times 10^6 yr; yet, &gt;= 10^7 yr is thought necessary for giant planet formation. If disks dissipate in less time than is needed for giant planet formation, such planets may be rare and those known around nearby stars would be anomalies. Herein, we report the discovery of H_2 gas orbiting a weak-lined T Tauri star heretofore presumed nearly devoid of circumstellar material. We estimate that a significant amount of H_2 persists in the gas phase, but only a tiny fraction of this mass emits in the near-infrared. We propose that this star possesses an evolved disk that has escaped detection thus far because much of the dust has coagulated into planetesimals. This discovery suggests that the theory that disks are largely absent around such stars should be reconsidered. The widespread presence of such disks would indicate that planetesimals can form quickly and giant planet formation can proceed to completion before the gas in circumstellar disks disperses.

=== arXiv:0207567v1  [2002-07-25]
TITLE  : The Infrared Emission of Circumstellar Envelopes, Dark Silhouettes and Photoionized Disks in HII Regions
AUTHORS: M. Robberto, S. V. W. Beckwith, N. Panagia
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J. 578 (2002) 897-913
DOI    : 10.1086/342615
ABS    : We model the IR Spectral Energy Distribution of circumstellar disks embedded in a HII region and photoevaporated by the external UV radiation. The model applies to the photoevaporated disks (proplyds) in Orion Nebula. First we calculate the IR emission of a PMS star surrounded by a dusty globule that is immersed within an HII region. The globule is assumed to be spherical, homogeneous, optically thin in the IR and photoevaporated according to the Dyson (1968) model. Second, we consider the IR emission of a disk directly exposed to the nebular environment. The disk is passive and treated according to the Chiang and Goldreich (1997) model. We improve over the CG97 treatment by tracing the propagation of the various radiative fluxes through the disk superheated atmosphere. Since the opposite disk sides receive different amounts of radiation, the flaring angle and the surface temperature distributions are different, resulting in well distinguished SEDs for the two disk faces. Finally, we combine the globule and disk models to estimate the IR emission of proplyds. The energy input from the central star and the nebular environment increase the disk flaring angle, and therefore also the amount of stellar radiation intercepted by the disk. The relative intensity of the disk vs. envelope emission varies with the tilt angle relative to the directions of th1Ori-C, and of the Earth. We explore the dependence of the SEDs upon the tilt angle with respect to the Earth, the distance from th1Ori-C, the size on the envelope, the inner disk radius and the temperature of the central star. The resulting SEDs are characterized by a broad peak of emission at 30-60micron, and are in general significantly different from those of isolated disks in low-mass star forming regions like Taurus-Auriga.

=== arXiv:0207463v1  [2002-07-22]
TITLE  : Exploring Brown Dwarf Disks in rho Oph
AUTHORS: A. Natta, L. Testi, F. Comeron, E. Oliva, F. D'Antona, C. Baffa, G. Comoretto, S. Gennari
JOURNAL: Astron.Astrophys. 393 (2002) 597-610
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361:20021065
ABS    : This paper discusses evidence for and properties of disks associated to brown dwarfs in the star-forming region rho-Oph. We selected nine objects fr om the ISOCAM survey of Bontemps et al. (2001) that have detections in the two mid-infrared bands (6.7 and 14.3 um), relatively low extinction and low luminosity. We present low-resolution near-infrared spectra in the J, H and K bands, and determine for each source spectral type, extinction, effective temperature a nd luminosity by comparing the spectra to those of field dwarfs and to the most recent model stellar atmospheres. The results indicate that eight objects have spectral types M6-M7.5, effective temperature of 2600-2700 K, one has a later spectral type (M8.5) and lower temperature (about 2400 K). The derived extinctions range between Av~2 and 8 mag. The location of the objects on the HR diagram, in spite of the uncertainties of the evolutionary tracks for young objects of substellar mass, indicates that all the objects are very young and have masses below about 0.08 Msun. The coolest object in our sample has mass in the range 8-12 Mjup (0.008-0.012 Msun). In all cases, the mid-infrared excess is consistent with the predictions of mode ls of disks irradiated by the central object, showing that circumstellar disks are commonly associated to young brown dwarfs and plan etary-mass objects. Finally, we discuss possible variations of the disk geometry among different objects, as well as the possibility of using these data to discriminate between various f ormation scenarios.

=== arXiv:0207312v1  [2002-07-15]
TITLE  : Power spectrum of the cosmic infrared background at 60 and 100 microns with IRAS
AUTHORS: M. -A. Miville-Deschenes, G. Lagache, J. -L. Puget
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361:20020929
ABS    : Based on a power spectrum analysis of the IRAS ISSA maps, we present the first detection of the Cosmic far-Infrared Background (CIB) fluctuations at 60 and 100 microns. The power spectrum of 12 low cirrus emission regions is characterized by a power excess at spatial frequencies higher than k~0.02 arcmin^{-1}. Most of this excess is due to noise and to nearby point sources with a flux stronger than 1 Jy. But we show that when these contributions are carefully removed, there is still a power excess that is the signature of the CIB fluctuations. The power spectrum of the CIB at 60 and 100 microns is compatible with a Poissonian distribution, at spatial frequencies between 0.025 and 0.2 arcmin^{-1}. The fluctuation level is ~1.6x10^3 Jy^2/sr and ~5.8x10^3 Jy^2/sr at 60 and 100 microns respectively. The levels of the fluctuations are used in a larger framework, with other observationnal data, to constrain the evolution of IR galaxies (Lagache et al. 2002). The detections reported here, coupled with the level of the fluctuations at 170 microns, give strong constraints on the evolution of the IR luminosity function. The combined results at 60, 100 and 170 microns for the CIB and its fluctuations allows, on the CIB at 60 microns, to put a firm upper limit of 0.27 MJy/sr and to give an estimate of 0.18 MJy/sr.

=== arXiv:0203296v2  [2002-03-19]
TITLE  : Remnants of Sagittarius Dwarf Spheroidal Galaxy around the young globular cluster Palomar 12
AUTHORS: D. Martinez-Delgado, R. Zinn, R. Carrera, C. Gallart
DOI    : 10.1086/341970
ABS    : Photometry of a large field around the young globular cluster Palomar 12 has revealed the main-sequence of a low surface-brightness stellar system. This main-sequence is indicative of a stellar population that varies significantly in metallicity and/or age, but in the mean is more metal poor than Pal 12. Under different assumptions for the properties of this population, we find distances from the Sun in the range 17-24 kpc, which encompasses the distance to Pal 12, $19.0\pm0.9$ kpc. The stellar system is also detected in a field 2$\arcdeg$ North of Pal 12, which indicates it has a minimum diameter of $\sim0.9$ kpc. The orbit of Pal 12 (Dinescu et al. 2000), the color-magnitude diagram of the stellar system, their positions on the sky, and their distances suggest that they are debris from the tidal disruption of the Sgr dSph galaxy. We discuss briefly the implications for the evolution of Sgr and the Galactic halo.

=== arXiv:0202331v1  [2002-02-18]
TITLE  : The far-infrared energy distributions of Seyfert and starburst galaxies in the Local Universe: ISO photometry of the 12 micron active galaxy sample
AUTHORS: Luigi Spinoglio, Paola Andreani, Matthew A. Malkan
DOI    : 10.1086/340302
ABS    : New far-infrared photometry with ISOPHOT, onboard the Infrared Space Observatory, is presented for 58 galaxies with homogeneous published data for another 32 galaxies all belonging to the 12 micron galaxy sample. In total 29 Seyfert 1's, 35 Seyfert 2's and 12 starburst galaxies, about half of the 12 micron active galaxy sample, plus 14 normal galaxies for comparison. The ISO and the IRAS data are used to define color-color diagrams and spectral energy distributions (SED). Thermal dust emission at two temperatures (one cold at 15-30K and one warm at 50-70K) can fit the 60-200 micron SED, with a dust emissivity law proportional to the inverse square of the wavelength. Seyfert 1's and Seyfert 2's are indistinguishable longward of 100 micron, while, as already seen by IRAS, the former have flatter SEDs shortward of 60 micron. A mild anti-correlation is found between the [200 - 100] color and the "60 micron excess". We infer that this is due to the fact that galaxies with a strong starburst component, and thus a strong 60 micron flux, have a steeper far-infrared turnover. In non-Seyfert galaxies, increasing the luminosity corresponds to increasing the star formation rate, that enhances the 25 and 60 micron emission. This shifts the peak emission from around 150 micron in the most quiescent spirals to shorter than 60 micron in the strongest starburst galaxies.

=== arXiv:0202132v2  [2002-02-06]
TITLE  : The 60-micron extragalactic background radiation intensity, dust-enshrouded AGNs and the assembly of groups and clusters of galaxies
AUTHORS: Andrew W. Blain, Tom Phillips
JOURNAL: Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc. 333 (2002) 222
DOI    : 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2002.05398.x
ABS    : Submillimetre observations reveal a cosmologically significant population of high-redshift dust-enshrouded galaxies. The form of evolution inferred for this population can be reconciled easily with COBE FIRAS and DIRBE measurements of the cosmic background radiation (CBR) at wavelengths &gt;100 microns. At shorter wavelengths, however, the 60-micron CBR intensity reported by Finkbeiner et al. is less easily accounted for. Lagache et al. have proposed that this excess CBR emission is a warm Galactic component, and the detection of the highest-energy gamma-rays from blazars limits the CBR intensity at these wavelengths, but here we investigate sources of this excess CBR emission, assuming that it has a genuine extragalactic origin. We propose and test three explanations, each involving additional populations not readily detected in existing submm-wave surveys. First, dust-enshrouded galaxies with hot dust temperatures, perhaps dust-enshrouded, Compton-thick AGN as suggested by recent deep Chandra surveys. Secondly, a population of relatively low-redshift dusty galaxies with SEDs more typical of the existing submm-selected galaxies, which could plausibly be associated with the assembly of groups and clusters of galaxies. Thirdly, a population of low-luminosity, cool, quiescent spiral galaxies. Hot AGN and the assembly of groups can account for the excess 60-micron background. There are significant problems with the cluster assembly scenario, in which too many bright IRAS sources are predicted. Spiral galaxies have the wrong SEDs to account for the excess. Future wide-field far-IR surveys using SIRTF and Herschel will sample representative volumes of the distant Universe, allowing any hot population of dusty AGNs and forming groups to be detected.

=== arXiv:0201196v1  [2002-01-12]
TITLE  : Distant Supernovae and the Accelerating Universe
AUTHORS: E. L. Wright
ABS    : The observation of SN 1997ff at redshift 1.7 has been claimed to refute alternative models such as grey dust or evolution for the faintness of distant supernovae, leaving only an accelerating Universe as a viable model. However, a very simple one parameter evolution model, with the peak luminosity varying as an exponential function of cosmic time, converts the flux vs. distance law of the critical density matter-dominated model into that of the concordance Omega_matter = 0.3 flat vacuum-dominated model with an error no larger than 0.03 mag over the range 0-2 in redshift. A grey dust model that matches this accuracy can easily be contrived but it still fails by overproducing the far-IR background or distorting the CMB. Models that involve oscillation between photons and axions could emulate an exponential function of cosmic time without violating these background constraints. Clearly a better and well-tested understanding of the Type Ia supernova explosion mechanism and the origin of the correlation between the decay rate and luminosity is needed before any effort to reduce statistical errors in the supernova Hubble diagram to very small levels.

=== arXiv:0201048v1  [2002-01-04]
TITLE  : X-ray transient AGN and galaxies, and why we need new soft X-ray surveys
AUTHORS: D. Grupe
ABS    : X-ray transience is the most extreme form of variability observed in AGN or normal non-active galaxies. While factors of 2-3 on timescales of days to years are quite common among AGN, X-ray transients appear only once and vanish from the X-ray sky years later. The ROSAT All-Sky Survey with its sensitivity to energies down to 0.1 keV was the an ideal tool to discover these sources. X-ray transience in AGN or galaxies can be caused by dramatic changes in the accretion rate of the central black hole or by changes of the properties of the accretion disk. So far only a handful of sources are known. In order to estimate how often such an event occurs in a galaxy, a new soft X-ray survey is needed. In these proceedings I describe the currently known X-ray transient AGN and galaxies and will argue for a new soft X-ray survey in order to discover more of these extreme X-ray sources.

=== arXiv:0201012v1  [2002-01-02]
TITLE  : Measuring the properties of extragalactic dust and implications for the Hubble diagram
AUTHORS: Ariel Goobar, Lars Bergstrom, Edvard Mortsell
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361:20020002
ABS    : Scattering and absorption of light by a homogeneous distribution of intergalactic large dust grains has been proposed as an alternative, non-cosmological explanation for the faintness of Type Ia supernovae at $z\s im 0.5$. We investigate the differential extinction for high-redshift sources caused by extragalactic dust along the line of sight. Future observations of Type Ia supernovae up to $z\sim 2$, e.g. by the proposed SNAP satellite, will allow the measurement of the properties of dust over cosmological distances. We show that 1% {\em relative} spectrophotometric accuracy (or broadband photometry) in the wavelength interval 0.7--1.5 $μ$m is required to measure the extinction caused by ``grey'' dust down to $δm=0.02$ magnitudes. We also argue that the presence of grey dust is not necessarily inconsistent with the recent measurement of the brightness of a supernova at $z=1.7$ (SN 1997ff), in the absence of accurate spectrophotometric information of the supernova.

=== arXiv:0112340v1  [2001-12-14]
TITLE  : Gravitational Lensing of the Most Distant Known Supernova, SN1997ff
AUTHORS: Christofer Gunnarsson
ABS    : We investigate the effect of gravitational lensing on the farthest known supernova, SN1997ff. The SN was found at z~1.7 in the Hubble Deep Field North and is most likely of Type Ia. Due to our poor knowledge of the properties of the lensing foreground galaxies, we conclude that large magnification effects are possible for reasonable lens parameter values implying that this single SN does not put any strong constraints on the cosmological parameters, grey dust obscuration or luminosity evolution of SNIa until we can model the lensing with high accuracy.

=== arXiv:0112319v1  [2001-12-13]
TITLE  : No disks around low-mass stars and brown dwarfs in the young sigma Orionis cluster?
AUTHORS: J. M. Oliveira, R. D. Jeffries, M. J. Kenyon, S. A. Thompson, Tim Naylor
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361:20011778
ABS    : We report on the analysis of 2MASS near-infrared data of a sample of low-mass stars and brown dwarfs in the sigma Orionis cluster. Youth and cluster membership have been spectroscopically confirmed using the Li I spectral line. We find little evidence in the JHKs colour-colour diagram for near-infrared excess emission for these cluster members. By comparison with model expectations, at most 2 out of 34 stars show (H-K) colour consistent with a near-infrared excess. This scarcity of near-infrared signatures of circumstellar disks in the lower-mass and substellar regimes of this cluster contrasts with findings in younger clusters, hinting at an age dependence of the disk frequency. Taking into account the apparent cluster age, our result supports the idea of a relatively fast (few Myr) disk dissipation and extends this conclusion to the substellar regime. We also find some evidence that, in this cluster, the disk frequency as measured by the Ks-band excess may be mass dependent.

=== arXiv:0112206v1  [2001-12-10]
TITLE  : The Infall of Gas onto the Galactic Disk
AUTHORS: Brad K. Gibson
ABS    : Ongoing accretion of low-metallicity gas onto the disk is a natural prediction of semi-analytical Galactic chemical evolution models. This star formation fuel ameliorates the overproduction of metal-poor G- and K-dwarfs in the solar neighbourhood which otherwise plague so-called ``closed-box'' models of Galaxy evolution. Do High-Velocity Clouds (HVCs) represent the source of this necessary fuel? We know that HVCs provide an important clue as to the processes governing galaxy formation and evolution - what is less clear is whether their role lies more closely aligned with cosmology (as relics of the Local Group's formation) or star formation (as tidal debris from nearby disrupted dwarfs, or the waste byproducts of disk supernova-driven winds). I provide a summary of recent speculations as to the origins of HVCs, and highlight several future projects which will lead to a deeper understanding of the role they play in galaxy evolution.

=== arXiv:0108398v1  [2001-08-24]
TITLE  : X-ray transient AGN and galaxies
AUTHORS: D. Grupe
ABS    : X-ray transience is the most extreme form of variability observed in AGN or normal in-active galaxies. While factors of 2-3 on timescales of days to years are quite commen among AGN, X-ray transients appear only once and vanish from the X-ray sky years later. The ROSAT All-Sky Survey was the tool to discover these sources. X-ray transience in AGN or galaxies can be caused by dramatic changes in the accretion rate of the central black hole or by changes of the properties of the accretion disk.

=== arXiv:0108034v1  [2001-08-14]
TITLE  : Formation of Nuclear "Pasta" in Cold Neutron Star Matter
AUTHORS: Kei Iida, Gentaro Watanabe, Katsuhiko Sato
JOURNAL: Prog.Theor.Phys. 106 (2001) 551-559; Erratum-ibid. 110 (2003) 847-848
DOI    : 10.1143/PTP.106.551
ABS    : Formation and decay of rod-like and slab-like nuclei, as may be encountered in the outer parts of neutron stars, are examined within a zero-temperature stability analysis with respect to perturbations inducing fission and proton clustering. The nonspherical nuclei are found to be stable against these perturbations, implying the possibility that the size of the stellar region containing such nuclei exceeds the equilibrium prediction.

=== arXiv:0107458v1  [2001-07-24]
TITLE  : Evidence for Circumstellar Disks around Young Brown Dwarfs in the Trapezium Cluster
AUTHORS: August Muench, Joao Alves, Charles Lada, Elizabeth Lada
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.558:L51-L54,2001
DOI    : 10.1086/323420
ABS    : We report the results of deep infrared observations of brown dwarf candidates in the Trapezium cluster in Orion. Analysis of the JHK color-color diagram indicates that a large fraction (approx 65% +/- 15%) of the observed sources exhibit infrared excess emission. This suggests the extreme youth of these objects and in turn, provides strong independent confirmation of the existence of a large population of substellar objects in the cluster. Moreover, this suggests that the majority of these substellar objects are presently surrounded by circumstellar disks similar to the situation for the stellar population of the cluster. This evidence for a high initial disk frequency (&gt; 50%) around cluster members of all masses combined with the smooth continuity of the cluster's initial mass function across the hydrogen burning limit suggests that a single physical mechanism is likely responsible for producing the entire cluster mass spectrum down to near the deuterium burning limit. The results may also indicate that even substellar objects are capable of forming with systems of planetary companions.

=== arXiv:0107065v2  [2001-07-18]
TITLE  : New hairy black holes with negative cosmological constant
AUTHORS: J. J. van der Bij, Eugen Radu
JOURNAL: Phys.Lett. B536 (2002) 107-113
DOI    : 10.1016/S0370-2693(02)01808-7
ABS    : Black hole solutions with nonspherical event horizon topology are shown to exist in an Einstein-Yang-Mills theory with negative cosmological constant. The main characteristics of the solutions are presented and differences with respect to the spherically symmetric case are studied. The stability of these configurations is also addressed.

=== arXiv:0105355v2  [2001-05-21]
TITLE  : Gravitational lensing of the farthest known supernova SN1997ff
AUTHORS: Edvard Moertsell, Christofer Gunnarsson, Ariel Goobar
JOURNAL: ApJ, 561, 106 (2001)
DOI    : 10.1086/323242
ABS    : We investigate the effects of gravitational lensing due to intervening galaxies on the recently discovered Type Ia supernova at z=1.7, SN1997ff, in the Hubble Deep Field North. We find that it is possible to obtain a wide range of magnifications by varying the mass and/or the velocity dispersion normalization of the lensing galaxies. In order to be able to use SN1997ff to constrain the redshift-distance relation, very detailed modeling of the galaxies to control the systematic effects from lensing is necessary. Thus we argue, that based on our current limited knowledge of the lensing galaxies, it is difficult to use SN1997ff to constrain the values of Omega_M and Omega_Lambda, or even to place severe limits on grey dust obscuration or luminosity evolution of Type Ia supernovae.

=== arXiv:0105295v1  [2001-05-17]
TITLE  : Spectropolarimetry of the Type II Supernovae 1997ds, 1998A, and 1999gi
AUTHORS: Douglas C. Leonard, Alexei V. Filippenko
JOURNAL: 2001, PASP, 113, 920
DOI    : 10.1086/322151
ABS    : We present single-epoch spectropolarimetry of the Type II supernovae (SNe II) 1997ds, 1998A, and 1999gi. SN 1997ds and SN 1998A were both observed during the early photospheric phase, while spectropolarimetry of SN 1999gi was obtained near the start of the transition to the nebular phase. Uncorrected for interstellar polarization (ISP), SN 1997ds is characterized by p_V = 0.85 +/- 0.02%, SN 1998A has p_V = 0.24 +/- 0.05%, and SN 1999gi is polarized at p_V = 5.72 +/- 0.01%. The low continuum polarization inferred for SN 1997ds and SN 1998A and the amplitude of polarization modulations across strong line features are consistent with those measured at similar epochs for SN 1987A and the Type II-plateau SN 1999em, and supports the growing consensus that core-collapse events with hydrogen envelopes substantially intact at the time of explosion are not significantly aspherical during the early photospheric phase. The spectral shape of the high continuum polarization of SN 1999gi closely resembles a ``Serkowski'' ISP curve, and is inconsistent with the wavelength-independent nature of electron scattering expected for an aspherical SN atmosphere. Since Galactic reddening is minimal along this line-of-sight, the majority of the observed polarization in SN 1999gi is believed to be due to ISP of the host galaxy, although significant (up to p = 2%) intrinsic polarization cannot be ruled out. The potential power of SN spectropolarimetry to study the properties of interstellar dust in external galaxies is described and applied to the SN 1999gi data, where it is shown that if the polarization is indeed predominantly interstellar in origin, then R_V = 3.0 +/- 0.2 for the dust along this line-of-sight in NGC 3184.

=== arXiv:0104455v1  [2001-04-27]
TITLE  : The Farthest Known Supernova: Support for an Accelerating Universe and a Glimpse of the Epoch of Deceleration
AUTHORS: Adam G. Riess, Peter E. Nugent, Brian P. Schmidt, John Tonry, Mark Dickinson, Ronald L. Gilliland, Rodger I. Thompson, Tamas Budavari
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.560:49-71,2001
DOI    : 10.1086/322348
ABS    : We present photometric observations of an apparent Type Ia supernova (SN Ia) at a redshift of ~1.7, the farthest SN observed to date. SN 1997ff, was discovered in a repeat observation by the HST of the HDF-), and serendipitously monitored with NICMOS on HST throughout the GTO campaign. The SN type can be determined from the host galaxy type:an evolved, red elliptical lacking enough recent star formation to provide a significant population of core-collapse SNe. The class- ification is further supported by diagnostics available from the observed colors and temporal behavior of the SN, both of which match a typical SN Ia. The photo- metric record of the SN includes a dozen flux measurements in the I, J, and H bands spanning 35 days in the observed frame. The redshift derived from the SN photometry, z=1.7+/-0.1, is in excellent agreement with the redshift estimate of z=1.65+/-0.15 derived from the U_300,B_450,V_606,I_814,J_110,J_125,H_160, H_165,K_s photometry of the galaxy. Optical and near-infrared spectra of the host provide a very tentative spectroscopic redshift of 1.755. Fits to observations of the SN provide constraints for the redshift-distance relation of SNe~Ia and a powerful test of the current accelerating Universe hypothesis. The apparent SN brightness is consistent with that expected in the decelerating phase of the preferred cosmological model, Omega_M~1/3, Omega_Lambda~2/3. It is inconsistent with grey dust or simple luminosity evolution, candidate astro- physical effects which could mimic past evidence for an accelerating Universe from SNe Ia at z~0.5.We consider several sources of possible systematic error including lensing, SN misclassification, selection bias, and calibration errors. Currently, none of these effects appears likely to challenge our conclusions.

=== arXiv:0104441v2  [2001-04-26]
TITLE  : What is the real nature of HD 108 ?
AUTHORS: Yael Naze, Jean-Marie Vreux, Gregor Rauw
JOURNAL: A&amp;A, 372, 195 (2001)
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361:20010473
ABS    : Since the beginning of the past century, the nature of HD 108 has been a subject of intense debate. One after another, astronomers explored its variability and attributed it either to binarity, or to changes in the stellar wind of a single star. In this article, we analyse a 30 years long campaign of spectroscopic observations of this star with special emphasis on the last 15 years during which photographic plates have been replaced by CCD detectors. Our investigation of the radial velocities of HD 108 yields no significant short- or long-term period and does not confirm the published periodicities either. Though the radial velocity of HD 108 appears clearly variable, the variations cannot be explained by the orbital motion in a spectroscopic binary. However, our data reveal spectacular changes in the H I Balmer lines and some He I profiles over the years. These lines continuously evolved from P Cygni profiles to `pure' absorption lines. A similar behaviour was already observed in the past, suggesting that these changes are recurrent. HD 108 seems to share several characteristics of Oe stars and we discuss different hypotheses for the origin of the observed long-term variations. As we are now in a transition period, a continuous monitoring of HD 108 should be considered for the next few years.

=== arXiv:0104268v1  [2001-04-16]
TITLE  : The Variability of T Tau, RY Tau and RW Aur from 1899 to 1952
AUTHORS: Tracy L. Beck, M. Simon
DOI    : 10.1086/321133
ABS    : We present the historical light curve of T Tau derived from photographic plates in the Harvard College Observatory archives. We find that the optical light of T Tau varied by 2-3 (or more) magnitudes on time scales as short as a month prior to ~1917, consistent with the results of Lozinskii (1949). Extreme light fluctuations of greater than 2 magnitudes abruptly ceased in the late 1910's and, to the best of our knowledge, have not repeated since this time. We compare the observed light variations of T Tau to the T Tauri stars RY Tau and RW Aur, whose light curves we also constructed from inspection of the archival plates. We find that variable extinction along the line of sight to the star is the most likely explanation for the observed light fluctuation of T Tau during the early part of the 20th century.

=== arXiv:0103185v1  [2001-03-13]
TITLE  : Dusty Debris Around Solar-Type Stars: Temporal Disk Evolution
AUTHORS: C. Spangler, A. I. Sargent, M. D. Silverstone, E. E. Becklin, B. Zuckerman
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.555:932-944,2001
DOI    : 10.1086/321490
ABS    : Using ISO-ISOPHOT we carried out a survey of almost 150 stars to search for evidence of emission from dust orbiting young main sequence stars, both in clusters and isolated systems. Over half of the detections are new examples of dusty stellar systems, and demonstrate that such dust can be detected around numerous stars older than a few x 10^6 years. Fluxes at 60 microns and either 90 or 100 microns for the new excess sources together with improved fluxes for a number of IRAS-identified sources are presented. Analysis of the excess luminosity relative to the stellar photosphere shows a systematic decline of this excess with stellar age consistent with a power law index of -2.

=== arXiv:0102154v2  [2001-02-08]
TITLE  : Radio Properties of Infrared Selected Galaxies in the IRAS 2 Jy Sample
AUTHORS: Min S. Yun, Naveen A. Reddy, J. J. Condon
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J.554:803,2001
DOI    : 10.1086/323145
ABS    : The radio counterparts to the IRAS Redshift Survey galaxies are identified in the NRAO VLA Sky Survey (NVSS) catalog. Our new catalog of the infrared flux-limited (S60 &gt;= 2 Jy) complete sample of 1809 galaxies lists accurate radio positions, redshifts, and 1.4 GHz radio and IRAS fluxes. This sample is six times larger in size and five times deeper in redshift coverage (to z ~ 0.15) compared with those used in earlier studies of the radio and far-infrared (FIR) properties of galaxies in the local volume. The well known radio-FIR correlation is obeyed by the overwhelming majority (&gt;98%) of the infrared-selected galaxies, and the radio AGNs identified by their excess radio emission constitute only about 1% of the sample, independent of the IR luminosity. These FIR-selected galaxies can account for the entire population of late-type field galaxies in the local volume, and their radio continuum may be used directly to infer the extinction-free star formation rate in most cases. Both the 1.4 GHz radio and 60 micron infrared luminosity functions are reasonably well described by linear sums of two Schechter functions, one representing normal, late-type field galaxies and the second representing starbursts and other luminous infrared galaxies. The integrated FIR luminosity density for the local volume is 4.8+/-0.5 x 10^7 L(sun) per Mpc^3, less than 10% of which is contributed by the luminous infrared galaxies with L(FIR) &gt; 10^{11} L(sun) . The inferred extinction-free star formation density for the local volume is 0.015 +/- 0.005 solar mass per year per Mpc^3.

=== arXiv:0101177v1  [2001-01-11]
TITLE  : The broad-line radio galaxy story
AUTHORS: Ilse van Bemmel
ABS    : In this paper I discuss the issue of the so-called 25 micron-peakers, which were discovered with IRAS, and consist almost solely of broad-line radio galaxies. I find that this peak is caused by the absence of colder dust that emits at 60 micron and not by an excess of hot dust, as suggested by the name. On optical images, the 25 micron-peakers show a lack of extended dust. The peakers are consistent with being in a later evolutionary stage, in which all the extended dust has been formed into stars and the dust torus is smaller. If the 60 micron dust is heated by stars, there might be a correlation between the star-formation rate and the power of the AGN.

=== arXiv:0011137v1  [2000-11-07]
TITLE  : Incidence and survival of remnant disks around main-sequence stars
AUTHORS: H. J. Habing, C. Dominik, M. Jourdain de Muizon, R. J. Laureijs, M. F. Kessler, K. Leech, L. Metcalfe, A. Salama
DOI    : 10.1051/0004-6361:20000075
ABS    : We present photometric ISO 60 and 170um measurements, complemented by some IRAS data at 60um, of a sample of 84 nearby main-sequence stars of spectral class A, F, G and K in order to determine the incidence of dust disks around such main-sequence stars. Of the stars younger than 400 Myr one in two has a disk; for the older stars this is true for only one in ten. We conclude that most stars arrive on the main sequence surrounded by a disk; this disk then decays in about 400 Myr. Because (i) the dust particles disappear and must be replenished on a much shorter time scale and (ii) the collision of planetesimals is a good source of new dust, we suggest that the rapid decay of the disks is caused by the destruction and escape of planetesimals. We suggest that the dissipation of the disk is related to the heavy bombardment phase in our Solar System. Whether all stars arrive on the main sequence surrounded by a disk cannot be established: some very young stars do not have a disk. And not all stars destroy their disk in a similar way: some stars as old as the Sun still have significant disks.

=== arXiv:0010286v2  [2000-10-15]
TITLE  : On the Nonspherical Nature of Halo Formation
AUTHORS: Tzihong Chiueh, Jounghun Lee
DOI    : 10.1086/321447
ABS    : We present a new collapse condition to describe the formation of dark halos via nonspherical gravitational clustering. This new nonspherical collapse condition is obtained by the logical generalization of the spherical model to the nonspherical one. By solving a diffusion-like random matrix equation with the help of the Monte Carlo method, we show that this nonspherical collapse condition yields the mass function derived by Sheth &amp; Tormen (1999) which has been shown to be in excellent agreement with the recent N-body results of high resolution. We expect that this nonspherical collapse condition might provide us a deeper insight into the structure formation, and suggest that it should be widely applied to various cosmological issues such as the galaxy merging history, the galaxy bias, and so forth.

=== arXiv:0007054v1  [2000-07-24]
TITLE  : Continuum Strong QCD: Confinement and Dynamical Chiral Symmetry Breaking
AUTHORS: Craig D. Roberts
ABS    : Continuum strong QCD is the application of models and continuum quantum field theory to the study of phenomena in hadronic physics, which includes; e.g., the spectrum of QCD bound states and their interactions. Herein I provide a Dyson-Schwinger equation perspective, focusing on qualitative aspects of confinement and dynamical chiral symmetry breaking in cold, sparse QCD, and also elucidating consequences of the axial-vector Ward-Takahashi identity and features of the heavy-quark limit.

=== arXiv:0007189v1  [2000-07-13]
TITLE  : Three Dimensional Magneto-Hydrodynamical Modeling of Planetary Nebuale ~ II: The Formation of Bipolar and Elliptical Nebulae with Point-Symmetric Structures and Collimated Outflows
AUTHORS: G. García-Segura, J. A. López
DOI    : 10.1086/317186
ABS    : This work presents three dimensional, magneto-hydrodynamical simulations of the formation and early evolution of a subgroup of planetary nebulae that exhibit a variety of point-symmetric structures. For bipolar nebulae, the formation of point-symmetric nebular shapes along the inner borders of their opposing lobes and/or collimated outflows or jets internal or external to their cavities, is reproduced by considering a steady misalignment of the magnetic collimation axis with respect to the symmetry axis of the bipolar wind outflow, defined perpendicular to the equatorial density enhancement. Elliptical planetary nebulae with ansae displaced from the symmetry axis in point-symmetric fashion are reproduced through the same process by reducing the equatorial density enhancement. This mechanism represents an alternative explanation to some cases where morphological appearances give the impression of the action of a symmetric, rotating or precessing jet from the central source. The computational survey reveals that jet formation is detected only for dense enough winds with mass loss rates $\gtrsim 10^{-7}$ \Moy. For lower mass loss rates the jets tend to vanish leaving behind only ansae-like structures at the tips of the lobes, as observed in some cases. The results are rather independent of the wind terminal velocity, since magnetized bubbles behave adiabatically for low wind velocities ($\simeq$ $100 \kms$), which in the absence of a magnetic field would behave as momentum driven.

=== arXiv:0005064v1  [2000-05-24]
TITLE  : Dyson-Schwinger Equations: Density, Temperature and Continuum Strong QCD
AUTHORS: C. D. Roberts, S. M. Schmidt
JOURNAL: Prog.Part.Nucl.Phys.45:S1-S103,2000
DOI    : 10.1016/S0146-6410(00)90011-5
ABS    : Continuum strong QCD is the application of models and continuum quantum field theory to the study of phenomena in hadronic physics, which includes; e.g., the spectrum of QCD bound states and their interactions; and the transition to, and properties of, a quark gluon plasma. We provide a contemporary perspective, couched primarily in terms of the Dyson-Schwinger equations but also making comparisons with other approaches and models. Our discourse provides a practitioners' guide to features of the Dyson-Schwinger equations [such as confinement and dynamical chiral symmetry breaking] and canvasses phenomenological applications to light meson and baryon properties in cold, sparse QCD. These provide the foundation for an extension to hot, dense QCD, which is probed via the introduction of the intensive thermodynamic variables: chemical potential and temperature. We describe order parameters whose evolution signals deconfinement and chiral symmetry restoration, and chronicle their use in demarcating the quark gluon plasma phase boundary and characterising the plasma's properties. Hadron traits change in an equilibrated plasma. We exemplify this and discuss putative signals of the effects. Finally, since plasma formation is not an equilibrium process, we discuss recent developments in kinetic theory and its application to describing the evolution from a relativistic heavy ion collision to an equilibrated quark gluon plasma.

=== arXiv:0004327v1  [2000-04-24]
TITLE  : Density dependent strong coupling constant of QCD derived from compact star data
AUTHORS: Subharthi Ray, Jishnu Dey, Mira Dey
JOURNAL: Mod.Phys.Lett. A15 (2000) 1301-1306
DOI    : 10.1142/S0217732300001626
ABS    : The present work is an endeavour to connect the properties of tiny nearly massless objects with those of some of the most massive ones, the compact stars. Since 1996 there is major influx of X-ray and $γ$ ray data from binary stars, one or both of which are compact objects that are difficult to explain as neutron stars since they contain a mass M in too small a radius R . The suggestion has been put forward that these are strange quark stars (SS) explainable in a simple model with chiral symmetry restoration (CSR) for the quarks and the M, R and other properties like QPOs (quasi periodic oscillations) in their X-ray power spectrum. It would be nice if this astrophysical data could shed some light on fundamental properties of quarks obeying QCD. One can relate the strong coupling constant of QCD, $α_s$ to the quark mass through the Dyson-Schwinger gap equation using the real time formalism of Dolan and Jackiw. This enables us to obtain the density dependence of $α_s$ from the simple CSR referred to above. This way fundamental physics, difficult to extract from other models like for example lattice QCD, can be constrained from present-day compact star data and may be put back to modelling the dense quark phase of early universe.

=== arXiv:0004110v1  [2000-04-07]
TITLE  : Cool Companions to Hot White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: Paul J. Green, Babar Ali, Ralf Napiwotzki
DOI    : 10.1086/309379
ABS    : We describe a near-IR photometric search for cool red dwarf companions to hot EUV-detected white dwarfs (WDs). While some composite systems have been found optically among WDs detected in recent EUV All-Sky Surveys, we develop an IR technique that probes farther down the main sequence, detecting yet more companions. We use detailed DA model atmosphere fits to optical spectra to predict K magnitudes and distances, against which we contrast our near-IR observations. Our photometric survey reveals 10 DAs with a significant excess in both J and K. Half are newly discovered, and are most likely previously unrecognized binary systems. Neither the frequency of infrared excess nor the mass estimate of the red dwarf companion correlate with white dwarf mass, as might be expected if either the EUV detectability or mass of the white dwarfs were significantly affected by a companion. Infrared spectra of these systems should help to determine the mass and spectral type of the cool companions presumably causing the IR excess, leading to better estimates of the mass ratio distribution in binaries. Counting previously known binaries, and resolved pairs, we find the total binary fraction of the sample is at least a third. Since most WD progenitors had initial masses larger than about 2 solar masses, we thus provide a photometric measure of the binary fraction of high mass stars that would be difficult to perform in high mass main sequence stars. We estimate that 90% of the companions are of type K or later.

=== arXiv:0003394v1  [2000-03-24]
TITLE  : A New Probe of the Molecular Gas in Galaxies: Application to M101
AUTHORS: Denise A. Smith, Ronald J. Allen, Ralph C. Bohlin, Natalya Nicholson, Theodore P. Stecher
DOI    : 10.1086/309172
ABS    : Recent studies of nearby spiral galaxies suggest that photodissociation regions (PDRs) are capable of producing much of the observed HI in galaxy disks. In that case, measurements of the HI column density and the far-ultraviolet (FUV) photon flux provide a new probe of the volume density of the local underlying H_2. We develop the method and apply it to the giant Scd spiral M101 (NGC 5457). We find that, after correction for the best-estimate gradient of metallicity in the ISM of M101 and for the extinction of the ultraviolet emission, molecular gas with a narrow range of density from 30-1000 cm^-3 is found near star- forming regions at all radii in the disk of M101 out to a distance of 12' (approximately 26 kpc), close to the photometric limit of R_25 = 13.5'. In this picture, the ISM is virtually all molecular in the inner parts of M101. The strong decrease of the HI column density in the inner disk of the galaxy at R_G &lt; 10 kpc is a consequence of a strong increase in the dust-to-gas ratio there, resulting in an increase of the H_2 formation rate on grains and a corresponding disappearance of hydrogen in its atomic form.

=== arXiv:0002422v1  [2000-02-23]
TITLE  : Simulating the effects of intergalactic grey dust
AUTHORS: Rupert A. C. Croft, Romeel Dave', Lars Hernquist, Neal Katz
DOI    : 10.1086/312666
ABS    : Using a high-resolution cosmological hydrodynamic simulation, we present a method to constrain extinction due to intergalactic grey dust based on the observed magnitudes of distant Type IA supernovae. We apply several simple prescriptions to relate the intergalactic dust density to the gas density in the simulation, thereby obtaining dust extinctions that may be directly compared to the observed distribution of supernova magnitudes. Our analysis is sensitive to the spatial distribution of grey dust, but is not dependent on its intrinsic properties such as its opacity or grain size. We present an application of our technique to the supernova data of Perlmutter et al., who find that their high redshift sample is ~0.2 magnitudes fainter than the expectation for a non-accelerating, low-density universe. We find that for grey dust to be responsible, it must be distributed quite smoothly, e.g., tracing intergalactic gas. More realistic dust distributions, such as dust tracing the metal density, are inconsistent with observations at the 1.5-2 sigma level. Upcoming observations and improved modelling of the dust distribution should lead to stronger constraints on intergalactic grey dust extinction.

=== arXiv:0002039v1  [2000-02-02]
TITLE  : Keck Speckle Imaging of the White Dwarf G29-38: No Brown Dwarf Companion Detected
AUTHORS: Marc J. Kuchner, Christopher D. Koresko, Michael E. Brown
JOURNAL: ApJ (1998) 508, L81
DOI    : 10.1086/311725
ABS    : The white dwarf Giclas 29-38 has attracted much attention due to its large infrared excess and the suggestion that excess might be due to a companion brown dwarf. We observed this object using speckle interferometry at the Keck telescope, obtaining diffraction-limited resolution (55 milliarcseconds) at K band, and found it unresolved. Assuming the entire K band excess is due to a single point-like companion, we place an upper limit on the binary separation of 30 milliarcseconds, or 0.42 AU at the star's distance of 14.1 pc. This result, combined with astroseismological data and other images of G29-38, supports the hypothesis that the source of the near-infrared excess is not a cool companion but a dust cloud.

=== arXiv:9910225v1  [1999-10-04]
TITLE  : On gap equations and color-flavor locking in cold dense QCD with three massless flavors
AUTHORS: I. A. Shovkovy, L. C. R. Wijewardhana
JOURNAL: Phys.Lett. B470 (1999) 189-199
DOI    : 10.1016/S0370-2693(99)01297-6
ABS    : The superconductivity in cold dense QCD with three massless flavors is analyzed in the framework of the Schwinger-Dyson equation. The set of two coupled gap equations for the color antitriplet, flavor antitriplet (bar{3},bar{3}) and the color sextet, flavor sextet (6,6) order parameters is derived. It is shown that the antitriplet-antitriplet gives the dominant contribution to the color-flavor locked order parameter, while the sextet-sextet is small but nonzero.

=== arXiv:9909225v1  [1999-09-14]
TITLE  : Can Dust Segregation Mimic a Cosmological Constant?
AUTHORS: Jakob T. Simonsen, Steen Hannestad
JOURNAL: Astron.Astrophys. 351 (1999) 1-9
ABS    : Recent measurements of type Ia supernovae indicate that distant supernovae are substantially fainter than expected from the standard flat cold dark matter model. One possible explanation is that the energy density in our universe is in fact dominated by a cosmological constant. Another possible solution is that there are large amounts of grey dust in the intergalactic medium. Dust grains can be grey either because they are non-spherical or very large. We have numerically investigated whether grey dust can be emitted from high redshift galaxies without also emitting standard, reddening dust, which would have been visible in the spectra of high redshift objects. Our finding is that grain velocities are almost independent of ellipticity so that if greyness are due to the grains being elongated, it will not be possible to separate grey dust from ordinary dust. We also find that velocities are fairly independent of grain size, but we cannot rule out possible sputtering of small grains, so that large, grey dust grains could be preferentially emitted. Therefore, our conclusion is that grey dust is an unlikely explanation of the data, but we cannot rule it out if the grey dust consists of large, spherical grains.

=== arXiv:9908005v2  [1999-08-02]
TITLE  : Lectures on cyclotomic Hecke algebras
AUTHORS: Susumu Ariki
ABS    : These are lecture notes prepared for London Mathematical Society Symposium "Quantum Groups" held in Durham 19-29 July 1999. We give a survey on cyclotomic Hecke algebras. These algebras have been studied by Dipper, James, Malle, Mathas and the author. In lecture one, we start with definitions. We then go on to Specht module theory of cyclotomic Hecke algebras constructed by Dipper, James and Mathas. In lecture two, we explain Ginzburg and Lusztig's theory on affine Hecke algebras and its application to cyclotomic Hecke algebras due to the author. As Kazhdan-Lusztig bases of Hecke algebras describe decomposition numbers of quantum algebras at roots of unity, canonical bases of quantum affine algebras on integrable modules describe decomposition numbers of cyclotomic Hecke algebras at roots of unity. In particular, it turns out that crystal structure in the sense of Kashiwara exists behind the representation theory of cyclotomic Hecke algebras. This was first observed by Lascoux, Leclerc and Thibon. Its interpretation in terms of socle series was proposed by Rouquier. It is further developed in Vazirani's thesis. The special case of Hecke algebras of type A is extensively studied, and its relation to Lusztig conjecture is now very clear. We explain Varagnolo and Vasserot's work and several algorithms proposed so far. Its application to the decomposition numbers of finite general linear groups due to Dipper and James is also explained. The parametrization of simple modules of cyclotomic Hecke algebras over arbitrary fields in terms of crystal graphs of quantum affine algebras is given by Mathas and the author. In the third lecture, we show that this crystal graph description fits well in the Specht module theory. It uses work of Takemura and Uglov, Varagnolo and Vasserot.

=== arXiv:9906124v2  [1999-06-30]
TITLE  : Critical gravitational collapse of a perfect fluid: nonspherical perturbations
AUTHORS: C. Gundlach
JOURNAL: Phys.Rev. D65 (2002) 084021
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevD.65.084021
ABS    : Continuously self-similar (CSS) solutions for the gravitational collapse of a spherically symmetric perfect fluid, with the equation of state p=kappa rho, with 0&lt;kappa&lt;1 a constant, are constructed numerically and their linear perturbations, both spherical and nonspherical, are investigated. The l=1 axial perturbations admit an analytical treatment. All others are studied numerically. For intermediate equations of state, with 1/9&lt;kappa&lt;0.49, the CSS solution has one spherical growing mode, but no nonspherical growing modes. That suggests that it is a critical solution even in (slightly) nonspherical collapse. For this range of kappa we predict the critical exponent for the black hole angular momentum to be 5(1+3kappa)/3(1+kappa) times the critical exponent for the black hole mass. For kappa=1/3 this gives an angular momentum critical exponent of mu=0.898, correcting a previous result. For stiff equations of state, 0.49&lt;kappa&lt;1, the CSS solution has one spherical and several nonspherical growing modes. For soft equations of state, 0&lt;kappa&lt;1/9, the CSS solution has 1+3 growing modes: a spherical one, and an l=1 axial mode (with m=-1,0,1).

=== arXiv:9906400v2  [1999-06-25]
TITLE  : Growth of Perturbation in Gravitational Collapse and Accretion
AUTHORS: Dong Lai, Peter Goldreich
DOI    : 10.1086/308821
ABS    : When a self-gravitating spherical gas cloud collapses or accretes onto a central mass, the inner region of the cloud develops a density profile $ρ\propto r^{-3/2}$ and the velocity approaches free-fall. We show that in this region, nonspherical perturbations grow with decreasing radius. In the linear regime, the tangential velocity perturbation increases as $r^{-1}$, while the Lagrangian density perturbation, $Δρ/ρ$, grows as $r^{-1/2}$. Faster growth occurs if the central collapsed object maintains a finite multiple moment, in which case $Δρ/ρ$ increases as $r^{-l}$, where $l$ specifies the angular degree of the perturbation. These scaling relations are different from those obtained for the collapse of a homogeneous cloud. Our numerical calculations indicate that nonspherical perturbations are damped in the subsonic region, and that they grow and approach the asymptotic scalings in the supersonic region. The implications of our results to asymmetric supernova collapse and to black hole accretion are briefly discussed.

=== arXiv:9906259v1  [1999-06-15]
TITLE  : Stellar Abundances in the Early Galaxy and Two r-Process Components
AUTHORS: Y. -Z. Qian, G. J. Wasserburg
JOURNAL: Phys.Rept. 333 (2000) 77-108
DOI    : 10.1016/S0370-1573(00)00017-X
ABS    : We present quantitative predictions for the abundances of r-process elements in stars formed very early in the Galactic history using a phenomenological two-component r-process model based on the I129 and Hf182 inventory in the early solar system. This model assumes that a standard mass of the ISM dilutes the debris from an individual supernova. High frequency supernova H events and low frequency supernova L events are proposed in the model with characteristics determined by the meteoritic data on I129 and Hf182. The yields in an H or L event are obtained from these characteristics and the solar r-process abundances under the assumption that the yield template for the high mass (A &gt; 130) nuclei associated with W182 or the low mass (A &lt; or = 130) nuclei associated with I127 is the same for both the H and L events and follows the corresponding solar r-pattern in each mass region. The abundance of Eu, not Fe, is proposed as a key guide to the age of very metal-poor stars. We predict that stars with log epsilon (Eu) = -2.98 to -2.22 were formed from an ISM contaminated most likely by a single H event within the first 10**7 yr of the Galactic history and should have an Ag/Eu abundance ratio less than the corresponding solar r-process value by a factor of at least 10. Many of the very metal-poor stars observed so far are considered here to have been formed from an ISM contaminated by many (about 10) r-process events. Stars formed from an ISM contaminated only by a pure L event would have an Ag/Eu ratio higher than the corresponding solar r-process value but would be difficult to find due to the low frequency of the L events. However, variations in the relative abundances of the low and high mass regions should be detectable in very metal-poor stars.

=== arXiv:9905067v1  [1999-05-31]
TITLE  : Mesonic correlations and quark deconfinement
AUTHORS: D. Blaschke, P. C. Tandy
JOURNAL: "Understanding Deconfinement in QCD", Eds. D. Blaschke, F. Karsch and C. D. Roberts, World Scientific, Singapore, p. 218 (1999)
ABS    : A simple confining separable interaction Ansatz for the rainbow-ladder truncated QCD Dyson-Schwinger equations is used to implement chiral restoration and quark deconfinement in a study of $\bar q q$ meson states at finite temperature. The model is fixed at T=0 by reproducing selected pi and rho properties. Deconfinement and chiral restoration are found to both occur at T_c=146 MeV. In the pion sector, we investigate M_pi(T) and f_pi(T) along with the exact QCD mass relation and the GMOR relation. For the vector mode, we investigate the 3-space transverse and longitudinal masses M_rho^T(T) and M_ρ^L(T), along with the widthfor the decay rho^0 --&gt; e^+e^-. The equation of state (EOS) for the model is investigated in the T-mu plane, a tri-critical point is identified and the relationship to a bag model is discussed. The deconfinement transition in rapidly rotating neutron stars is considered and a new signal from the pulsar timing in binary systems with mass accretion is suggested. The model is used to discuss the possibility of a superconducting quark matter phase.

=== arXiv:9812090v1  [1998-12-04]
TITLE  : Observational Constraints on the Origin of Metals in Cool DA-type White Dwarfs
AUTHORS: R. Chary, B. Zuckerman, E. E. Becklin
ABS    : We present ISOCAM 7 micron and 15 micron observations of 12 nearby white dwarfs, 6 of which have been found to have metals such as Ca, Mg and Fe in their photospheres. Our purpose was to search for an excess of infrared emission above the stellar photospheres. We find that none of the white dwarfs other than G29-38 shows a detectable infrared excess and this places strong constraints on the existence of a dusty disk around these stars. We conclude that ongoing accretion of the interstellar medium seems an unlikely explanation for the existence of metals in the photospheres of cool hydrogen atmosphere white dwarfs. The excess associated with G29-38 is 3.8+/-1.0 mJy and 2.9+/-0.6 mJy at 7 micron and 15 micron respectively. The broadband spectrum of this star strengthens the hypothesis that the infrared excess arises from a disk of particulate matter surrounding the white dwarf rather than from a cool brown dwarf companion.

=== arXiv:9811316v3  [1998-11-19]
TITLE  : Dust Versus Cosmic Acceleration
AUTHORS: Anthony N. Aguirre
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J. 512 (1999) L19
DOI    : 10.1086/311862
ABS    : Two groups have recently discovered a statistically significant deviation in the fluxes of high-redshift type Ia supernovae from the predictions of a Friedmann model with zero cosmological constant. In this Letter, I argue that bright, dusty, starburst galaxies would preferentially eject a dust component with a shallower opacity curve (hence less reddening) and a higher opacity/mass than the observed galactic dust which is left behind. Such dust could cause the falloff in flux at high-z without violating constraints on reddening or metallicity. The specific model presented is of needle-like dust, which is expected from the theory of crystal growth and has been detected in samples of interstellar dust. Carbon needles with conservative properties can supply the necessary opacity, and would very likely be ejected from galaxies as required. The model is not subject to the arguments given in the literature against grey dust, but may be constrained by future data from supernova searches done at higher redshift, in clusters, or over a larger frequency range.

=== arXiv:9810508v1  [1998-10-30]
TITLE  : Spectroscopy of Brown Dwarf Candidates in the rho Ophiuchi Molecular Core
AUTHORS: Bruce A. Wilking, Thomas P. Greene, Michael R. Meyer
JOURNAL: Astrophys.J. 117 (1999) 469
DOI    : 10.1086/300674
ABS    : We present an analysis of low resolution infrared spectra for 20 brown dwarf candidates in the core of the $ρ$ Ophiuchi molecular cloud. Fifteen of the sources display absorption-line spectra characteristic of late-type stars. By comparing the depths of water vapor absorption bands in our candidate objects with a grid of M dwarf standards, we derive spectral types which are independent of reddening. Optical spectroscopy of one brown dwarf candidate confirms the spectral type derived from the water bands. Combining their spectral types with published near-infrared photometry, effective temperatures and bolometric stellar luminosities are derived enabling us to place our sample on the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram. We compare the positions of the brown dwarf candidates in this diagram with two sets of theoretical models in order to estimate their masses and ages. Considering uncertainties in placing the candidates in the H-R diagram, six objects consistently lie in the brown dwarf regime and another five objects lie in the transition region between stellar and substellar objects. The ages inferred for the sample are consistent with those derived for higher mass association members. Three of the newly identified brown dwarfs display infrared excesses at $λ$=2.2 $μ$m suggesting that young brown dwarfs can have active accretion disks. Comparing our mass estimates of the brown dwarf candidates with those derived from photometric data alone suggests that spectroscopy is an essential component of investigations of the mass functions of young clusters.

=== arXiv:9809059v1  [1998-09-18]
TITLE  : All nonspherical perturbations of the Choptuik spacetime decay
AUTHORS: Jose M. Martin-Garcia, Carsten Gundlach
JOURNAL: Phys.Rev. D59 (1999) 064031
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevD.59.064031
ABS    : We study the nonspherical linear perturbations of the discretely self-similar and spherically symmetric solution for a self-gravitating scalar field discovered by Choptuik in the context of marginal gravitational collapse. We find that all nonspherical perturbations decay. Therefore critical phenomena at the threshold of gravitational collapse, originally found in spherical symmetry, will extend to (at least slightly) nonspherical initial data.

=== arXiv:9807229v1  [1998-07-22]
TITLE  : Cometary Dust in the Debris Disks of HD 31648 and HD 163296: Two ``Baby'' beta Pics
AUTHORS: Michael L. Sitko, Carol A. Grady, David K. Lynch, Ray W. Russell, Martha S. Hanner
DOI    : 10.1086/306586
ABS    : The debris disks surrounding the pre-main sequence stars HD 31648 and HD 163296 were observed spectroscopically between 3 and 14 microns. Both possess a silicate emission feature at 10 microns which resembles that of the star beta Pictoris and those observed in solar system comets. The structure of the band is consistent with a mixture of olivine and pyroxene material, plus an underlying continuum of unspecified origin. The similarity in both size and structure of the silicate band suggests that the material in these systems had a processing history similar to that in our own solar system prior to the time that the grains were incorporated into comets.

=== arXiv:9806082v2  [1998-06-04]
TITLE  : Optical and Near Infrared Observations of the Afterglow of GRB 980329 from 15 Hours to 10 Days
AUTHORS: Daniel E. Reichart, Donald Q. Lamb, Mark R. Metzger, Jean M. Quashnock, David M. Cole, Francisco J. Castander, Sylvio Klose, James E. Rhoads
DOI    : 10.1086/307210
ABS    : We report I-band observations of the GRB 980329 field made on March 29 with the 1.34-m Tautenberg Schmidt telescope, R-, J- and K-band observations made on April 1 with the APO 3.5-m telescope, R- and I-band observations made on April 3 with the Mayall 4-m telescope at KPNO, and J- and K-band observations made between April 6 - 8 with the Keck-I 10-m telescope. We show that these and other reported measurements are consistent with a power-law fading of the optical/near infrared source that is coincident with the variable radio source VLA J0702+3850. This firmly establishes that this source is the afterglow of GRB 980329.

=== arXiv:9709082v1  [1997-09-30]
TITLE  : Gravitational wave extraction and outer boundary conditions by perturbative matching
AUTHORS: The Binary Black Hole Grand Challenge Alliance, :, A. M. Abrahams, L. Rezzolla, M. E. Rupright, A. Anderson, P. Anninos, T. W. Baumgarte
JOURNAL: Phys.Rev.Lett.80:1812-1815,1998
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.80.1812
ABS    : We present a method for extracting gravitational radiation from a three-dimensional numerical relativity simulation and, using the extracted data, to provide outer boundary conditions. The method treats dynamical gravitational variables as nonspherical perturbations of Schwarzschild geometry. We discuss a code which implements this method and present results of tests which have been performed with a three dimensional numerical relativity code.

=== arXiv:9610218v1  [1996-10-26]
TITLE  : Galaxy evolution at low redshift? II. Number counts and optical identifications of faint IRAS sources
AUTHORS: E. Bertin, M. Dennefeld, M. Moshir
ABS    : We analyse a Far InfraRed (FIR) catalogue of galaxies at 60 microns with a flux limit of approx. 110 mJy, extracted from a deep subsample of the IRAS Faint Source Survey. Monte-Carlo simulations and optical identification statistics are used to put constraints on the evolution of galaxies in the FIR. We find evidence for strong evolution of IRAS galaxies, in luminosity prop. to (1+z)^3.2 or density prop. to (1+z)^6.0 for f60 &gt; 150 mJy, in agreement with previous claims. An excess of rather red faint optical counterparts with B&gt;18, consistent with the above evolution, is detected. We interpret these results as strong evolution at recent times among the starburst (or dusty AGN) population of merging/interacting galaxies. Most of these objects at moderate redshifts may pass unnoticed among the population of massive spirals in broad-band optical surveys, because of large amounts of dust extinction in their central regions. A possible link with the strong evolution observed in the optical for blue sub-M* galaxies is discussed.

=== arXiv:9511094v2  [1995-11-20]
TITLE  : Theory for the nonlinear optical response of a nonspherical metal cluster
AUTHORS: J. P. Dewitz, W. Huebner, K. H. Bennemann
ABS    : Using classical electrodynamics we determine the higher harmonic radiation by a nonspherical metal cluster in form of a matrix formalism. Extending the theory for the source of the higher harmonic radiation for spherical metal clusters as introduced by Östling et al. [Z. Phys. D {\bf 28}, 169 (1993)] we calculate the sources for nonspherical particles. Employing these sources we develop the nonlinear Mie theory and determine the radiated higher harmonic fields generated by the cluster. Our theory is valid for arbitrary shape and arbitrary complex refractive index for cluster sizes much smaller and comparable to the wavelength of the incident light.

=== arXiv:9508059v1  [1995-08-29]
TITLE  : Applying black hole perturbation theory to numerically generated spacetimes
AUTHORS: A. M. Abrahams, R. H. Price
JOURNAL: Phys.Rev. D53 (1996) 1963-1971
DOI    : 10.1103/PhysRevD.53.1963
ABS    : Nonspherical perturbation theory has been necessary to understand the meaning of radiation in spacetimes generated through fully nonlinear numerical relativity. Recently, perturbation techniques have been found to be successful for the time evolution of initial data found by nonlinear methods. Anticipating that such an approach will prove useful in a variety of problems, we give here both the practical steps, and a discussion of the underlying theory, for taking numerically generated data on an initial hypersurface as initial value data and extracting data that can be considered to be nonspherical perturbations.

=== arXiv:9411069v1  [1994-11-17]
TITLE  : Evolution of the Galactic Halo and Disk
AUTHORS: Gerard Gilmore
JOURNAL: Astrophys.Space Sci. 267 (1999) 109-117
DOI    : 10.1023/A:1002779826607
ABS    : Correlations between stellar kinematics and chemical abundances are fossil evidence for evolutionary connections between Galactic structural components. Extensive stellar surveys show that the only tolerably clear distinction between galactic components appears in the distributions of specific angular momentum. Here the stellar metal-poor halo and the metal-rich bulge are indistinguishable from each other, as are the thick disk and the old disk. Each pair is very distinct from the other. This leads to an evolutionary model in which the metal-poor stellar halo evolves into the inner bulge, while the thick disk is a precursor to the thin disk. These evolutionary sequences are distinct. The galaxy is made of two discrete `populations', one of low and one of high angular momentum. Some (minor?) complexity is added to this picture by the debris of late and continuing mergers, which will be especially important in the outer stellar halo.

=== arXiv:9411001v1  [1994-11-03]
TITLE  : Many-Body effects and resonances in universal quantum sticking of cold atoms to surfaces
AUTHORS: Eric R. Bittner, John C. Light
DOI    : 10.1063/1.468692
ABS    : The role of shape resonances and many-body effects on universal quantum sticking of ultra cold atoms onto solid surfaces is examined analytically and computationally using an exactly solvable representation of the Dyson equation. We derive the self-energy renormalization of the the transition amplitude between an ultra cold scattering atom and the bound states on the surface in order to elucidate the role of virtual phonon exchanges in the limiting behavior of the sticking probability. We demonstrate that, to first order in the interactions for finite ranged atom-surface potentials, virtual phonons can only rescale the strength of the atom-surface coupling and do not rescale the range of the coupling. Thus, universal sticking behaviour at ultra-low energies is to be expected for all finite ranged potentials. We demonstrate that the onset of the universal sticking behavior depends greatly on the position of the shape resonance of the renormalized potential and for sufficiently low energy shape resonances, deviations from the universal $s(E)\propto\sqrt{E}$ can occur near these energies. We believe that this accounts for many of the low energy sticking trends observed in the scattering of sub-millikelvin H atoms from superfluid $^4$He films.

