197OApJ. . .160 . .64IM




                          The Astrophysical Journal, Vol. 160, May 1970
                          (c) 1970. The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. Printed in U.S.A.




                                              DIFFUSION PROCESSES IN PECULIAR A STARS

                                                                    Georges Michaud*
                                                     Hale Observatories, Carnegie Institution of Washington,
                                                               California Institute of Technology
                                                                  Received 1969 September 19
                                                                         ABSTRACT
                              It is suggested that diffusion processes aré responsible for most of the peculiar abundances observed
                          in Ap stars. If it is assumed that the atmosphere is stable enough for diffusion processes to be important,
                          gravitational settling leads to the underabundances of He, Ne, and O in the stars where they are ob-
                          served (that is, with the 0eff, log g they are observed to have). Radiation pressure leads to the over-
                          abundances of Mn, Sr, Y, Zr, and the rare earths in the stars where they are observed. Silicon would be
                          expected to be overabundant only if it has wide autoionization features. Phosphorus would be expected
                          to be overabundant in stafs with 0eff ^ 0.5, but is observed to be overabundant in stars with 0eff — 0.4.
                             The fhâgnetic fields observed in Ap stars could bring to the atmosphere the stability needed for dif-
                          fusion processes to be important. They would also guide diffusion into patches leading to the periodic
                          variation of the observed overabundances.

                                                                         I. INTRODUCTION
                              Sargent and Searle (1967a) have recently established that the abundance anomalies
                          in Ap stars were closely related to the atmospheric parameters. It is found below that the
                          same dependence on atmospheric parameters exists for abundance anomalies to be ex-
                          pected from diffusion processes. Diffusion would cause the observed abundance anom-
                          alies if the atmosphere is stable enough for diffusion to be important. The magnetic
                          fields observed in Ap stars may give their atmosphere the needed stability.
                             One of the best-established characteristics of Ap stars (Sargent and Searle 1967a;
                          Wolff 1967) seems to be the dependence of some of the abundance anomalies on the ef-
                          fective temperature of the star. Before the systematic studies of Sargent, Searle and
                          co-workers, it could have been argued that the apparent dependence of the abundance
                          anomalies on effective temperature was due to selection effects. However, by determin-
                          ing the abundances of certain elements (O, Mg, Si, Mn, . . .) in a large number of both
                          normal and peculiar stars, Sargent and Searle (1967a) were able to establish that certain
                          elements (O, Si, Mn) had unusual abundances only in peculiar stars with a given range
                          of 0eff. Outside that range they measured the abundances of the same elements and
                          found them normal, or at least not so abnormal. They established that O was most
                          underabundant in the cooler Ap stars (0.43 < 0eff < 0.65) (Sargent and Searle 1962) and
                          that Si and Mn were most overabundant in the respective ranges 0.28 < 0eff ^ 0.45
                          (Searle and Sargent 1964) and 0.35 < 0eff < 0.46 (Searle, Lungershausen, and Sargent
                          1966). Others have established that Sr, Y, and Zr behaved differently with the effective
                          temperatures of these stars and that heavy elements were generally overabundant
                          (Hack 1968). The rare earths are more overabundant than Ba. Phosphorus and Be are
                          ovarabundant in some of the Mn stars (Sargent and Searle 1967a).
                             Finally, the relationship between the atmospheric parameters and the peculiarities
                          was strikingly confirmed when Sargent and Searle (1967£) found that the same peculiari-
                          ties occurred at the same (0eff, log g) in Population II stars as they did in Ap stars.
                             Detailed studies of a few Ap stars have also been made. Two model-atmosphere
                             * Partially supported by the National Science Foundation [GP-9433, GP-9114], the Office of Naval
                          Research [Nonr-220(47)], and Fellowships from L’Hydro-Québec and Le Ministère de L’Education du
                          Québec.
                                                                          641




                             © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
197OApJ. . .160 . .64IM



                          642                               GEORGES MICHAUD                                   Vol. 160

                          studies of the same observational material for 53 Tau (Auer et al. 1966; Strom 1969) give
                          results differing frequently by factors of 4. The differences come mainly from the differ-
                          ent turbulent velocities adopted. Auer et al. (1966) took vt = 0.0. Strom (1969) obtained
                          turbulent velocities (one for the visible and one for the ultraviolet) by forcing strong
                          and weak lines to give the same abundance. It has been shown by an analysis of line
                          profiles (Hardorp, Bidelman, and Prolss 1968) that the turbulent velocity obtained in
                          this way for 3 Cen A was inconsistent with the upper limit of the width observed for
                          certain lines. Until the parameters entering model-atmosphere studies are better under-
                          stood, it seems preferable to rely for abundance determination in Ap stars on the com-
                          parative curve-of-growth analyses of Sargent, Searle and co-workers. For their abun-
                          dance analyses they chose lines that are relatively independent of the uncertain struc-
                          ture of the atmosphere.
                             Even when compared only with the well-established properties of Ap stars, the
                          nuclear-physics models all run into serious difficulties. If the nuclear reactions occurred
                          in the interior of stars (Fowler et al. 1965), there should be no Ap stars in young stellar
                          clusters, a conclusion contrary to observations (Kraft 1967; Hyland 1967; Garrison
                          1967; Adelman 1968). It seems hard to imagine how the binary-star hypothesis (Fowler
                          et al. 1965; Van Den Heuvel 1968a, b) could lead to any dependence of the abundances
                          on the parameters of the atmosphere. Finally, the models that assume nuclear reactions
                          in the atmosphere (Fowler, Burbidge, and Burbidge 1955; Brancazio and Cameron 1967)
                          run into difficulty with element conservation (Searle and Sargent 1964; Michaud 1969).
                          It then seems worthwhile to look for other explanations to the Ap stars.
                             We will discuss the possibility that the atmospheres of Ap stars are stable enough for
                          diffusion to become important. This is reasonable since the Ap stars are known to be slow
                          rotators and convection zones are not expected to be important in B and early A stars.
                          The magnetic fields may also add to the stability of the atmosphere since magnetic fields
                          are observed to reduce convection in sunspots. Also, the ability of the rigid-rotator hy-
                          pothesis (Deutsch 1958) to explain a large fraction of the observed magnetic-field varia-
                          tions argues for their stability. We shall discuss (§ II) some general aspects of diffusion
                          in A and B stars. In particular, it will be found that, in order not to sink, a heavy element
                          must be pushed upward by a force at least as strong as gravity, that the diffused elements
                          either float on the top of the atmosphere or lie at its bottom, and that the diffusion
                          velocity is of the order of 10-3 cm sec-1. The effect of magnetic fields will also be dis-
                          cussed.
                             The radiation force (§ III) transferred through bound-free and bound-bound transi-
                          tions will be found to be frequently larger than the gravitational force. Autoionization
                          levels may play an important role in transferring momentum from the radiation field to
                          certain preferred elements.
                             The comparison (§ IV) of the calculated radiation force to the observed abundance
                          anomalies will show that the radiation force on Mn, Sr, Y, Zr, and the rare earths should
                          push them into the outer atmosphere in those stars in which they are overabundant.
                          Oxygen should be underabundant in the cooler Ap stars, as is observed. The Si over-
                          abundance would be explained only if Si n has wide autoionization features. The P over-
                          abundance is expected in stars with 0eff — 0.5, but is observed in stars with 0éff — 0.4.
                                                           II. DIFFUSION PROCESSES
                             Diffusion processes in stars have been discussed by a number of authors. They studied
                          the effects of gravitational settling on the abundances of the heavier elements in the
                          atmosphere of the Sun (Aller and Chapman 1960) and of He in the old halo B stars
                          (Greenstein, Truran, and Cameron 1967). Praderie (1968) discussed the possibility that
                          the metallic-line stars could be the normal stars. Gravitational settling would have re-
                          duced the abundances of heavy elements in the other stars, including the Sun. Browne
                          (1968) found that diffusion processes might explain the periodic variation of the over-




                            © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
197OApJ. . .160 . .64IM



                          No. 2, 1970                      PECULIAR A STARS                                     643

                          abundances in magnetic stars. We will find that diffusion processes naturally lead to the
                          abundance anomalies observed in the Ap stars and to their observed dependence on at-
                          mospheric parameters. But we must first discuss some general aspects of diffusion in the
                          atmosphere of A and B stars and then (§ III) the effect of radiation pressure on diffusion.
                             First we will discuss the diffusion equation proposed by Aller and Chapman (1960).
                          We shall then use it to calculate diffusion velocities and hence diffusion time scales in
                          Ap stars. The time scale turns out to be of the order of 104 years—much smaller than the
                          expected lifetimes of these stars. To oppose gravity, a force must be of the same order
                          as the gravitational force. Diffusion due to a magnetic-field gradient will then be seen to
                          be negligible (Babcock 1947, 1958Ô, 1963).
                             Starting from the diffusion equation for a binary mixture, Aller and Chapman (1960)
                          argued for the following equation for a mixture of ionized hydrogen, electrons, and an
                          ionized gas of charge Z and atomic mass A :



                                                                                                                 (i)
                                             + i [2.65* + 0.805M - £)] f +                              ,

                          where
                                    Ci = mass fraction of hydrogen,
                                  Ac2 = mass fraction of the gas (Z, ^4),
                                  w12 = relative velocity of the gas (Z, ^4) with respect to hydrogen,
                                     r = a measure of distance (where plane symmetry is assumed) in cm,
                                    T = temperature in ° K,
                                    p = pressure (cgs units),
                                   Fi = force on hydrogen (dynes),
                                   F2 = force, per unit atomic mass, on the gas (Z, ^4) (dynes),

                                                    A2 = 1.947 X 109r5/2[ATZMi(2)]-1,
                                                          ^x(2) = log, (1 + *o2) ,                               (2)

                                                        *o2 = 2.73 X WTZ/(Z*N) ,
                                    N = number density of hydrogen (cm“3).

                             To evaluate equation (1) for the stars of interest, we used the model atmospheres of
                          Mihalas (1965). Before giving the numerical results, we will briefly discuss the relative
                          importance of each term and obtain, as a by-product, the force needed to counter gravity
                          and the distribution with height of diffused elements.
                             In the atmospheres of A and B stars the term containing dF/dr is found numerically
                          to be less than 10 percent of the term containing dp/dr; it may thus be neglected.
                             We assume that the gas is mainly made up of ionized hydrogen. Then:
                                                               1      , Wyg
                                                               p dr ~ 2 kT

                          (note that in deriving eq. [1], it was assumed that H was completely ionized and that
                          He was not present). For diffusion to occur toward the top of the atmosphere, one then
                          requires (if Ac2<K Ci, and dc2/dr = 0)

                                        Wmp\Fi -Fi\> — ~2Z ~ 1 mpg = (A -j- 0 gmp ;                              (3)




                            © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
197OApJ. . .160 . .64IM



                          644                              GEORGES MICHAUD                                   VoL Í60

                          that is, if
                                                     Fi <3C F2   and     (JZ + §) <3C -4 ,

                          the upward force on (Z, A) has to be larger than the gravitational force on (Z, A) for
                          diffusion to occur toward the top of the atmosphere.
                             We will now see that diffused elements will either be floating at the top of the stable
                          zone or lying at its bottom. The terms




                          represent, respectively, the scale height of settling due to diffusion (Rd) and the scale
                          height of pressure variations in the atmosphere. If diffusion is caused by gravity, it stops
                          when
                                               1 ÔC2                 lap
                                                                           ~ 3.5 X ur7 cm 1,
                                              c2 dr                    Br
                                                             Rd ~ 3 X 106 cm .

                          A radiation force twice as large as the gravitational force would lead to the same Rd as
                          the pressure-gradient term. For diffusion to cause observable effects, it has to take ele-
                          ments from the zone where lines are formed to a zone oné cannot observe from the out-
                          side (or vice versa). This corresponds to a At > 1. The corresponding AR is of the order
                          of 108 cm in A stars. There are 30 diffusion scale heights over that distance. The diffused
                          elements will be concentrated at the top or at the bottom of the atmosphere.
                             For diffusion to be of any importance, it is at least necessary that the diffusion time
                          scale be shorter than the lifetime of the star. To determine the diffusion time scale, we
                          have used equation (1) (with dCÿ/dr = 0.0 and Fi = 0 = F2), along with Mihalas’s
                          (1965) models. The results are shown on Figure 1 for Mn m ions. One can use Figure 1
                          to calculate time scales for other elements and other ions by remembering that (eqs.
                          [1] and [2])
                                                                  to ce Z*! A .                                   (4)

                             It is seen that the time scales are of the order of 104 years for the ions of interest to
                          move from r = 0.1 to r = 10.0 under the influence of the gravitational force. If the
                          radiation force on an element is twice the gravitational force, that element will diffuse
                          toward the top of the atmosphere on the gravitational-settling time scale. These time
                          scales are much shorter than the expected main-sequence lifetimes (~108 years) of A
                          or B stars (Iben 1965 and 1966).
                             To determine how stable the atmosphere has to be for diffusion to be important, we
                          have plotted the diffusion velocities as a function of r for Mn m ions (Fig. 2).
                             For diffusion to be important, convection and rotational circulation currents would
                          have to be slower than 10”3 cm sec“1 or so in the atmosphere of the star.
                             We have also calculated the diffusion speed for neutral O. The diffusion velocity in a
                          gravitational field is approximately (Loeb 1934)

                                                      w    %gtA = 2 X 10-6 g            ,                         (5)
                                                                                 pG

                          where Ia is the average time between two collisions (see Fig. 2). Since the diffusion
                          velocity of singly ionized O is about the same as the diffusion velocity of doubly ionizèd
                          Mn, the ionization of O is seen, from Figure 2, to reduce its diffusion velocity by a factor
                          of about 10.
                             The atmospheres of early A and B stars might be very stable. In the Sun, convection




                            © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
197OApJ. . .160 . .64IM




                          No. 2, 1970                            PECULIAR A STARS                                              645

                          leads to granules whose speed is observed to be 105 cm sec-1. However, the Sun is known
                          to have an important convection zone close to the surface, whereas late B and early A
                          stars have only weak convection zones (Mihalas 1965). As mentioned in § I, we have not
                          found any reliable estimates of turbulent velocities in Ap stars; however, the abundance
                          anomalies appear in those stars in which convection becomes relatively unimportant
                          and in which diffusion processes are therefore most likely to be important.




                              Fig. 1.—The time needed for Mn m ions to diffuse from r = 10.0 to r = 0.2 is seen to be of the order
                          of 104 years, much shorter than the expected main-sequence lifetimes of A or B stars. If the atmosphere is
                          stable enough, diffusion processes should then be important.




                              Fig. 2.—The diffusion velocity shows that there must be no currents faster than 10~8 cm sec”1 for the
                          diffusion of ions (solid lines) to be important in the atmosphere of A or B stars. Neutral elements would
                          diffuse 10 times faster (dashed line). Diffusion could not be important when there is convection.

                              Peculiar A stars have recently been shown to be slow rotators (Sargent and Searle
                          1967a; Abt 1967; Deutsch 1967). Their rotational velocity is about a quarter that of
                          normal main-sequence stars. We know of no reliable estimates of the velocities of rota-
                          tional circulation. Assuming a star rotates uniformly, Sweet (1950) has calculated the
                          velocity of the rotational currents. We have used the 3 MQ model of Iben (1965) to
                          obtain pc and Tc needed to calculate ^rotation < 10“3 cm sec“1 from SweeUs calculation,
                          if the Ap stars have equatorial rotational velocities of 90 km sec“1 or less (Wolff 1968).
                          The normal A stars, which rotate faster, would then have currents too rapid to allow
                          diffusion. Mestel (1966) has shown that SweeUs calculations should not be applied that
                          far out in the atmosphere, but Mestel neglects the influence of magnetic fields.




                            © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
197OApJ. . .160 . .64IM



                          646                              GEORGES MICHAUD                                   Vol. 160

                                                              a) Magnetic Fields
                             Magnetic fields may be important in increasing stability both against convection and
                          against rotational currents. One can expect stability against convection \i pg\^T\/T <
                          7t#2/X2 (Cowling 1953), where X is the size of the instabilities. Here
                                                 VT/T ~ 10~10 cm“1,         H ^ 104 gauss ,
                          so that
                                                                X < 1011 cm .

                          Since the radius is approximately 1011 cm (Iben 1965), one expects that the magnetic
                          field will increase the stability against convection. Similarly, for stability against rota-
                          tion one should replace pg\vT\/T by pi22. For rotational periods of 0^5, one obtains
                          X < 1012 cm (if p ^ 10~9 g cm-3,          104 gauss).
                              Even though it cannot be shown that Ap stars have stable enough atmospheres for
                          diffusion processes to take place, they are expected to be among the stars having the least
                          convection and the smallest meridional circulation due to rotation. Furthermore, the
                          magnetic fields observed in their atmospheres (Babcock 1958a) may very well reduce
                          convection and rotational currents. It seems reasonable, then, to make the working
                          hypothesis that the atmospheres of Ap stars are stable and to study what diffusion pro-
                          cesses are likely to be important.
                              We discussed above the possible importance of magnetic fields in increasing the stabil-
                          ity of the atmospheres of Ap stars. Magnetic fields might also be important in slowing
                          the diffusion of ions, and their gradients may cause diffusion (Babcock 1947, 1958^,
                          1963
                               ).
                              The effect of a magnetic field on diffusion velocities may be approximated (Spitzer
                          1962 ; Chapman and Cowling 1953) by multiplying the component perpendicular to the
                          magnetic field by (1 + ^c2^2)“1, where
                                                                                b 2
                                                                           12 BT l
                                                           coc/c = 3 X 10“ ^.                                     (6)

                          The magnetic field will start having appreciable effect in slowing down diffusion when
                          ù)ctc~ 1. If T = 0.2 in the atmosphere of a star with log g = 4.0 and 0eff = 0.4, one
                          obtains for O n
                                                            B ~ 4 X 103 gauss .
                          Effective magnetic fields of 1000-6000 gauss are frequently observed in Ap stars (Bab-
                          cock 1958a). They correspond to uniform dipolar fields Hp (Hp = He/[0.303 cos i]) of
                          5000-30000 gauss in the star. Magnetic fields could be expected to slow down diffusion
                          perpendicular to the H field by a factor from 2 to 50.
                             Babcock (1947, 19580, 1963) has discussed the possible importance of magnetic-field
                          gradients in causing diffusion in Ap stars. If H is assumed to be about 105 gauss and to
                          vary over a distance of 107 cm, then | V##| — 10“2 gauss cm-1, and the force on the
                          ions is
                                                                    X 10“22g-cm sec”2                          (7)
                          (where p is taken to be 5 mb, where mb is the Bohr magneton). This is 3 orders of magni-
                          tude smaller than the gravitational force and so could not cause diffusion upward.

                                                          III. RADIATION PRESSURE
                             We will now discuss the importance of the radiation field in causing diffusion. We
                          first show that in spite of its discrete nature, the radiation force can be treated in the




                            © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
197OApJ. . .160 . .64IM




                          No. 2, 1970                        PECULIAR A STARS                                       647

                          same way as the gravitational force. We then calculate the momentum transferred to
                           the ions of interest by bound-free transitions (continuum) and bound-bound ones (lines).
                          The force of radiation pressure is frequently larger than the force of gravity. It can then
                          push elements outward and cause overabundances in the outer part of the atmosphere.
                              One might argue that the momentum received by an ion from the radiation field is
                          rapidly transferred through collisions to all species present and therefore cannot cause
                          diffusion. Under the hypothesis that the time scale for this transfer is approximately
                          the same as the time for an ion to be scattered through 90°, ¿c, it will be seen that a given
                          radiation force causes diffusion velocities equal to those produced by the same gravita-
                          tional force.
                             For simplicity, suppose that all photons are streaming in the same direction. (In gen-
                          eral, one should consider only the anisotropic part of the radiation field, i.e., the radiation
                          flux). Let tp be the average time between the absorption of two photons. The momentum
                          transferred from the radiation field per second (the force) is then hv/(tvc). The distance
                          traveled per second hvtc/(2tpcM) (where the factor \tc is introduced, since the push is
                          remembered for a time tcr but over the time \tc the strength of the push is reduced by a
                          factor 0.5). Here, M is the mass of the ion. Similarly, the distance traveled per second
                          under the influence of gravity is approximately 0.5 gtc. When the two expressions are
                          compared, it is easily seen that a radiation force as large as a gravitational force causes
                          diffusion through the same distance as the gravitational force. The direction in which the
                          ions will diffuse will be determined by the relative size of the gravitational and radiation
                          forces, independently of ¿c. In the diffusion equation, one can introduce the radiation
                          force in the same way as a continuous force, in spite of the discrete nature of the photons.
                          The collision frequency will affect only the diffusion velocity.
                             We now calculate radiation forces from bound-free and bound-bound transitions in
                          the usual way and expect that, when the radiation force is larger than the gravitational
                          force, the ions will diffuse toward the top of the atmosphere. One then observes over-
                          abundances.

                                                            a) Continuous Absorption
                             The force exerted on an atom by a radiation flux <t>v (physical flux) in a wavelength
                          interval d\ through absorption of photons by the level w, when the fraction Nn/Atot of
                          the given element are in the level w, is given by (Pecker and Schatzman 1959)

                                                        Fxd\ = 108—L cn<t>v § (cgs) ,                                (8)
                                                                  ■iV tot   A

                          where on is the cross-section for absorption of photons by level n, in the wavelength
                          interval d\ (X in Â).
                             We estimated the contribution of the continuum by calculating the cross-section for
                          the bound-free transition in the classical hydrogenic approximation


                                                        ^ = 7-9ê^ x 10-18 cm2’                                       (9)



                          where Zn is the charge of the ion after ionization, n is the principal quantum number of
                          the level, and Y = hv/I.Y. (I.E. = ionization energy of the level n).
                             For photoionization, equation (8) has to be slightly modified since not all the mo-
                          mentum of the ionizing photon is transferred to the ion. Some of it is given to the elec-
                          tron. Far away from the atom, the distribution of electrons after photoionization is given
                          by (Sommerfeld 1939)

                                                      J oc sin2 6 cos2 $ (1 + 40 cos 0) ,                          (10)




                            © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
197OApJ. . .160 . .64IM



                          648                              GEORGES MICHAUD

                          where 6 is the angle between the direction of the light quantum and that of the electron
                          the photon, and the ion, and the plane containing the photon and its polarization vector
                          (ß = v/c). The fraction F of the momentum given to the electron is then
                                                        p _ y'ttw co$6 J dti _ RK
                                                              fihv/c)J dti ”      ’                             (id
                          where
                                                         p. _ %mv2 _ hv -- LE.
                                                                                                                (12)
                                                               hv        hv
                          As AT —> 1, the electrons go away with more momentum than the photons brought in;
                          the ions are then pushed back by the photoionization. However, in the cases of interest
                          to us AT < 15 percent, so that most of the momentum is transferred to the ion and not
                          to the ejected electron. In our calculations we subtracted the momentum transferred to
                          the electron by multiplying the right-hand side of equation (8) by (1 — 1.6 AT).
                             Equation (10) was obtained by Sommerfeld for the ionization of the ground state of
                          the hydrogen atom. To our knowledge, J has not been calculated for any case except
                          hydrogen when K is appreciably smaller than 1. When K is close to 1, the effect becomes
                          measurable. For krypton the anisotropy has been measured and, on the average, less
                          momentum would be transferred to the electron than in the case of hydrogen (Krause
                          1969). It seems impossible, however, to observe the (40 cos 0)-term at low energy. It
                          would then be useful to have J determined theoretically for cases other than hydrogen.
                             We have calculated for a number of model atmospheres the force transferred through
                          photoionization from the radiation field to different elements of interest. The results for
                          the force at r = 0.1 are shown in Figures 3 and 8 as a function of 0eff, log g = 4. The
                          special cases of O and Si will be discussed below in a section on autoionization.
                             To calculate the forces, we used Mihalas’s (1965) models. The main feature in his cal-
                          culated outgoing flux, insofar as our calculations are concerned, is the Lyman continuum.
                          Below the Lyman continuum, hardly any flux is coming out. Photoionization will only
                          occur, then, for those levels in which the ionization potential is less than 13.6 eV.
                             The elements with ionization potentials larger than 10.5 eV but smaller than 13.6 eV
                          will be pushed out by large radiation forces in the cooler peculiar stars (C, P, Cl, Ca,
                          Sc, As, Br, Sr, Y, Zr, Xe, Rn, and the rare earths fall in this category). The elements
                          with ionization potentials smaller than 10 eV or greater than 18 eV will not absorb
                          enough radiation to counter gravity in the Ap stars (He, Li, Be, B, Ne, Na, Al, K, Ni,
                          Cu, Ga, Se, Rb, In, Sb, Te, and Cs fall in this category). Those with an ionization po-
                          tential between 13.6 and 18 eV may or may not be pushed outward by the radiation
                          field in the warmer Ap stars. Whether or not they are pushed out depends on the details
                          of the atomic structure. Compare Mg, Mn, Fe, and Cr.
                              In Figure 4 is plotted the variation with r of the force transferred through photo-
                          ionization on Si, Mn, P, and Cl for the model atmopshere 0eff == 0.4 and log g = 4. The
                          behavior with r depends on the excitation energy of the levels from which photoioniza-
                          tion occurs. The special case of Si will be discussed at greater length below. The radia-
                          tion force on Si does not decrease as rapidly when r increases as that on Cl or P.
                              One may wonder why hydrogen, the lightest element, should not be thrown out. The
                          answer is simple. There is either too much H or not enough light. The radiation pressure
                          in these stars is only a few percent of the total pressure (Mihalas 1965). The flux at the
                          proper wavelength to push hydrogen up (below the Lyman continuum) is very small.
                          Whereas the radiation force transferred through photoionization on Mn is 4 times the
                          gravitational force, that on H is only 1 percent of the gravitational force.
                                                              b) Line Absorption
                            The possible influence of lines in pushing elements outward can first be seen by com-
                          paring with the gravitational force the momentum per second which a line would




                            © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
197OApJ. . .160 . .64IM




                             Fig. 3.—Radiation force transferred through photoionization to a number of elements. All calcula-
                          tions were done at r = 0.1 in atmospheres with log g = 4.0. Dashed lines, gravitational forces. Note that
                          because of the relatively large abundance of C in normal stars, the radiation field could support over-
                          abundances of C by a factor of at most 5.




                             Fig. 4.—^Variation with r of the force transferred through photoionization to certain elements in an
                          atmosphere with 0eff = 0.4, log g = 4.0. Notice that the different behavior with r of the force from ele-
                          ment to element may have important effects in causing overabundances.




                            © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
197OApJ. . .160 . .64IM



                          650                                GEORGES MICHAUD                                  Vol. 160

                          transfer from the radiation field to the element of interest. For one line, J<Tndv = {ire2/
                          mc)f. Equation (12) then becomes (with 4>v kept constant over the width of the line;
                          Ntot is the number density of the element of interest)

                                                                           3 X
                                                    fft C ly tot                 lO-16#"/
                                                                                      ^ » tot (g-
                                                                                                  cm
                                                                                                     see"2)      (13)

                          if one assumes $* = 3 X 10“3 (cgs) (as is typical in the atmospheres of A and B stars,
                          Mihalas 1965). This force compares with 1.7 X 10”20 A (g-cm sec“2), the gravitational
                          force on an element with atomic mass A, if log g = 4. Saturation could reduce the flux
                          by a factor of 2 X lO4/^, and the radiation force from one line could still be as strong
                          as the gravitational force. If the flux in the line can be approximated by
                                                              01ine = ^cont

                          saturation can be estimated by comparing KPnm in the line with kp in the continuum.
                          In the line
                                                     7re2\ /fnmNnX\ _ 1n7 /fnmNn X\
                                               K nm                                                              (15)
                                                " ~ meânn \ NA\ J         \ N AX/

                          We require, in order to take saturation into account,

                                                                           F'rad = Fgrav                         (16)

                          This leads to
                                            mass fraction that one line can support = 0.1 <j>PKp/\               (17)

                          if AX/X = (l/c)(2kT/M)112 = 10“5, as would be the case for an ion with A = 100 at
                          a temperature of 104 ° K. We calculated, for different values of X, 0.1 <!>vkv/\ at r = 0.2,
                          in a model atmosphere with log g = 4 and 0eff = 0.4. The results are shown in Figure
                          5, a. Depending on where it is in the spectrum, a line of thermal Doppler width can sup-
                          port a mass fraction anywhere from 10”7 to lO""6.
                             The line width could be defined as the width over which the product <t>vnmKvnm is de-
                          pendent of KPnm. If KVnm/kv ~ 200 in the center of aline, and if KPnm oc exp{ — [(X — X0)/
                          AX0]2}, where AX0 is the thermal Doppler width, then exp{ — [(X — Xo)/AX0]2} ^ 0.005
                          for IX — Xo|/AXo— 2.5. The total width of the line is then approximately 5AX0. If a
                          given element has a resonant line at 4000 Â, that line alone could support a mass fraction
                          of 10“6. We now compare the above results for the mass fraction that a line can support,
                          with the results one obtains by supposing LTE in the formation of the line (Milne
                          1927). We then calculate in a few model atmospheres how the mass fraction sup-
                          ported by one line varies with r, X. Comparing the calculated with the observed mass
                          fractions, we determine which element can be supported by the radiation pressure
                          transferred through lines to an element.
                             According to Milne (1927), when exp (—r„nm) is small, one line of width Av would
                          transfer ^Tr^v{dBP/dT)^r/{?>c) from the radiation pressure to the pressure supporting
                          one element in a shell of thickness At. The force one line exerts on one atom is then
                                                                     47t    dBp Ampie dT
                                                                                                                 (18)
                                                                   - 3c     ~WX{A)~dT *

                          Equating Fiine to the gravitational force, one obtains the mass fraction X(^4) of a given
                          element one line can support:




                            © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
No. 2, 1970                             PECULIAR A STARS                                                651

                                          AX hv      exp (hv/kT)          dT/T
                   X(A) = 4 X 104                                 Bv(T)ic                              (19)
                                                   1 - exp Qw/kt)          dr

(cgs units except for X in Â). Using Mihalas's (1965) models, we calculated for a number
of cases the mass fraction a line of thermal Doppler width can support (Fig. 5, 6, c, d).
The Doppler width is the appropriate one for an element with A ~ 30. Since AXo ^
A~112, the plotted results can be extended to an element with any A.
   Listed in Table 1 are the number of “average” lines of thermal Doppler width needed
to support normal abundances of a few elements of interest. Each line is assumed to




    Fig. 5.—On the average, one line of thermal Doppler width can support a mass fraction of 3 X lO-3.
(a) Calculated from eq. (17) for an atmosphere with 0eff = 0.4, log g = 4. (¿>), (c), and (d) Calculated with
Milne’s approximation for a number of cases. Note that on the average the force transferred through lines
does not decrease as r increases, contrary to that transferred through photoionization.

support a mass fraction of 3 X 10”7. Note from Table 1 that overabundances of elements
heavier than the iron peak can be supported by line absorption. However, large over-
abundances of the iron-peak elements or of the lighter metals (except Li, Be, and B)
have to be supported by continuum absorption.

                                           c) Autoionization Levels
   The force transferred from the radiation field to elements might be increased for two
elements of interest, O and Si, by an unusual type of levels, the autoionization levels.
Those of interest here are levels in which two electrons are excited. The total excitation
energy of the two electrons is greater than the energy needed to ionize the ground state.




  © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
197OApJ. . .160 . .64IM



                          652                                    GEORGES MICHAUD                                            Vol. 160

                          At the same energy, then, there exists a continuum of states. There is a finite probability
                          that, after the two electrons have been excited, the system will ionize without collision
                          or absorption of a photon; hence the name given to these states.
                             If the parity and the quantum numbers /, L, and S of the excited states are the same
                          as those of the cjontinuum for one value of the emitted electron, the probability for
                          autoionization is large. The levels are then much wider than the usual excited levels.
                          For instance, autoionizing levels as wide as 0.07 eV have been observed in Ca (Newson
                          1966; Ditchburn and Hudson 1960), and as wide as 0.3 eV in Cd and Hg (Berkowitz and
                          Lifshitz 1968).
                                                                  TABLE 1
                                                                      Effect of Lines

                                                                          Number of
                                                  Element               Lines Required*                 Abundance
                                            0                              5       X 104                2.5   X 107
                                            Ne                             1.5     X 1033               8     X 1066
                                            Mg                             2       X 103                9.1   X 106
                                            Si                             3     X 10                           10
                                            Cl.                           10                            2.6 X 1034
                                            Ca                           250                            5     X 10
                                            Cr                            40                            7.8 X 1033
                                            Mn.. ¿                        35                            6.9 X 104
                                            Fe                           500                            8.5 X 10
                                            Ga                             0.1                          9
                                            Sr                             0.5                         61
                                            Y                              0.1                          8.9
                                            Zr                             0.1                         14.2
                                            Ba                             0.05                         2.6
                                            La                             0.01                         0.5
                                            Eu                             0.002                        0.115

                                               * Number of lines required to counter gravity for the observed normal
                                            abundances of some elements  of interest. Each line was taken as supporting a
                                            mass fraction of 3 X 10“7. The abundances were taken from Bashkin (1963).
                                            The number density of silicon is normalized to 10®. The number density of
                                            hydrogen is then 3.0 X 1010.

                             Calculation of what mass fraction a line related to such a level can push upward shows
                          how important it might be. In an atmosphere with 0eff = 0.32 and log g = 4, a line re-
                          lated to a level 0.3 eV wide at 1000 Â can support a mass fraction

                                                          X = <l)vAv/(cpa) ^ 0.6 percent,

                          where po and <t>v were obtained from Mihalas’s (1965) models.
                             One single line ending at such a level could support nearly 1 percent of the mass (an
                          overabundance of Si by a factor of 10) of the elements above r = 0.1.
                             Most elements are not strongly affected by autoionization levels. When an element has
                          an ionization potential smaller than 13.6 eV, it can be ionized from the ground state by
                          continuum radiation above the Lyman continuum. The integrated value of the photo-
                          ionization cross-section should not then be changed by an order of magnitude by the
                          autoionization levels, and the same holds true for elements having numerous excited
                          levels contributing to the photoionization opacity. The autoionization levels cannot con-
                          tribute substantially here to the transfer of momentum to ions like Mg n which have
                          only one electron outside a closed shell; the excitation of two electrons, then, always in-
                          volves more energy than is available above the Lyman continuum.
                             Both O and Si are special cases. There is only one level of O which is properly placed




                            © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
197OApJ. . .160 . .64IM



                          No. 2, 1970                       PECULIAR A STARS                                     653

                          to transfer an appreciable amount of momentum from the continuum: the 2pA 1D level,
                          which is 2.0 eV above the ground state (ionization from the ground state would require
                          radiation from below the Lyman continuum). However, it is a lD term, and, in Russell-
                          Saunders coupling, the A5 = 0 selection rule does not allow it to be photoionized to the
                          ground state of O n, a AS term. Furthermore, in such a light element as O, Russell-
                          Saunders coupling holds, as exemplified by the small difference in energy between terms
                          of different / in a multiplet. Transitions to autoionization levels might then be the main
                          source of absorption. However, in the case of O, either transitions from the 1D level have
                          to go to 3P or 3F levels and thus are expected to be weak transitions (forbidden by the
                          AS = 0 selection rule) or they go to 1P and lF levels and are not expected to be broad-
                          ened by' autoionization because the available continuum of states has S = 3. The ex-
                          perimental results of Rudd and Smith (1968) agree with the preceding discussion: they
                          have found no evidence of the autoionization of XD or of ^ levels to the continuum in-
                          volving the ground state of O n (a 4S level). The force transferred from the radiation
                          field to O is then calculated to be smaller than 10 percent of the gravitational force on 0.
                          It could not impede gravitational settling.
                             The case of silicon is different, mainly because of the breakdown of Russell-Saunders
                          coupling. Singly ionized silicon has two excited levels that are properly placed: a 3p2 4P
                          level and a 3p2 2D level. The 3p2 2D level is perturbed by a 3d 2D level. Froese and Under-
                          hill (1966) calculated that the wave function for the level of interest was actually
                                                      0.84 3s3p2 2D + 0.54 3s23d 2D .

                          The photoionization of the 3$3/>2 2D configuration to the ground state of Si n is pro-
                          hibited, but that of the 3s23d 2D configuration is not. Furthermore, from the latter level
                          there are permitted transitions to levels which are known to be strongly autoionizing
                          (Shenstone 1961), although their width is unknown.
                             The photoionization of the 3p2 4P level to the ground state of Si m is forbidden. It is
                          a two-electron jump. However, this level has permitted transitions to quadruplet levels
                          which, in spite of the AS = 0 selection rule, show autoionization effects to the continuum
                          involving the ground state of Si m (Shenstone 1961). These autoionization levels would
                          not be expected to be very wide, but they are further examples of the breakdown of
                          Russell-Saunders coupling. Transitions to the doublet terms may then not be strongly
                          forbidden.
                             The available information on Si n does not allow us, then, to say whether or not auto-
                          ionization will be important in transferring momentum from the radiation field to Si.
                          However, it is quite possibly important. An upper limit on the transferred momentum
                          is obtained by assuming that an autoionization level is 0.5 eV wide and is connected to
                          the levels of interest by lines with/c^ 1. The radiation force on Si is then found to be
                          20-times the gravitational force in an atmosphere with 0eff = 0.32, log         4, and with
                          saturation taken into consideration, for an overabundance of Si by a factor of 20.
                             Whether radiation pressure is transferred to Si through photoexcitation to autoioniza-
                          tion levels or through photoionization, the lower levels are always the same and the
                          radiation comes from the same part of the spectrum. Both processes then give the same
                          dependence of the radiation force on the effective temperature of the star. Plotted in
                          Figure 8 are the results for photoionization in the hydrogenic approximation. This could
                          be an overestimate if Russell-Saunders coupling is a good approximation. It would be
                          an underestimate if the autoionization levels which are known to exist were wide enough,
                          T > 0.05 eV, and if they were connected to the levels of interest by strong lines.

                                                    IV. COMPARISON WITH OBSERVATIONS
                             We will now discuss the abundance anomalies that can be expected from diffusion
                          processes in Ap stars, and we will compare these with the observed abundance anomalies.




                            © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
197OApJ. . .160 . .64IM



                          654                              GEORGES MICHAUD                                   Vol. 160

                          Given the diffusion hypothesis, most well-established abundance anomalies would be
                          expected. The most important difficulty comes from the Si overabundance. Its explana-
                          tion requires the autoionization levels known to exist at the proper energy in Si n to be
                          unusually wide features.
                              If the atmosphere of the star is stable, abundance anomalies should manifest them-
                          selves on a time scale of 104 years. Those elements not contributing enough to the opacity
                          in the outer atmosphere of the star will settle down. For large underabundances to be
                          observed, elements have to settle over the whole surface of the star. For instance, for an
                          underabundance by a factor of 100 to be observed, the elements must have settled down
                          over 99 percent of the surface. Ionized elements will settle down 10 times more slowly
                          than the un-ionized ones. Furthermore, when they have to cross magnetic-field lines
                          they will be slowed down by another factor of 10. An element is then expected to be most
                          underabundant when it is not ionized.
                              Diffusion upward will also be slower for ionized elements than for un-ionized ones.
                          However, the magnetic field is now expected to channel elements into patches and not
                          to slow appreciably the flow of elements upward when the magnetic field is parallel to
                          the gravitational field. In those stars with magnetic fields, overabundances of ionized
                          elements should be expected to occur in patches and to vary with a period related to that
                          of the magnetic field.
                              The transfer of momentum through bound-bound transitions (lines) is expected to
                          be efficient in pushing outward the less abundant elements. Each line of thermal Doppler
                          width can, on the average, support a mass fraction of 3 X 10"7. Since the mass fraction
                          of a typical normally abundant rare earth is only 10”8 to 10"9, lines could easily cause
                          overabundances of rare earths. As seen from Figure 5, the force exerted by lines is not
                          dependent on r as long as the element remains in an ionization state where there are
                          lines, i.e., does not take the configuration of a rare gas. Lines cannot only maintain over-
                          abundances in the upper part of the atmosphere, they can also push elements from below.
                              Lines cannot support overabundances of the more abundant elements, like Si, in the
                          upper part of the atmosphere. Overabundances of the light elements are possible only
                          when the radiation force transferred through photoionization or through autoionization
                          levels is larger than the gravitational force. However, lines can still push elements from
                          below to fill the upper part of the atmosphere, where the continuum takes over. Note
                          that an overabundance by a factor of 10 requires only that the elements from above
                          r = 1 bè pushed up.
                              The diffusion hypothesis predicts that the abundant, light, un-ionized elements,
                          which have no properly placed continuum and which do not have enough lines to be kept
                          up by lines, should be most underabundant. This is confirmed by the results of Sargent
                          and Searle (1962). When O and Mg are both singly ionized, one expects both to have
                          settled down by the same amount. On the average, this happens around 0eff = 0.4 (see
                          Fig. 6). When O is not ionized, one expects O to be much more underabundant than Mg.
                          This is confirmed at 0eff > 0.45. When Mg is doubly ionized and Ö is singly ionized,
                          one would expect O to be^slightly more underabundant than Mg. This would occur for
                          0eff < 0.36. The data are not good enough yet to confirm this trend; in any case, the
                          difference should be relatively small. Whereas O not being ionized increases its diffusion
                          velocity by a factor of about 100, Mg being doubly ionized changes the diffusion velocity
                          by a factor of only 4.
                              Similarly, Ne and He would be expected to be most underabundant when they are
                          not ionized. The data are not as conclusive for Ne as for O (see Fig. 7). Note that Ne
                          can be observed only when it is starting to be ionized. We have compared Ne with C
                          because, for a given abundance, the observed lines of Ne and C behave similarly with
                          0eff (Sargent et al. 1969). Helium seems to be underabundant in the stars in which it is
                          not ionized in the upper atmosphere as ^voidd be expected.
                              Silicon will be pushed up only if there exist wide autoionization states in Si n, as




                            © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
s
UD
O
-    No. 2, 1970                             PECULIAR A STARS                                               655

a    mentioned above. If they do exist, the radiation force on Si will be largest in the tempera-
o    ture range in which the Si stars are observed.
2       The elements P, S, Cl, Ca, and Sc can be expected to be overabundant in the cooler
     Ap stars, but neither Ar nor K should be. Sargent and Searle have made no systematic
     studies on these elements. The observational data are not conclusive except for P.
     Compare the different values obtained for the abundance of Ca in 53 Tau. The over-
     abundances of P observed in 3 Cen A and a few Mn stars, for instance k Cnc, are not




                                                                                  Fig. 7
        Fig. 6.—Solid line, fraction of O that is not ionized at r = 0.3 in model atmospheres with log g = 4.0
     and different 0eff. Points show the abundance of O in a number of stars. Open circle, a helium-weak star;
     çrosses, Ap stars (from Sargent and Searle 1962). The greater underabundances of O occur only in stars
     where O is not ionized in the outer atmosphere, as would be expected from the diffusion hypothesis.
        Fig. 7.—Solid lines, fractions of He and Ne that are not ionized at r = 0.3 in model atmospheres with log
     g = 4.0 and different 0eff. Points show abundance of Ne in a number of stars (from Sargent et al. 1969).
     Open circles, He-weak stars; crowei, Ap stars. Data are not as conclusive as for O, since Ne has been ob-
     served only in stars where it is getting ionized in the atmosphere.

     explained here. In k Cnc the ratio of O to Mg does not seem to follow the same trend
     as in the other Ap stars.
        In the iron peak, Figure 8 shows that the diffusion hypothesis explains naturally the
     overabundance of Mn. The occurrence of Mn stars in the (0eff, log g)-plane is also ex-
     plained naturally. There is excellent agreement between the observations and the over-
     abundances predicted by the diffusion hypothesis. Line absorption could explain slight
     overabundances of the other elements of the iron peak. Titanium and Fe may also be
     affected by continuum radiation, but not as much as Mn. One would not expect from
     diffusion large overabundances of Cr. In fact Searle, Lungershausen, and Sargent (1966)
     conclude that Cr is not as overabundant as is generally believed.
        Lines can be expected to cause overabundances of most elements heavier than the
     iron peak. They are so underabundant that they are generally observed to have more




       © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
197OApJ. . .160 . .64IM



                          656                                  GEORGES MIGHAUD                                        Vol. 160

                          lines than are necessary to push them upward. They are generally observed to be over-
                          abundant. When Figure 4, d, is compared with the résumé of Hack (1968), it seems that
                          Sr, Y, and Zr are most overabundant in those stars where the radiation pressure trans-
                          ferred to them through the continuum is largest.
                             The rare earths are observed to be overabundant, as expected. Barium is not expected
                          to be as overabundant as the rare earths, since in the atmosphere of the Ap stars it is
                          mainly in the form of Ba m which has the same atomic configuration as the preceding
                          noble gas. It must have very few lines, if any.
                             However, Sr will also take the configuration of the preceding noble gas in the at-
                          mospheres of the Ap stars, and it is observed to be overabundant. It should first be
                          mentioned that the maximum of the radiation-pressure force on Sr is in stars with 0eff —
                          0.55. The maximum on Ba would occur in stars with 0eff — 0.61, because the ionization
                          potential of Ba n is smaller than that of Sr n. At that temperature, the convection zone




                             Fig. 8.—Radiation force transferred through photoionization to Mg, Si, and iron-peak elements at
                          r 0.1 in atmospheres with log g = 4.0. Histograms show number of Si stars (a) and Mn stars (b) as a
                          function of 0eff (Sargent and Searle 1967a). Radiation force from the continuum appears related to the
                          Mn overabundance in Ap stars. Wide autoionization levels would have to exist in Si n for the radiation
                          force to be able to push Si into the outer atmosphere. Dashed lines, gravitational forces.

                          is becoming more important and diffusion processes are probably unimportant. Similar
                          remarks apply to the contribution of lines. Strontium is then expected to be more over-
                          abundant than Ba; however, the observed difference between the two is perhaps bigger
                          than would be expected.
                             Thus the diffusion hypothesis predicts the better-established abundance anomalies in
                          the Ap stars. In particular, it predicts the dependence of the anomalies on 0eff, unlike
                          any nuclear model;. It predicts that, in a given star, Sr, Y, and Zr should behave differ-
                          ently, which again no nuclear model predicts. It also predicts the existence of patches
                          leading to a periodic variation in the overabundances. However, it is difficult to explain
                          the overabundance of P and the existence of both Si and Mn stars at the same 0eff.
                              In our calculation, we had no free parameter to play with. However, if we suppose
                          that the atmospheres are not stable in their uppermost part but only below a given
                          value of T, which may vary from star to star, we would expect to have both Si and Mn
                          stars at the same 0eff. We see on Figure 4 that the radiation force on Si does not decrease




                             © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
No. 2, 1970                           PECULIAR A STARS                                             657

as rapidly when r increases as does that on Mn. If the relevant r for a given star were
1.0 or 2.0, it might become a Si star, whereas it would be a Mn star if the relevant r
were 0.1. Some of the characteristics of the metallic-line stars can probably be explained
in the same way. However, it is not clear how one could explain the underabundances
of Sc and Ca observed in some metallic-line stars. Because of the uncertainty as to the
value of r one should use, we have not pursued the matter any further.

   The author would like to thank Dr. W. L. W. Sargent for continuous guidance and
help and Drs. R. F. Christy, A. J. Deutsch, W. A. Fowler, J. L. Greenstein, D. L. Lam-
bert, and L, Searle for very useful discussions and comments.

                                           REFERENCES
Abt, H. A. 1967, in The Magnetic and Related Stars, ed. R. C. Cameron (Baltimore: Mono Book Co.),
   p. 173.
Adelman, S. J. 1968, Pub, A.S.P., 80, 329.
Aller, L. H., and Chapman, A. 1960, Ap.J., 132, 461.
Auer, L. H., Mihalas, D., Aller, L. H., and Ross, J. E. 1966, Ap.      145, 153.
Babcock, H. W. 1947, Pub, A.S.P., 59, 112.
        . 1958a, Ap. J. Suppl., 3, 141.
        . 19585, Ap. J., 128, 228.
        . 1963, ibid., 137, 690.
Bashkin, S. 1963, in Stellar Structure, ed. L. H. Aller and D. B. McLaughlin (Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press).
Berkowitz, J., and Lifshitz, C. 1968, J. Phys., B (Proc. Phys. Soc.), 1, 438.
Brancâzio, P. J., and Cameron, A. G. W. 1967, Canadian j. Phys., 45, 3297.
Browne, P. F. 1968, Nature, 220, 1296.
Chapman, S., and Cowling, T. G. 1953, The Mathematical Theory of Non Uniform Gases (Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press).
Cowling, T. G. 1953, in The Solar System, Vol. I, The Sun, ed. G. P. Kuiper (Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press), 532.
Deutsch, A. J. 1958, Hdb. d. Phys., 51, 689.
        . 1967, in The Magnetic and Related Stars, ed. R. C. Cameron (Baltimore: Mono Book Co.), p. 181.
Ditchburn, R. W., and Hudson, R. D. 1960, Proc. Roy. Soc., 256, 53.
Fowler, W. A., Burbidge, G. R., and Burbidge, E. M. 1955, Ap. J. Suppl., 2, 167.
Fowler, W. A., Burbidge, E. M., Burbidge, G. R., and Hoyle, F. 1965, Ap. J., 142, 423.
Froese, C., and Underhill, A. B. 1966, Ap. J., 146, 301.
Garrison, R. F. 1967, Ap. J., 147, 1003.
Greenstein, G. S., Truran, J. W., and Cameron, A. G. W. 1967, Nature, 213, 871.
Hack, M. 1968, Sky and Tel., 36, 92.
Hardorp, J., Bidelman, W. P., and Proiss, J. 1968, Zs. f. Ap., 69, 429.
Heuvel, E. P. J. Van den. 1968a, B.A.N,, 19, 326.
    —. 19685, ibid., p. 432.
Hyland, A. R. 1967, in The Magnetic and Related Stars, ed. R. C. Cameron (Baltimore: Mono Book Co.),
   p. 311.
Iben, I. 1965, Ap. J., 142, 1447.
        . 1966, ibid., 143, 483.
Kraft, R. P. 1967, in The Magnetic and Related Stars, ed. R. C. Cameron (Baltimore: Mono Book Co.),
   p. 303.
Krause, M. O. 1969, Phys. Rev., 177, 151.
Loeb, L. B. 1934, The Kinetic Theory of Gases (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co.) (reedited 1961, New
   York: Dover Publications).
Mestel, L. 1966, Zs. f. Ap., 63, 196.
Michaud, G. 1969, unpublished Ph.D. thesis, California Institute of Technology.
Mihalas, D. 1965, Ap. J. Suppl., 9, 321.
Milne, E. A. 1927, M.N.R.A.S., 87, 697.
Newson, G. 1966, Proc. Phys. Soc., 87, 975.
Pecker, J., and Schatzman, E. 1959, Astrophysique Générale (Paris: Dunod Editeur).
Praderie, F. 1968 (private communication).
Rudd, M. E., and Smith, K. 1968, Phys. Rev., 169, 79.
Sargent, A. I., Greenstein, J. L., and Sargent, W. L. W. 1969, Ap. J., 157, 757.
Sargent, W. L. W., and Searle, L. 1962, Ap. J., 136, 408.




  © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
197OApJ. . .160 . .64IM



                          658                                   GEORGES MICHAUD
                          Sargent, W. L. W., and Searle, L. 1967a, in The Magnetic and Related Stars, ed. R C. Cameron (Baltimore:
                             Mono Book Co.), p. 209.
                                  . 19676, Ap. J. {Letters), 150, L33.
                          Searle, L., Lungershausen, W. G., and Sargent, W. L. W. 1966, Ap. /., 145* 141.
                          Searle, L., and Sargent, W. L. W. 1964, Ap.      139, 793.
                          Shenstone, A. G. 1961, Proc. Roy. Soc. London, A, 261, 153.
                          Sommerfeld, A. 1939, Atombau und Spektrallinien, Vol. 2, 5th ed.* Braunschweig.
                          Spitzer, L. 1962, Physics of Fully Ionized Gases (New York: Interscience Publications).
                          Strom, K. M. 1969, Astr. and Ap., 2, 182.
                          Sweet, P. A. 1950, M.N.R.A.S., 110, 548.
                          Wolff, S. C. 1967, Ap. J. Suppl., 15, 21.
                                 . 1968, Pub. A.S.P., 80, 281.




                            © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
