                                                  Accepted for publication in The Astrophysical Journal on 23 June 2014.
                                                  Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 5/2/11




                                                     THE Ĝ INFRARED SEARCH FOR EXTRATERRESTRIAL CIVILIZATIONS WITH LARGE ENERGY
                                                                   SUPPLIES. II. FRAMEWORK, STRATEGY, AND FIRST RESULT
                                                                   J. T. Wright1,2 , R. Griffith1,2 , S. SigurDsson1,2 , M. S. Povich3 , and B. Mullan4,5
                                                                                 Accepted for publication in The Astrophysical Journal on 23 June 2014.

                                                                                                       ABSTRACT
arXiv:1408.1134v1 [physics.pop-ph] 5 Aug 2014




                                                           We describe the framework and strategy of the Ĝ infrared search for extraterrestrial civilizations
                                                         with large energy supplies, which will use the wide-field infrared surveys of WISE and Spitzer to search
                                                         for these civilizations’ waste heat. We develop a formalism for translating mid-infrared photometry
                                                         into quantitative upper limits on extraterrestrial energy supplies. We discuss the likely sources of
                                                         false positives, how dust can and will contaminate our search, and prospects for distinguishing dust
                                                         from alien waste heat. We argue that galaxy-spanning civilizations may be easier to distinguish from
                                                         natural sources than circumstellar civilizations (i.e., Dyson spheres), although GAIA will significantly
                                                         improve our capability to identify the latter. We present a zeroth order null result of our search based
                                                         on the WISE all-sky catalog: we show, for the first time, that Kardashev Type iii civilizations (as
                                                         Kardashev originally defined them) are very rare in the local universe. More sophisticated searches
                                                         can extend our methodology to smaller waste heat luminosities, and potentially entirely rule out (or
                                                         detect) both Kardashev Type iii civilizations and new physics that allows for unlimited “free” energy
                                                         generation.
                                                         Subject headings: extraterrestrial intelligence — infrared: galaxies — infrared:stars

                                                                                                  1. INTRODUCTION AND OUTLINE
                                                   This is the second paper in a series describing Ĝ, the Glimpsing Heat from Alien Technologies survey (or G-HAT).
                                                   In Paper I of this series, we discussed the background and justification for Ĝ. Briefly, if spacefaring extraterrestrial
                                                intelligences (ETI’s) capable of colonizing other stars in its galaxy exist in the Milky Way or in another galaxy, we
                                                find, in agreement with Hart (1975), that its galaxy can be fully colonized on the timescale of a galactic rotation
                                                (i.e. significantly less than the age of the galaxy). Since the power generation and collection (the energy supply) of
                                                intelligent life has the potential to expand exponentially, and since intelligence implies the ability to overcome negative
                                                feedback and approach physical limits, these energy supplies could, in principle, be quite large.
                                                   An ETI’s energy collection and generation must be balanced by energy disposal in steady-state. This disposal
                                                most naturally occurs in mid-infrared wavelengths, potentially rendering large alien civilizations easily detectable
                                                and distinguishable from natural sources with new mid-infrared surveys such as that recently conducted by WISE
                                                (Wright et al. 2010).
                                                   In order to specify and quantify the classes of ETIs that would be detectable with a waste heat search, in Section 2
                                                we develop a formalism for parameterizing the energy budget of a civilization and use it to construct models of such a
                                                civilization’s spectral energy distribution (SED). We also consider what values for the parameters we have chosen one
                                                might expect for alien civilizations, and what values are permitted by the laws of physics.
                                                   Section 3 describes, in broad outlines, the first aspect of our search using WISE to identify stars and galaxies with
                                                anomalously high amounts of mid-infrared emission. Here we also discuss the likely sources of false positives we will
                                                encounter and how to distinguish them from true positives. We also present the “zeroth order” result of our search in
                                                this section.
                                                   We present our conclusions in Section 4. In subsequent papers in this series we will discuss the details of our efforts,
                                                including our quantitative results.
                                                                                            2. PARAMETERIZING ALIEN CIVILIZATIONS
                                                  In this section, we develop a formalism for describing alien civilizations with large energy supplies by comparing the
                                                magnitude of their power generation and waste heat disposal to the energy available to them in starlight. This allows
                                                us to model their SED’s and associate quantitative upper limits with a null detection of waste heat.
                                                                                                       2.1. The Kardashev Scale
                                                  Kardashev (1964) formulated a system to classify civilizations on their technological sophistication based on the
                                                scale of their energy supply (which could be used for intentional or unintentional radio communication). He defined
                                                Type i civilizations to be those with energy supplies comparable to humanity’s supply today. Type ii civilizations had
                                                    1 Department of Astronomy & Astrophysics, 525 Davey Lab, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 16802, USA
                                                    2 Center for Exoplanets and Habitable Worlds, 525 Davey Lab, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
                                                    3 California State Polytechnic University, Pomona, Department of Physics and Astronomy, 3801 West Temple Ave, Pomona, CA 91768,
                                                  USA
                                                   4 Blue Marble Space Institution of Science, PO Box 85561, Seattle, WA 98145-1561, USA
                                                   5 Carnegie Science Center, 1 Allegheny Way Pittsburgh, PA 15212, USA
2                                                    J. T. Wright et al.
                  Table 1: Definition of parameters in the AGENT formalism, and values for humanity
         Parameter Meaning (Powers as fractions of avail- Value for Humanity Notes
                    able starlight)
             α      Power of intercepted starlight              ∼ 10−7       Counting only photovoltaic generation
                                                                             (ignoring passive heating, agriculture,
                                                                             etc.)
             ǫ      Power of non-starlight energy supply        ∼ 10−4       Mostly fossil fuel, some nuclear
                    (e.g. fossil fuel use, zero-point energy,
                    nuclear energy)
             γ      Power of waste heat in the form of ther-    ∼ 10−4       ∼ǫ
                    mal radiation of photons
             ν      Power of other waste disposal (e.g. neu-   negligible    Radio transmission and radar, neutrino
                    trino radiation, non-thermal emission,                   losses in nuclear reactors, kinetic and
                    kinetic energy, energy-to-mass conver-                   potential energy in spacecraft
                    sion)
          Twaste    Characteristic color temperature of        ∼ 285 K       Typical operating / ambient tempera-
                    thermal waste photons                                    ture


at their disposal all of the power radiated by their host star (∼ 4 × 1026 W), and a Type iii supercivilization could
tap all of the starlight of its home galaxy (∼ 4 × 1037 W). This categorization spans an enormous range of energy
supplies and conveniently divides plausible spatial extents of civilizations: planetary, stellar system, and galactic.
  Sagan (1973) noted that the gaps between Kardashev’s types spanned approximately factors of 1010 , and extended
the definition to nonintegers by defining it in terms of the civilization’s total energy supply P , measured in units of
10 MW:                                                             
                                                               P
                                                K = log10             /10                                              (1)
                                                            10MW
On this scale humanity’s current energy supply makes it a K = 0.7 civilization, and all life on Earth has K = 0.89
(Kleidon 2010).
  In this work, we follow Zubrin (2000) and apply Kardashev’s types more loosely, defining a Type i civilization (which
we will distinguish from Kardashev’s definition with the notation K1) as one that “has achieved full mastery of all its
planet’s resources”. That is, we do not tie it specifically to an absolute energy supply (since other planets may have
different capacities of power) but rather to the extent and approximate technological achievement of the civilization. By
Zubrin’s definition, humanity is nearly a K1 civilization. Analogously, a K2 civilization is a circumstellar civilization,
tapping a significant fraction of its host star’s light and having the capacity for resource acquisition and use that far
exceeds that of a planet-bound civilization. Finally, K3 refers to a supercivilization that is galaxy-spanning, composed
of so many K2’s that it has mastered a significant fraction of the galaxy’s luminosity and resources.

                                               2.2. The AGENT Formalism
  We describe here a general formalism for parameterizing the effects of alien waste heat on the spectrum of a star or
galaxy. This formalism is general in the sense that it attempts to parameterize an alien civilization’s energy budget
without making any assumptions about the nature of alien civilizations or their engineering.
  We divide energy supply (that is, generation and collection) into two components: starlight collection and other
sources, which we specify with the symbols α (which is meant, for mnemonic purposes, to remind the reader of an
absorption coefficient) and ǫ (meant to remind the reader of the energy generation per unit volume in stellar structure
equations). We likewise divide energy emission or disposal into two categories: waste heat in the form of radiation
(denoted γ, meant to evoke a common symbol for the photon) and all other forms (denoted ν, meant to suggest neutrino
radiation, an example of a source of non-thermal or non-photon energy losses, as in, for example, supernovae). Finally,
where appropriate, we assume that thermal waste heat has some characteristic temperature Twaste , which may be a
function of the portion of the electromagnetic spectrum observed.
  While these parameters could be expressed in physical units, we find it more convenient to normalize them by the
energy available to a civilization in starlight. Thus, we normalize by the incident starlight on a planet for a K1, by a
stellar luminosity for a K2, and by a galactic luminosity for a K3. This restricts α to lie between zero and one, but
the other parameters can take any positive value.
  We will refer to this as the AGENT parameterization, after the parameters αγǫνTwaste , and present the parameters
in Table 1.
  Conservation of energy and steady-state together require that the energy a civilization collects or generates must
equal the energy it emits or disposes of, most naturally as waste heat. This yields:

                                                       α+ǫ = γ+ν                                                       (2)
  The assumption of negligible non-thermal losses (ν ∼ 0) and the further assumption that all sources of power other
than starlight are negligible (ǫ ∼ 0) yields the useful simplification of α = γ.
  To illustrate the AGENT parameters, consider that humanity has an energy supply of approximately 1.4 × 105 TWh
per year, or approximately 1.7 × 107 MW, mostly from fossil fuels (Kleidon 2010). Since the total amount of sunlight
incident on the Earth is 1.7 × 1011 MW, we parameterize humanity as having values given in Table 1.
                                       Ĝ search for Kardashev Civilizations II                                       3

  We have made several simplifying assumptions for this calculation. We have ignored sunlight used for passive
heating, agriculture, and the many other ways it makes Earth inhabitable for us, because we are here isolating our
civilization’s contribution to the global energy budget. We have also assumed steady state, and so ignored forms of
energy storage such as the potential energy in architecture, the chemical energy in stored food and batteries, and
similar considerations. Fossil fuels are stored solar energy, but the time over which this storage took place is so long
that their use does not badly violate our steady-state assumption.
  Put this way, we see that humanity warms the Earth with its energy generation by 0.01% above the effects of sunlight
alone, and this effect has elevated the Earth’s MIR heat signature by that amount (0.1 millimagnitude) above its pre-
industrial levels. This effect (direct heating) is currently small compared to greenhouse warming (which insulates the
Earth’s surface but does not change the global energy balance) and albedo effects (such as loss of reflective sea ice or
changes in cloud cover).
  The energy budget of life on Earth is surprisingly poorly known, but on average photosynthetic life on Earth generates
∼ 2 × 108 MW from sunlight with approximately 2% efficiency (Kleidon 2010), implying that it ultimately intercepts
∼ 5% of sunlight that strikes the top of the atmosphere. Since photosynthetic energy production dominates Earth’s
biological work budget, we would write that for all life on Earth α = 0.05 and, since all of this energy eventually
cascades into waste heat, γ = 0.05.
                                                2.3. Illustrative Examples
  We now illustrate our formalism by translating some speculative forms of advanced civilizations from the scientific
and popular literature into the AGENT parameterization.
  First, we consider civilizations with energy supplies comparable to their star’s total luminosity. A “classical” Dyson
sphere that generated power solely from its completely enfolded solar-luminosity star and with a radius of 1 AU would
have α = γ = 1; Twaste ∼ 250 K; and ν = ǫ = 0. A civilization using a rotating black hole to convert one Jupiter mass
of material to energy with 40% efficiency evenly over the course of 5 Gyr via the Penrose mechanism would have a
energy supply of approximately 1 solar luminosity, so ǫ = 1, but might have α = 0 if it employed no mega-engineering
to block significant amounts of starlight. A “ring world” (Niven 1970) with radius r = 1 AU and with a width of
w = 1.6 × 106 km would intercept 21 w/r of its star’s light, and so have α = 5 × 10−4 .
  For K3’s, α would represent the luminosity-averaged covering fraction of stars in the galaxy, so α = 1 corresponds
to the limiting case of every star being enshrouded by a complete Dyson sphere, and α = 0.5 could represent partial
coverage of every star or total coverage of stars contributing one half of the galaxy’s total luminosity.
  We can also translate some past SETI work into the AGENT parameters.
  Radio or optical communication SETI can be thought of as searches for the deliberate or leaked power we parameterize
by ν. In Kardashev’s original formulation of types of civilizations, he made an order of magnitude estimate of the
power available for (non-thermal) radio emission from civilizations given that it must be some fraction of the energy
supply. In our parameterization Kardashev estimated ν . (α + ǫ) ≈ 1. A variation on this theme is the idea of
Loeb & Turner (2012) to search for leaked high brightness-temperature light from alien civilizations on Kuiper Belt
Objects.
  One can approximate a civilization’s place on Sagan’s version of the Kardashev scale (§ 2.1) for galaxies similar to
the Milky Way and stars similar to the Sun as

                                              K = [K] + log10 (α + ǫ)/10                                            (3)
where [K] is the ordinal Kardashev type on Zubrin’s scale. Thus, a civilization that is intercepting 5% of its Sun-like
host star’s light and producing another 0.05 L⊙ from other sources around its planetary system would be a K2 (it is
circumstellar) with approximately K = 2 + log10 (0.05 + 0.05)/10 = 1.9 (the proper value in Sagan’s formulation is
K = log10 (0.1 × 4 × 1020 )/10 = 1.96).
  The K3 search of Annis (1999) sought evidence of stellar obscuration on the basis of optically faint galaxies that
appeared to be outliers to the Tully–Fischer relation, and was sensitive to galaxies with greater than 75% obscuration.
In AGENT parameters, Annis sought galaxies with 0.75 < α < 1 (although his sensitivity near 1 was necessarily
limited by the fact that the galaxies were required to have a measured optical rotation curve to be included in his
sample, creating a selection bias against the highest-α galaxies).
  We can contrast this with the MIR search originally proposed by Dyson, which is focused on high-γ objects. This
describes the searches already performed by researchers such as Jugaku and Carrigan, and such as we will describe
later. Indeed, much of the work of Jugaku put rather tight limits on the values of γ for nearby stars with IRAS, as
low as γ < 0.01.
  The artifacts postulated by Arnold (2005) (see § 2.2 of Paper I) would correspond in AGENT parameters to structures
with γ = α ∼ 10−2 –10−4 , with the twist that the detection and communication would be made through the time
variations in α.
  Viewed this way, the principal advantage to searches for electromagnetically telecommunicating civilizations (i.e,
searches for high-ν civilizations, Blair et al. 1992) is that the power emitted might be in a narrow bandwidth (and so
have high flux density), might be obviously of alien origin, and might thus be easily distinguished from background or
natural sources of radiation. The principal disadvantage is that we must guess at the form of ν and/or hope it is large
enough for us to detect with our technology and from our vantage. In contrast, the principal advantage of searches
for waste heat is that we expect γ ≫ ν, and we expect the waste heat to have a characteristic (thermal) spectrum;
4                                                   J. T. Wright et al.

their principal disadvantages are that they are only sensitive to large values of γ, and that there are many confounding
sources (mostly involving stochastically heated dust) that will mimic this signature. Thus, the two forms of SETI are
most sensitive to different kinds of activities of alien civilizations and face different challenges.

                                               2.4. Spectral Implications
  We can use the AGENT parameters to roughly calculate the MIR spectrum we would expect for large civilizations.
  Consider a simple model in which a galaxy or star at distance d has a stellar luminosity Lhost and a flux density
received at Earth Fλ . We describe the SED of the host galaxy, fhost , normalized to unity area, i.e.
                                                                  Lhost
                                                   λFλ = fhost                                                 (4)
                                                                   4πd2
  This galaxy hosts a civilization with typical waste heat temperature Twaste blocking a fraction α of the stellar
luminosity and generating non-thermal emission with normalized SED fnt .
  The presence of the civilization will, to first order, alter the spectrum received at Earth to be:
                                                                                  
                                                             λπBλ (Twaste )          Lhost
                                 λFλ = (1 − α)fhost + γ                 4   + νfnt                             (5)
                                                                σTwaste              4πd2
where Bλ (Twaste ) is the specific intensity of the Planck function at T = Twaste . Note that this expression ignores any
feedback on the host stars from the presence of a large solid angle of collectors (e.g. Badescu & Cathcart 2000), and
any non-stellar sources of radiation, such as the emission from dust or a galaxy’s central engine. We have also assumed
in this equation that all non-thermal energy disposal (represented by ν) is electromagnetic (i.e. it can be represented
by fnt ).
  For K2’s, the starlight may not be blocked uniformly at all angles (that is, modeling the stellar energy collectors
as a translucent screen may be inappropriate). If we assume that the stellar disk is completely unocculted at most
times, then we can ignore the (1 − α) factor. For K3’s, the number of stars in the galaxy makes it appropriate to take
a phase average over them and retain the (1 − α) term.

                                             2.5. Simple Blackbody Model
  If we crudely approximate a stellar or galactic spectrum as a blackbody with temperature T∗ and ignore ν, then we
can rewrite the expected SED as
                                   "                                      4 #
                                                                     T∗          π Lhost
                            Fλ ≈ (1 − α)Bλ (T∗ ) + γBλ (Twaste )                                                 (6)
                                                                    Twaste      σT∗4 4πd2
If, more realistically, we restrict this last approximation to the Rayleigh–Jeans limit, we have
                                                      "                  3 #
                                                                    T∗            ck Lhost
                                Fλ (λ ≫ hc/(kT∗ )) ≈ 1 − α + γ                                                       (7)
                                                                   Twaste      2λ4 σT∗3 d2
                                                      "                  3 #
                                                                    T∗
                                                    ≈ 1−α+γ                    Fλ (α = γ = 0)                        (8)
                                                                   Twaste
This form reveals the well-established power of working in the MIR when searching for high-γ civilizations. We see
that the MIR flux of high-γ civilizations will be strongly enhanced by the large (T∗ /Twaste )3 term, which will be on
the order of 103 even for modest values of γ. Indeed, for γ = 0.15, T∗ = 4000 K, and Twaste = 255 K, this amounts to
an increase in MIR flux of nearly 7 mag. Further, the MIR color temperature would be dominated by the 255 K waste
heat, meaning that it will be distinguished from most astrophysical sources in both luminosity and color. By contrast,
the dimming in the NIR/optical is linear in α, and so is a much smaller effect, only observationally distinguishable for
values of α near 1.
  The lesson here is that to have detectable waste heat, a civilization need not completely obfuscate its star(s) nor
must it employ starlight as the primary source of its energy. The MIR excess scales, to first order, as γ(T∗ /Twaste )3 ,
which is large enough that the primary obstacle to detecting waste heat from high-γ civilizations will not be their
brightness, but confusion with other astrophysical sources with similar broadband colors or spectra.

                                  2.6. Plausible Values for the AGENT Parameters
                                               2.6.1. Starlight Absorbed: α
  In the solar system, the available free energy is dominated by the Sun’s luminosity, which provides ∼ 1033 erg s−1 for
∼ 1010 yr, or ∼ 1051 erg over its lifetime, having converted 10−3 of its rest mass into energy. The planets collectively
contain ∼ 10−3 M⊙ , meaning that even perfectly efficient mass-to-energy conversion would provide no more energy
than the Sun provides “for free” if performed over the lifetime of a star. The gravitational potential and kinetic energy
of the planets are both dominated by Jupiter, and are ∼ GM⊙ MX /(5AU) ∼ 1042 erg. Coincidentally, this is similar
                                              Ĝ search for Kardashev Civilizations II                                                      5

to the rough order of magnitude of the chemical potential energy of the planets (∼ MX /mp eV ∼ 1043 erg; i.e. the
energy available for “burning” them).
  We see, then, that the Sun dominates the energy budget of the solar system both in terms of readily available
energy and in mass available for both construction and mass-to-energy conversion. Of course, a civilization might use
the mass of planets as an energy source for timescales much less than 10 Gyr, in which case its energy supply might
temporarily exceed that available from its host star. Such a energy supply would necessarily be short-lived, however,
and so the chances of its detection would be quite small (given the age of the Galaxy and the duty cycle this implies).
Long-lived civilizations with large energy supplies might therefore be expected to rely almost entirely upon starlight
for their energy needs.
  Thus, for civilizations relying primarily on starlight for their power, collected starlight equals power disposal (α =
γ + ν), so power disposal will be some fraction of total stellar luminosity (0 < (γ + ν) < 1), and other power sources
are negligible (ǫ ≪ 1).
                                                     2.6.2. Other Energy Sources: ǫ
   An arbitrarily advanced civilization may, of course, be able to tap additional sources of energy. Speculation into the
nature of such technology is perilous, but we can explore the limitations imposed on it by our current understanding
of the laws of physics. The conversion of mass to energy through fusion or fission is generally inefficient (and, at any
rate, stars already do this “for free”), but in theory the use of a rotating black hole (through the Penrose mechanism)
can provide very high efficiencies (Bhat et al. 1985). The star itself might provide the fuel for such an engine. If such a
process operated at 40% efficiency and consumed the entire star over its natural lifetime, it would effectively increase
the luminosity of a star system by a factor of (0.4/0.001) = 4 × 104 (if the higher luminosity were to be sustained over
10 Gyr).
   K3’s would also have two additional resources at their disposal: interstellar gas and the central supermassive black
hole. The former should be of little utility: the gas in a galaxy typically composes only 10% of its baryonic mass, and is
inconveniently distributed compared with the mass in stars (in the sense that it is not dense, and so must be collected
across large volumes to be of much use). The central black hole might provide the core of an engine for converting, for
instance, stellar mass into free energy (Inoue & Yokoo 2011); indeed such an engine might bear a striking similarity
to active galactic nuclei (AGNs).6
   Since dark matter dominates the mass-energy budget of a galaxy (composing, e.g., 90% of the Milky Way’s mass),
it is in some sense the most obvious and abundant energy source, and bears consideration as a source of energy. The
most widely accepted model of cosmology holds that ∼ 85% of the mass-energy of the universe (not counting the “dark
energy” responsible for cosmic acceleration) is in the form of dark matter. This matter is cold (in the sense that the
kinetic energy per particle kT ≪ mc2 ) and, so far, is detected only by its gravity. The most popular candidate for
the dark matter is an as-yet undiscovered, relic, weakly interacting, massive particle. The dark matter is known to
be self-gravitating and bound down to at least the scales of galaxies, and galaxy clusters host high concentrations of
dark matter, especially at their centers. The details of the temperature and nature of the dark matter are still poorly
constrained observationally, but this outline is sufficient to consider its applicability to the problem of alien energy
supplies.
   If we very roughly take a large galactic dark matter halo to be M ∼ 1012 solar masses (1045 g) with typical size
R ∼ 1023 cm (∼ 30 kpc), then the average mass-energy density isp∼ 10−24 g/cm3 ∼ 10−4 J/m−3 ∼ 0.6GeV/c2 /cm3 .
The typical velocity of the dark matter particle or clump will be ∼ (GM/R) ∼ 300 km/s, so the average mass-energy
flux would be of the order of 102 W/m2 . This is roughly one-tenth of the solar constant of 1400 W/m2 (comparable
to the output of a modern photovoltaic solar cell) and so would warm a surface to ∼ 200K.
   So in principle, especially in dark-matter halos with deep gravitational wells and large particle fluxes, dark matter
may be a useful source of energy over gigayear timescale, if it could be tapped with high efficiency. The major
obstacle to dark matter energy extraction is that most dark matter candidate particles have nearly negligible cross
sections to baryonic matter and electrons, and so cannot be captured or otherwise used as a source of energy with
high efficiency. If the dark matter particles have cross sections to baryonic interaction similar to that of the neutrino,
then it would require neutron-star-like densities to achieve optical depths approaching unity on scales of 1 m (but,
since neutron matter is degenerate at reasonable temperatures, the particles still could not interact with the target
through elastic scattering because all of the possible post-interaction states for the target particle would be filled).
Alternatively, gravitational focusing might be employed to create especially high densities of dark matter, which might
self-annihilate if it is composed of both particles and their antiparticles, and might decay into a form useful for energy
extraction.7 Indeed, Hooper & Steffen (2012) suggested dark matter as a potential source of internal heating for
planets that might make them habitable (i.e. capable of supporting liquid surface water).
   Regardless of the form overcoming this obstacle might take, it would imply that a K3 could generate a modest
amount of energy anywhere within a dark matter halo (although it is not clear what benefit this would provide over
a small nuclear reactor other than the potential for saving the necessary reactants over billions of years).
   6 The idea that all or most AGN are, in fact, alien engines that we have misinterpreted as natural phenomena has a certain ironic
appeal, and might explain away any theoretical difficulties in perfectly modeling them (i.e. what appears to be missing physics is in reality
deliberate engineering on the part of alien civilizations). Besides being an “aliens of the gaps” argument, though, this explanation fails to
explain the abundance of AGN with cosmic time (i.e. why AGN are most abundant at redshift and relatively rare in the local universe),
since one would naı̈vely expect their abundance to increase with time as K3’s arise and reach their central engines. That is, it is unclear
why alien civilizations would almost invariably shut off their engines after a few gigayears. This explanation would also require that K3’s
arise very quickly after the Big Bang (even at z > 5) which seems quite unlikely.
   7 An interesting consequence of such an energy source is that since the gravity of dark matter holds galaxies together, its conversion into
thermal photons would slowly unbind galaxies and galaxy clusters. The environmental consequences of depleting this energy source would
be quite dramatic.
6                                                   J. T. Wright et al.

  Even more exotically, alien civilizations might be able to tap zero-point energy or cosmic dark energy for their needs.
It is unclear to us to what degree this is allowed or prohibited by the laws of physics.
  Regardless of the form of non-starlight energy an ETI might take, it must be ubiquitous across a supercivilization
for it to contribute significantly to a galactic energy budget, and so this alternative energy source must be “obvious”
or easily replicable. If such energy sources are available, then they might supersede starlight as the dominant energy
source in the galaxy. In this case, we might expect ǫ ≫ α, and even ǫ ≫ 1. If this energy were to be emitted as thermal
waste heat (i.e. if ǫ ∼ γ) at high waste heat temperatures, then such a civilization might be quite easily detected in
the MIR, but hardly noticeable at all by way of obscured starlight. Indeed, such a K3 would be so noticeable that
even a cursory examination of the WISE survey catalog shows that they must not be common in the local universe.

                                             2.6.3. Power Disposal: γ and ν
  The emergent spectrum of an alien civilization will depend on the sort of work it does with its energy supply. On
Earth, most of the work we do eventually results in little to no energy storage: transportation, metabolism, energy
distribution, and computation all accomplish useful tasks, but essentially all of the energy involved is ultimately
dissipated as waste heat. We might then expect that alien civilizations will do the same, but we must also account for
other possibilities.
  The most obvious sources of non-thermal disposal of energy are radio emission and other electromagnetic radiation.
On Earth, small amounts of our energy supply is lost to space in these forms as radar, high brightness temperature
outdoor lighting, laser, and other decidedly non-thermal radiation. Searches for alien analogs to this emission compose
significant parts of optical and radio communication SETI. Other possibilities for non-thermal energy use are energy-
to-matter conversion, or the generation of non-E-M forms of radiation (gravity waves, neutrinos, etc.). These all
represent low-entropy forms of energy, and the second law of thermodynamics requires that the balance of entropy be
carried away by waste heat.
  Slysh (1985) noted that the maximum possible thermodynamic efficiency of a civilization is the Carnot efficiency
                                                    η = 1 − Twaste /T                                                 (9)
where T = T∗ for collected starlight and is characteristic temperature at which energy is generated otherwise. We can
use this observation to calculate an upper limit on ν. If a civilization operates at maximum thermodynamic efficiency,
then the fraction of energy ν that does not ultimately end up radiated away as waste heat (i.e. remains at low entropy)
is given by
                                                          ν
                                                               ≤η                                                  (10)
                                                        α+ǫ
For a fiducial Dyson sphere at 1AU around a Sun-like star, we have η ≈ 1 − 290K/5800K = 0.95, so in this case
γ/α ≥ 0.05, ν/α ≤ 0.95, and ν/γ ≤ 19.
  More exotically, it is conceivable that ETI’s might employ machinery that is based on the weak force, and thus
radiate significant waste heat as thermal neutrinos, or other particles that do not quickly decay into thermal photons,
in which case they might be able to have ν ≫ γ. If such physics is obvious and pervasive enough to be employed by
all ETI’s, we would not expect to be able to detect them from their waste heat in photons.
  If a civilization’s waste heat from stellar energy is typically photonic then γ/α ≥ Twaste /T∗ and, by conservation of
energy, ν = α + ǫ − γ. If, like humanity, ETI’s do most of their work in a manner that eventually generates waste
heat (γ ∼ α + ǫ) then waste heat will dominate the civilization’s radiation (ν ≪ γ). If, further, starlight dominates a
civilization’s energy supply, then we have (0 . γ . 1).

                                         2.6.4. Waste Heat Temperature: Twaste
  We expect Twaste to have values near 300 K, but not solely for anthropocentric reasons. Of course, since Earth
demonstrates that intelligent, spacefaring life can emerge and thrive at these temperatures, it follows that we should
expect at least some alien civilizations to favor this temperature. However, the waste heat temperature does not need
correspond to either preferred ambient temperature of alien organisms or to the effective temperature of the collectors
of stellar power; it represents the temperature of the outermost radiating surface of a stellar system. Nonetheless,
there are thermodynamic reasons that we do not expect waste heat to be disposed of at temperatures far from 300 K
for civilizations using starlight.
  The waste heat from the outermost radiating surfaces of a civilization could itself be used to do work at a yet lower
temperature. Thermodynamically, this corresponds to an improvement in the maximum possible efficiency, η from
starlight at a given temperature. Naively, it would seem then that ETIs with large energy supplies would construct
highly efficient Dyson spheres, potentially rendering waste heat so cool that it would not radiate in the MIR.
  However, the marginal free energy yield from employing ever lower waste heat temperature decreases with Twaste
even as the difficulty of the engineering rapidly increases. Energy balance for a Dyson sphere with ǫ = ν = 0 requires
that
                                                   L∗ α = γσTwaste 4 A                                               (11)
where A is the surface area of the radiators. Thus, for α = γ, the radiating surface A must increase as (1/Twaste )4 . For
instance, improving the maximum thermodynamic efficiency η of a K2 from 95% (for instance, a 1 AU sphere radiating
                                            Ĝ search for Kardashev Civilizations II                                                 7

290 K waste heat reprocessed from 5800 K starlight) to 99.5% (the same, but radiating at 29 K) would require an
increase in surface area of                     −4          −4
                                        1 − 0.95           29K
                                                      =             = 104                                  (12)
                                       1 − 0.995          290K
(representing a sphere 100 AU in radius in our example).
   This strong inverse dependence implies that there will be an optimal waste heat temperature beyond which it would
be impractical to extract more free energy from starlight. This optimal operating temperature would then characterize
Dyson spheres, and this temperature will likely be significantly above the minimum possible (i.e. that of the cosmic
microwave background at 2.7 K). Indeed, the Twaste −4 dependence is so strong, one might expect that civilizations will
operate at the highest temperature consistent with the work they wish to do.
   Of course, different civilizations might optimize this problem in different ways, but there are reasons to expect a
value near 300 K. At this temperature around Sun-like stars, η = 95%, a point at which there is an order of magnitude
less free energy available in the waste heat as there is in the starlight itself. Further improvements in maximum
thermodynamic efficiency at this point are small compared to the potential value of improving the energy efficiency
of the “factories” themselves. This temperature is also low enough that complex molecules can form and most rocks
and metals are solid, allowing for the construction of mega-engineering projects. Temperatures between 150 and 600
K are thus “reasonable” values for the optimization of this problem (spanning a factor of 250 in radiating surface to
be engineered).
   As long as this optimal Twaste value is measured in this range, then the Wien peak of a civilization’s waste heat —
and thus the bulk of its luminosity — should be in the MIR, and we should expect searches there to be effective. This
is in contrast to natural astrophysical sources of radiation with significant amounts of dust, which can have much lower
effective temperatures (because dust clouds are large, having very large effective radiating area, their typical Twaste
values are 15–50 K).
   The highest thermodynamic efficiencies for K2’s will result in waste heat having an SED very close to thermal (i.e.
that of a blackbody). Heat radiating from a surface of a given area with a given flux has the highest entropy when the
spectrum is thermal, so a non-thermal spectrum for that energy would imply that free energy remains to be tapped
from the energy at constant surface area. A K2 optimizing its operating temperature to balance engineering difficulty
with thermodynamic efficiency would thus aim for its waste heat to have an SED as close to that of a blackbody as
possible.
   Thus, while an alien civilization using starlight might emit waste heat over a range of temperatures, we should not
expect it to be so cold or to have such a strongly non-thermal spectrum that as to be easily missed in the MIR.
                              2.6.5. Other Assumptions: Steady State, and Conservation of Energy
  More advanced civilizations might do significant work that efficiently stores energy as kinetic or potential energy,
rearranging the mass of their stellar system or galaxy in both position and velocity space, and violating our steady-
state assumption. Such a process would be inherently limited, however, as eventually they must either “evaporate”
their stellar system or galaxy, or else heat it until it radiates thermal waste heat.
  More exotically, if the “dark sector” (dark energy and dark matter) contains energy that can be tapped (as a source
for ǫ), then it might also serve as a sink for waste heat, implying that both energy generation and disposal might
be performed “for free” and have no detectable effects. If such physics and engineering is “obvious” in the sense
that advanced civilizations inevitably discover and use it, then waste heat might be only a trace component of most
advanced civilizations’ energy budgets. If such engineering is so “obvious” and practical as to be nearly universally
employed by ETI’s, then a waste heat search would fail.
             3. THE Ĝ SEARCH FOR EXTRATERRESTRIAL CIVILIZATIONS WITH LARGE ENERGY SUPPLIES
  We have begun the G-HAT search for alien waste heat, which we denote Ĝ. We will give detailed descriptions of
our search methodology in later papers, but here we will give a general outline. We also discuss some of the most
promising ways one could remove false positives by identifying dust as the source of infrared radiation identified in a
broadband MIR survey. We also show give a “zeroth” order result of our search from our preliminary analysis of the
WISE all-sky survey.
                                    3.1. Predicted Magnitudes and Colors in WISE Bands
   The simple blackbody model of Section 2.5 is obviously an insufficient description of the actual characteristics of
a galactic SED, in that both the stellar population and the dust responsible for the MIR emission cannot really be
characterized by a single pair of temperatures. The assumption of a single temperature for the stellar photosphere
is more appropriate for searches of incomplete Dyson spheres, but in this case the value derived for α is likely to be
incorrect, both because backwarming will make the MIR color temperature of the star inconsistent with its effective
temperature, and because of the incorrect assumption in the (1 − α) term that we can effectively model the absorption
of starlight as a translucent screen (see § 2.4).
   For galaxies, we can do better by employing galaxy templates8 generated by Mari Polletta using the GRASIL code
of Silva et al. (1998), to provide a more realistic functional form for fhost . Inspection of the elliptical and spiral galaxy
  8 We obtained these templates from the SWIRE template library at http://www.iasf-milano.inaf.it/∼polletta/templates/swire templates.html,
compiled and hosted by Mari Polletta
8                                                          J. T. Wright et al.

templates reveals an appropriate value for T∗ in the toy model would be T∗ = 4000K, consistent with most of the
starlight in a typical galaxy, especially in the red optical, coming from K giants.
  To transform the predictions of the AGENT formalism and the Silva SEDs into predictions of colors in the WISE
bands, we followed the prescription in the WISE Explanatory Supplement9 and references therein (Cutri et al. 2012;
Wright et al. 2010; Jarrett et al. 2011).
  Using the filter response curves and zero points described in Cutri et al. (2012), we constructed a procedure that
calculates the received flux in the four bandpasses of WISE for a blackbody emitter at temperature Twaste with fiducial
luminosity 1 L⊙ at a distance of 10 pc. Rather than compute the response to a blackbody anew every time we
need
P3 them, we fit the         resulting fluxes in each of the four bandpasses as a function of temperature with the function
                          i−1
   i=0 =  a i log T waste     . Use of this simple expression in T significantly speeds computation time. Our procedure then
scales these predicted fluxes by the luminosity and distance of a given hypothetical source.
  To validate our calculations, we used this procedure to calculate WISE magnitudes of the star Vega (since WISE
uses Vega magnitudes). This procedure was complicated by the fact that Vega is not a blackbody, but in the Rayleigh-
Jeans limit in the MIR this is a reasonable approximation. We consulted Cohen et al. (1992, Fig. 2) to determine
the appropriate value of T∗ to use, and found that at 5µ, a continuum temperature of 13,000 K produced the best
match to the spectra in that work. Our procedure predicts (W 2 − W 1), (W 3 − W 1), and (W 4 − W 1) colors of
(−0.0011, −0.0002, 0.020) for blackbodies at this temperature. These values suggest that our approximation of Vega
as a blackbody induces errors of < 1% in the first two colors, and of order 2% in (W 4 − W 1); this serves as a reality
check on our interpretation of the WISE response curves and zero points.
  We apply this computation to the K3 hunt by using this procedure to calculate the sensitivity of WISE to objects
with the spectra described in Eq. 5 with α = γ and ν = 0. Specifically, our procedure calculates WISE fluxes for the
old elliptical Ell13 Silva template and blackbodies of temperature Twaste and scales them by (1−α) and γ, respectively.
It then sums these two fluxes in each of the four WISE bands, and scales them appropriately by (Lhost /(4πd2 )) to
produce the predicted WISE magnitudes for a a given set of α, γ, Twaste , (Lhost /(4πd2 )).

                                 3.2. Interpreting WISE SEDs with AGENT Parameters
  We now give a few illustrative examples in the context of our AGENT parameterization from Eq. 5 and sources in
the WISE Source Catalog.
  To interpret the observed WISE magnitudes of sources in terms of our formalism, we inverted our modeling process
assuming α = γ (thus the model has three free parameters: γ, Twaste , and (Lhost /(4πd2 ))). In cases where WISE
provides only an upper flux limit in two bands, the model can be underconstrained. We found that our fitter (based
on the Levenburg-Marquardt algorithm in MPFIT (Markwardt 2009; Moré 1977)) converged in the vast majority of
cases, and that the typical failure modes were in cases where the observed magnitudes were strongly inconsistent with
any positive parameter values in our model.
  In Figure 1 we show the SED and model fit spiral galaxy to illustrate how our toy model characterizes the stars
and dust there. If we were to interpret this as an old elliptical galaxy full of civilizations, we would say that γ = 20%,
meaning that 20% of the starlight has been reprocessed to a low waste heat temperature, Twaste = 200 K.
  Naturally, the true interpretation of this galaxy’s SED involves both dust and stellar photospheres with a range of
temperatures. A more secure value of γ (interpreted more naturalistically as the amount of starlight reprocessed by
dust) would require comparing the luminosity of the dust emission (primarily in the FIR) to that from unobscured
starlight. A more rigorous approach to the problem would be to use the dust models of Draine & Li (2007) to fit
available photometry and in terms of the physically motivated parameters in that model: qPAH , γDraine , Mdust and
Umin , representing the fraction of dust in polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), the fraction of dust illuminated
by starlight with intensity U > Umin , and the total dust mass in the galaxy. Interpreted with these parameters, even
broadband photometry of a K3, given enough bands, might result in unusually large or even unphysical values of qPAH
(since the excess 12µ emission from the waste heat would be interpreted in this model as excess emission from PAH’s).
  The example in Figure 1 is at the high end of the range of γ values we derive for typical galaxies, and very few sources
are consistent with γ > 0.4. This means that efficient, broadband searches for waste heat from K3’s will necessarily
be restricted to γ values significantly higher than this, where few astrophysical sources are to be found.
  Figure 2 illustrates a lenticular galaxy, which, having less gas than a typical spiral, yields a correspondingly lower
value of γ = 0.07. This case also illustrates how the fitter can handle upper limits properly. Still, it is clear that,
despite (or because of) the non-detection in W 4 for this galaxy, high γ values are inconsistent with the data, and we
can put an upper limit on the size of the energy supply of any K3 civilization in it of 7% of its starlight.
  The assumption that α = γ means that our interpretation of γ may be incorrect if, in fact, the civilization primarily
uses non-stellar sources for its energy supply (see Section 2.6.1). If, in fact, α ∼ 0, then the correct value of γ will be
related our inferred value, γ ′ by γ = γ ′ /(1 − γ ′). Thus, if we measure γ ′ = 0.9 assuming α = γ, then the corresponding
value in the α = 0 case is γ = 0.9/0.1 = 9, meaning that the civilization has an energy supply that is nine times larger
than the stellar luminosity available to it.
  Put another way, our fitting procedure would measure a K3 with ǫ = γ > 1 (more than a galactic luminosity of
non-stellar energy supply) to have γ ′ > 0.5 (because we improperly assumed α = γ). This is above the value we derive
for most galaxies, so WISE is capable of effectively ruling out the existence of any galaxies with ǫ > 1.
    9 http://wise2.ipac.caltech.edu/docs/release/allsky/expsup/index.html
                                                              Ĝ search for Kardashev Civilizations II                                    9



                                                     10−11                                              Model Star
                                                                                                       Total Model




                        Flux Density (erg/s/cm2/µ)
                                                                                                 Model Waste Heat
                                                                ACS−GC 90043805                        WISE Data
                                                                                                       Model Data



                                                     10−12



                                                     10−13



                                                     10−14
                                                          0       5        10    15      20                   25     30
                                                                            Wavelength (µ)
  Fig. 1.— Model and observed MIR SED of spiral galaxy acs-gc 90043805 (Griffith et al. 2012). Black points represent observed WISE
magnitudes and the corresponding horizontal line corresponds to the approximate span of the waveband. The orange line is the best-fit
model SED of our toy model from Eq. 5 with AGENT parameters α = γ = 0.20, and Twaste =200 K. The red points with dashed lines
correspond to the model magnitudes in the WISE bands of the model SED (which are coincident with the black points and lines in this
case because the fit is essentially perfect). This typical example of a spiral galaxy illustrates why a search for waste heat from K3’s with
broad band photometry will necessarily be limited to civilizations with values of γ significantly higher than this because of confusion with
ordinary galaxies.




                                                     10−11                                              Model Star
                                                                                                       Total Model
                                                                ACS−GC 90025517
                        Flux Density (erg/s/cm2/µ)




                                                                                                 Model Waste Heat
                                                                                                       WISE Data
                                                                                                       Model Data
                                                     10−12


                                                     10−13


                                                     10−14


                                                     10−15
                                                          0       5        10    15      20                   25     30
                                                                            Wavelength (µ)
  Fig. 2.— Model SED and observed MIR SED of lenticular galaxy acs-gc 90025517 (Griffith et al. 2012). Black points represent observed
WISE magnitudes and the corresponding horizontal line corresponds to the approximate span of the waveband, including a non-detection
(upper limit) in W 4. The orange line is the best-fit model SED of our toy model from Eq. 5 with AGENT parameters α = γ = 0.07,
Twaste =142 K. The red points with dashed lines correspond to the model magnitudes in the WISE bands of the model SED. This example
illustrates how the model fitter properly handles upper limits and how galaxies with less dust than typical spirals yield small γ values.
10                                                             J. T. Wright et al.




  Fig. 3.— Color-color space of some natural and artificial sources in the WISE bands. We recreated the underlying figures from Lake et al.
(2012) and Jarrett et al. (2011) Left: The colors of K3 civilizations with AGENT parameters α = γ, ǫ = ν = 0 and two values of Twaste .
Values for γ increase from zero (lower left) to 1.0 in increments of 0.05. Civilizations with high values of γ are distinct from regions populated
by most known classes of sources. Right: Distribution of sources listed in both the WISE Source Catalog and the 2MASS Extended Source
Catalog with good point source photometry in WISE (so the vast majority of these are galaxies with good colors). In regions of high source
density, we have used a logarithmic greyscale. The region of color space for K3’s with γ > 0.4 is largely free of contamination, illustrating
how WISE provides good discriminatory power between artificial sources and most natural extragalactic sources, with only ULIRGs and
similarly dusty galaxies providing confusion.
                                              3.3. Contamination From Natural Sources
   The process of identifying alien civilizations will necessarily be one of exclusion of natural sources, at least until an
unambiguously alien signal is identified (§ 2.3 of Paper I). The characteristics of waste heat of high luminosity are
that it will be bright and have a low color temperature. This is also a characteristic of astrophysical dust, which will
be a major source of false positives in any waste heat SETI work. This is because dust performs essentially the same
task as alien civilizations would: intercepting starlight and reradiating it in the MIR (although in the case of dust, the
radiation is often a non-thermal process producing characteristic emission from polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons).
   A broadband search cannot distinguish the spectral features of dust from that of other sources of MIR radiation.
This means that without additional information (such as spectra or contextual information like an object’s location in
a star forming region) civilizations with low levels of waste heat will not be distinguishable from ordinary astrophysical
sources. The most populous class of natural sources with the highest MIR to near-infrared flux ratios will set a lower
limit to the energy supply of extraterrestrial civilizations we are sensitive to, and we can identify galaxies and stars
with MIR fluxes much higher than this limit for follow-up.
   Figure 3 shows the distribution of extragalactic sources in the WISE Source Catalog. We generated this sample by
cross-matching the WISE Source Catalog with the 2MASS Extended Source Catalog to remove stars. To ensure that
the photometry is robust for this figure, we excluded sources resolved by WISE (using the filter EXT_FLG == 0) and
used the profile-fitted photometry (our full search will include resolved sources, whose nature will be easier to diagnose
than point sources). While some of these sources may be Galactic, the vast majority of WISE sources are extragalactic
(Cutri et al. 2012). We recreated the underlying figure from the works of Lake et al. (2012) and Jarrett et al. (2011),
who have helpfully identified regions in this color space where many classes of natural extragalactic objects reside.
   Figure 3 shows that artificial sources with γ > 0.4 occupy a region of color space beyond most classes of natural,
extended sources, and indeed that nearly all of the sources detected by WISE are consistent with γ < 0.3. This
illustrates that the dominant source of confusion in a K3 search with WISE will be LIRGs, ULIRGs, and hyper-
luminous infrared galaxies, and that the MIR colors of K3 host galaxies with even modest values of γ will be easily
distinguished from those of normal galaxies.

             3.4. Distinguishing Waste Heat in K3’s (Galaxy-Spanning Civilizations) from Other Sources
  K3’s would have an additional characteristic making them easily distinguished from most forms of contamination:
they would be extended sources, even to a mission such as WISE, out to great distances. This eliminates most forms
of false positives above the Galactic plane. Even galaxies that appear unresolved to WISE will be identifiable as
such if their values of α are sufficiently low (and their optical/NIR luminosities sufficiently high) that they appear
in shorter-wavelength surveys of sufficient resolution and sensitivity (for instance, in the 2MASS Extended Source
Catalog, Jarrett et al. 2000).
                                            Ĝ search for Kardashev Civilizations II                                                   11




  Fig. 4.— SEDs of typical galaxies containing dust and Kardashev civilizations, with the four WISE bands, the IRAS 60 and 100 µ bands,
and the Planck 857 GHz (350 µ) bandpasses highlighted. The Galaxy template SEDs are from Silva et al. (1998) and are normalized at
0.55 µ. Black: the “old elliptical” template Ell13. Green: the Sd template, representing a typical late spiral, and Arp220, representing a
ULIRG/starburst galaxy. Dashed lines represent blackbodies of the listed temperatures, scaled with respect to the old elliptical template
according to the AGENT parameterization with γ = α and the value of γ indicated on the plot. Solid orange and blue lines represent the
model spectra of an galaxy composed solely of stars characteristic of an old elliptical and a K3 civilization with the AGENT parameters
listed in the labels of the dashed curves of corresponding color. The values of Twaste and γ were chosen so that the resulting SEDs would
roughly match the MIR flux observed by WISE for the spiral and starburst templates, to illustrate the degeneracy between PAH emission
from dust and waste heat from ETIs. This figure also shows how MIR spectra and FIR or sub-mm photometry might break this degeneracy.
Since even extremely dusty galaxies as Arp 220 yield derived γ values ∼ 0.35, K3 civilizations with even higher values of γ would stand
out as having W 2-W 3 colors even more extreme than these superlative objects.


  The dominant contaminants for a search of K3’s will be diffuse emission from warm dust and gas in the interstellar
medium (perhaps warmed by embedded objects, such as protostars), planetary nebulae and their precursors, dusty
resolved galaxies (starbursts and ULIRGs), and blue compact dwarf galaxies (e.g. Griffith et al. 2011). Many of these
MIR-bright sources have been cataloged already, or are only expected in regions of known star formation or dust.
Planetary nebulae are particularly easily distinguished by their characteristic optical emission and morphology. The
dominant source of contamination from extragalactic sources will thus be from ULIRGs, and perhaps galaxies with
active nuclei for systems not well resolved by WISE.
  Figure 4 illustrates the effects of dust on a galaxy SED, with some relevant all-sky survey bandpasses highlighted.
We have chosen three template spectra from Silva et al. (1998) to span the extremes of dust content in galaxies: the
“Ell13” “old elliptical” template, having almost no dust, the “Sd” template having dust typical of a late spiral, and a
template for Arp 220, the prototypical ULIRG / starbust galaxy. While even a small (∼ 1%) midinfrared excess from
a K3 civilization would be detectable by WISE, it would not necessarily be distinguishable from a small amount of
dust. Indeed, a typical Sd spiral has MIR luminosities comparable to a γ = α ∼ 0.1 K3 civilization in an otherwise
dust-free galaxy, and values of γ as high as 0.4 might be consistent with ULIRGs. However higher values of γ would
be consistent only with extraordinary levels of dust and star formation (which are astrophysically interesting in their
12                                                    J. T. Wright et al.

own right). A search for extended sources with very red W 2-W 3 colors would be a search for high-γ objects in a region
of parameter space relatively clear of naturally red objects.
  There are several ways to distinguish dust from artificially generated waste heat in a galaxy, and Figure 4 illustrates
two of them.

     • Empirically, PAH emission is well correlated with [C II] emission (Helou et al. 2001), so an anomalously low
       [C II]/MIR flux ratio might indicate a non-PAH origin of a galaxy’s MIR luminosity.
     • MIR spectroscopy will detect the characteristic PAH emission and silicate absorption features from dust, while
       one would not expect those features to be present if the origin of the bulk of the MIR radiation were thermal
       waste heat. Depending on the brightness of the source, CANARICAM on the Gran Telescopio Canarias, SOFIA,
       or the James Webb Space Telescope might be best suited to perform this followup.
     • If PAH emission is ruled out, a rarer potential confounding source of MIR radiation is continuum emission from
       warm dust from high star formation rates in low-metallicty galaxies, for instance, from blue compact dwarfs
       (Sajina et al. 2007; Galliano et al. 2003; Griffith et al. 2011). In these cases, other tracers of star formation must
       be sought out, for instance, the MIR emission from ionic species such as [S II], [Ne II], or [O IV], which may be
       diagnostic of both the hot gas that accompanies the star formation and the metallicity of the galaxy.
     • Dust radiates primarily in the FIR, while artificial waste heat should radiate primarily in the MIR owing to its
       higher effective temperature (Section 2.6.4). The FIR luminosities of the two scenarios should thus differ by
       around two orders of magnitude for a given MIR luminosity, in principle making LFIR /LMIR or Lsub−mm /LMIR
       a useful discriminant. Instruments such as SCUBA-2 on the James Clerk Maxwell Telescope might be used for
       such a purpose.
     • Since the presence of dust implies molecules, the total mass of CO should be commensurate with dust emission,
       and thus diagnostic of the PAH origin of MIR emission. Empirically, Pope et al. (2013) find a slightly sub-linear
       relation between the 6.2µ MIR luminosity LPAH and the line luminosity L′CO(1−0) for ULIRGS in both the local
       universe and at redshift. From a theoretical angle, the models of Draine & Li (2007) would provide a prediction
       of the range of expected total CO mass for a given MIR SED. In any case, an extremely high ratios of the form
       LMIR /L′CO are inconsistent with a dusty galaxy and therefore diagnostic of artificial waste heat.

  Thus, K3’s may be ultimately easier to diagnose and distinguish from natural sources than K2’s, because the number
of classes of potentially confounding sources is smaller than for point sources, because these sources in these classes
are rarer, and because there are clear diagnostics that distinguish them.
  Indeed, explorations of the dust properties of MIR-bright galaxies for the purposes of studying the relationship
between dust, metallicity, and star formation, might inadvertently identify good K3 candidates as those appearing to
show anomalously high PAH mass fractions (e.g. Galametz et al. 2009).

                                                     3.5. Debris Disks
   An even more pernicious contaminant than dust will be stellar debris disks. The SED’s of debris disks are generally
characterized as ordinary stars with some fraction of their light reprocessed by dust and larger objects, which reradiate
as a roughly thermal spectrum with characteristic temperatures of tens to hundreds of Kelvins (Wyatt 2008). Indeed,
the parameters often used to describe debris disk SED’s, f and T , map very will to the AGENT parameters, with
f = LIR /L∗ being equivalent to our γ, and T = Twaste . Debris disks are, in fact, defined by f (= γ) < 10−2 , making
them a primary confounder for sensitive searches to Dyson spheres.
   Indeed, a broadband (or even spectral) search for waste heat from K2’s is functionally equivalent to a search for
debris disks. Distinguishing Dyson spheres from debris disks might involve high-resolution imaging to show that the
waste heat is not confined to a disk, or studies of the star itself to show that it is old (since debris disks are generally
associated with younger (< 1 Gyr) stars).
   Put another way, studies of and searches for debris disks are effectively searches for Dyson spheres, as well. Of course,
as scientists, we must always reach first for the naturalistic explanation for observations (see Section 2.3 of Paper I),
and there is, at present, no reason to believe that stars known to have debris disks are, in fact, K2’s. Nonetheless, it
would be reasonable for communication SETI efforts to make a higher priority of stars known (or rather, believed) to
host debris disks, since if K2’s with large energy supplies do exist in the Milky Way they would naturally appear on
lists of such stars.

                     3.6. Distinguishing Waste Heat in K2’s (Dyson Spheres) from Other Sources
  K2’s will appear as point sources, and so potential sources of confusion come from dusty stars, heavily extinguished
stars, and potentially from unresolved dusty galaxies, dusty galactic nuclei, merging galaxies, or redshifted cosmological
sources.
  The primary exclusion of embedded sources and other heavily extinguished sources would come from our knowledge
of the distribution of dust and star formation in the Galaxy, which allows us to mask out regions where such sources
are expected. Young stars with disks will show MIR excess even outside of dusty lines of sight and will put a lower limit
                                           Ĝ search for Kardashev Civilizations II                                   13

on the values of γ one can search for without additional follow-up observations to determine if the star is sufficiently
young to host an MIR-bright disk.
  After disks, asymptotic giant stars and cosmological sources would be the other dominant contaminant in regions of
the sky free from dust for high γ candidates. For instance, “Hyper-luminous infrared galaxies” (Eisenhardt et al. 2012),
dusty obscured galaxies (“DOGs” Dey et al. 2008), and similar galaxies will show very red W 2-W 3 colors, and may
even be W 2 dropouts. While a number of follow-up observations could be done to identify these sources, an efficient
and definitive exclusion criterion for them would be the measurement of parallax to determine their luminosity. In
particular, candidate objects with sufficient optical brightness will have their parallaxes measured with the upcoming
GAIA mission (Perryman et al. 2001). This would allow for candidate point sources to be segregated into three classes
based on their luminosity.

   • Sources with no detectable parallax. These sources would be either Galactic but beyond the parallax precision of
     GAIA, or galaxies. Follow-up observations at high angular resolution will distinguish these cases. Extragalactic
     sources can then follow the vetting procedure described in Section 3.4, while Galactic sources would then have
     lower limits set on their luminosity that would make them consistent with high luminosity (presumably giant)
     stars.
   • High luminosity Galactic sources. These would most likely be AGB stars, although in principle a K2 civilization
     might temporarily increase the luminosity of its host star and civilization through high values of ǫ. Given that
     a naturalistic explanation exists for these, follow up of these objects might be of low priority, but could proceed
     with MIR spectroscopy following the procedure of Carrigan (2009).
   • Low (∼ solar) luminosity Galactic sources. A high MIR–NIR flux ratio for an object with apparently near
     solar luminosity would indicate significant circumstellar dust around a dwarf star. This could be diagnosed
     by identifying signs of stellar youth (for instance with X rays, or the star’s presence in a star forming region).
     Objects that survive this vetting will be excellent candidate K2’s.

  The precise parallax survey of GAIA will thus be a powerful tool for identifying K2 candidates from the many bright
point sources in an MIR survey.

                          3.7. A Zeroth Order Result for K3’s, and Prospects for Tighter Limits
   Figure 3 gives the zeroth-order result of the WISE search for K3’s: there are very few, if any, galaxies detected
by WISE hosting K3’s with γ > 0.4. We will scrutinize the few catalog entries consistent with such civilizations to
determine if they are real and have reliable photometry. Those that are will be good candidates for follow-up to
determine if they are some class of known dusty galaxy, a new class of astrophysical object, or good candidates for
being a K3.
   We note that for the galaxies less luminous than the Milky Way, this upper limit corresponds to γ . 4 × 1010 L⊙ ,
which is less than Kardashev’s original energy supply threshold for a Type iii civilization. Except in the cases of
galaxies significantly more luminous than the Milky Way (where the starlight might overwhelm the K3 civilization),
our zeroth-order result is that Kardashev Type iii civilizations are very rare, and most galaxies do not host them.10
A thorough analysis of the few sources with colors consistent with such civilizations will allow us to rule them out
entirely out to a significant distance, or identify the best candidates.
   In addition to finding that “classical” Type iii civilizations are very rare or non-existent, this result also implies
that that physics may not allow for an easily tapped source of “free” energy (e.g. zero-point energy) at high effective
temperatures (see Paper I). If such physics existed and was “obvious”, then alien civilizations would have unlimited
free energy, and would not be bound by any resource limitation (since, as we argued in Paper I, all such limitations
can be overcome through application of energy). Such a civilization could easily span its galaxy and achieve γ ≫ 1
(which, since our methodology assumes α = γ, we would measure as γ ≫ 0.5, see Section 3.2). However, our zero-th
order result shows that this has never happened in our search volume. This would seem to make the likelihood that
such physics exists smaller than it was before our survey.
   Objects with apparent values of γ > 0.25 are more numerous, but depending on their natures, they may be easily
found to be inconsistent with a K3. This may be because they are morphologically inconsistent (the MIR emission
being obviously confined to dusty lanes or the nucleus of the galaxy; see Section 5.3 of Paper I) or because the object
is obviously not a galaxy (e.g., a planetary nebula, reflection nebula, or other Galactic source). In the first (resolved
K3) phase of Ĝ we will use these methods to establish an upper limit on γ for the galaxies in our sample.
   This pilot program could be extended to tighter upper limits on γ in several ways.
   A detailed morphological study of galaxies extended in WISE would allow one to calculate an uppler limit for γ
from sources other than interstellar dust, especially in ellipticals. This is because interstellar dust is generally not
smoothly distributed, but the stars are (and, especially in ellipticals, they are also generally well-mixed). Since the
spatial distribution of the component civilizations of a K3 should be the same as that of the stars, any line of sight
should be adequate for measuring γ due to stars alone. Thus, the line of sight with the minimum measured γ value
would set an upper limit for the entire galaxy that may be significantly tighter than that from the integrated flux.
  10 Or they universally lack waste heat detectable by WISE.
14                                                     J. T. Wright et al.

Use of Spitzer imaging would both tighten limits on nearby galaxies and extend the method to galaxies unresolved by
WISE. An elliptical galaxy with an unusually high and uniform MIR surface brightness would be an especially enticing
target for followup.
   MIR spectra or FIR fluxes would allow one to use the properties of dust we outline in Section 3.4 to predict the
integrated MIR fluxes, and search for MIR excesses above expectations due to dust. This method would push limits
for γ below what can be done with MIR photometry alone, and may allow values of γ < 0.01 to be probed in dust-free
ellipticals.


                                                      4. CONCLUSIONS
   Before the launch of WISE the upper limits on energy supplies of galaxy-spanning civilizations in other galaxies
were very weak (and, to our knowledge, had never been computed). A zeroth order analysis of WISE data allows us
to establish here, for the first time, that alien MIR waste heat luminosities of the order of order 1011 L⊙ (Kardashev’s
original definition of a Type iii civilization) are very rare in the local universe, and implies that no level of technological
advancement will allow any easy or obvious access to “free” energy (since apparently no alien supercivilizations are
using such energy to outshine their host galaxies).
   We have developed a formalism, which we refer to as the AGENT parameterization, for describing the energy budget
of ETI’s, and described past searches for and descriptions of ETI’s in terms of it. We have also used it to show how
a large area MIR survey will enable a search for them both in our own Galaxy, and spanning other galaxies. Such a
search is feasible now with the release of the WISE survey and we have begun to perform it.
   The Galactic phase of our search will focus on finding point sources that are unusually red for a given line of sight
(i.e. outside of known star forming regions). GAIA will provide a powerful way to distinguish amongst cosmological
sources (which might be red because of both redshift and dust), dusty giant stars, and abnormally cool sources with
dwarf-star luminosities, characteristic of Dyson spheres. Stars with debris disks will be a major confounder for the
most sensitive searches for circumstellar ETI waste heat, and communication SETI efforts should consider enriching
their target lists with stars thought to host debris disks, especially any such stars that show no signs of youth.
   The extragalactic phase of our search will allow us to identify candidate alien civilizations with large energy supplies
among ∼ 105 galaxies using broadband photometry alone. We find that, because they can be resolved, galaxy-spanning
civilizations may be easier to diagnose and distinguish from natural sources than circumstellar civilizations.
   A thorough analysis of the extended sources in the WISE catalogs will allow us establish an upper limit for the total
waste heat of galaxy-spanning civilizations near γ ∼ 0.25 (i.e. total MIR waste heat luminosity of one-fourth of the
galaxy’s stellar luminosity). This limit will be significantly lower than the only previous search for galaxy-spanning
civilizations, that of Annis (1999), who found no evidence of galaxies with α & 0.75 (i.e. obscuration of three-fourth
of the galaxy’s stellar luminosity). Morphological, spectral, and FIR or radio data can push this limit down further,
to the point where it may begin to significantly sharpen the Fermi Paradox.
   Useful follow-up observations would include high-resolution imaging to determine source morphology, radio detection
of molecules such as CO, mid-infrared spectra to detect PAH features, and far-infrared or submillimeter photometry
to detect thermal dust emission. Such observations will allow for detection of galaxy-spanning alien energy supplies
below ∼ 25% of stellar luminosity.
   We hope this first effort inspires more detailed surveys to do just that, and that positive detections of anomalous
objects will inspire new astrophysics and provide candidates for communication SETI and other investigation.


   This research is supported entirely by the John Templeton Foundation through its New Frontiers in Astronomy and
Cosmology, administered by Don York of the University of Chicago. We are grateful for the opportunity provided by
this grant to perform this research.
   The Center for Exoplanets and Habitable Worlds is supported by the Pennsylvania State University, the Eberly
College of Science, and the Pennsylvania Space Grant Consortium.
   This publication makes use of data products from the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer, the NASA/IPAC Infrared
Science Archive and the NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database (NED), all of which are operated by the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under contract with or with funding from the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration. This research has also made use of NASA’s Astrophysics Data System and the SIMBAD
database, operated at CDS, Strasbourg, France. We thank Erik Rosolowsky for making the binplot.pro and disp.pro
routines available for our use in making Figure 3.
   We acknowledge that many ideas not original to us are incompletely cited (often because we are not aware the
earliest or most appropriate references); we apologize that the references included in this series of papers are not
comprehensive. For instance, Zubrin’s loose use of the term “Type iii civilization” appears in Kardashev (1985) but
likely has earlier attestations; our use of the shorthand K1, K2, and K3 is at least as old as Webb (2002), but may
have earlier origins.
   We are grateful for the assistance of IPAC and members of the WISE team, especially Davey Kirkpatrick, Tom
Jarrett, and Michael Cushing. We thank Arjun Dey, Eugene Chiang, and Marc Kuchner for helpful contributions and
discussions. We thank Adam Kraus for the insight that GAIA will provide a powerful discriminant for K2’s. We thank
our referees for appropriately challenging our conclusions and sharpening our reasoning.
                                             Ĝ search for Kardashev Civilizations II                                                15

                                                              REFERENCES
Annis, J. 1999, Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, 52,    Kardashev, N. S. 1964, Soviet Ast., 8, 217
  33                                                                  Kardashev, N. S. 1985, in IAU Symposium, Vol. 112, The Search
Arnold, L. F. A. 2005, ApJ, 627, 534                                     for Extraterrestrial Life: Recent Developments, ed. M. D.
Badescu, V., & Cathcart, R. B. 2000, Journal of the British              Papagiannis, 497–504
  Interplanetary Society, 53, 297                                     Kleidon, A. 2010, Physics of Life Reviews, 7, 424
Bhat, M., Dhurandhar, S., & Dadhich, N. 1985, Journal of              Lake, S. E., Wright, E. L., Petty, S., et al. 2012, AJ, 143, 7
  Astrophysics and Astronomy, 6, 85                                   Loeb, A., & Turner, E. L. 2012, Astrobiology, 12, 290
Blair, D. G., Norris, R. P., Troup, E. R., et al. 1992, MNRAS,        Markwardt, C. B. 2009, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific
  257, 105                                                               Conference Series, Vol. 411, Astronomical Data Analysis
Carrigan, Jr., R. A. 2009, ApJ, 698, 2075                                Software and Systems XVIII, ed. D. A. Bohlender, D. Durand,
Cohen, M., Walker, R. G., Barlow, M. J., & Deacon, J. R. 1992,           & P. Dowler, 251–+
  AJ, 104, 1650                                                       Moré, J. J. 1977, in Numerical Analysis, ed. G. A. Watson
Cutri, R. M., Wright, E. L., Conrow, T., et al. 2012, Explanatory        (Berlin: Springer), 105–116
  Supplement to the WISE All-Sky Data Release Products, Tech.         Niven, L. 1970, Ringworld (New York, NY, USA: Ballantine)
  rep.                                                                Perryman, M. A. C., de Boer, K. S., Gilmore, G., et al. 2001,
Dey, A., Soifer, B. T., Desai, V., et al. 2008, ApJ, 677, 943            A&A, 369, 339
Draine, B. T., & Li, A. 2007, ApJ, 657, 810                           Pope, A., Wagg, J., Frayer, D., et al. 2013, ApJ, 772, 92
Eisenhardt, P. R. M., Wu, J., Tsai, C.-W., et al. 2012, ApJ, 755,     Sagan, C. 1973, Icarus, 19, 350
  173                                                                 Sajina, A., Yan, L., Armus, L., et al. 2007, ApJ, 664, 713
Galametz, M., Madden, S., Galliano, F., et al. 2009, A&A, 508,        Silva, L., Granato, G. L., Bressan, A., & Danese, L. 1998, ApJ,
  645                                                                    509, 103
Galliano, F., Madden, S. C., Jones, A. P., et al. 2003, A&A, 407,     Slysh, V. I. 1985, in IAU Symposium, Vol. 112, The Search for
  159                                                                    Extraterrestrial Life: Recent Developments, ed. M. D.
Griffith, R. L., Tsai, C.-W., Stern, D., et al. 2011, ApJ, 736, L22      Papagiannis, 315–319
Griffith, R. L., Cooper, M. C., Newman, J. A., et al. 2012, ApJS,     Webb, S. 2002, If the Universe Is Teeming with Aliens ...
  200, 9                                                                 WHERE IS EVERYBODY?: Fifty Solutions to the Fermi
Hart, M. H. 1975, QJRAS, 16, 128                                         Paradox and the Problem of Extraterrestrial Life, Copernicus
Helou, G., Malhotra, S., Hollenbach, D. J., Dale, D. A., &               Series (Springer)
  Contursi, A. 2001, ApJ, 548, L73                                    Wright, E. L., Eisenhardt, P. R. M., Mainzer, A. K., et al. 2010,
Hooper, D., & Steffen, J. H. 2012, Journal of Cosmology and              AJ, 140, 1868
  Astroparticle Physics, 7, 46                                        Wyatt, M. C. 2008, ARA&A, 46, 339
Inoue, M., & Yokoo, H. 2011, Journal of the British                   Zubrin, R. 2000, Entering Space: Creating a Spacefaring
  Interplanetary Society, 64, 58–62                                      Civilization (New York, USA: Jeremy P. Tarcher/Putnam)
Jarrett, T. H., Chester, T., Cutri, R., et al. 2000, AJ, 119, 2498
Jarrett, T. H., Cohen, M., Masci, F., et al. 2011, ApJ, 735, 112
