Starry Messages: Searching for Signatures of Interstellar Archaeology
Richard A. Carrigan, Jr.,
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory*, Batavia, IL 60510, USA
carrigan@fnal.gov
630-840-8755
Summary
Searching for signatures of cosmic-scale archaeological artifacts such as Dyson
spheres or Kardashev civilizations is an interesting alternative to conventional
SETI. Uncovering such an artifact does not require the intentional transmission of
a signal on the part of the original civilization. This type of search is called
interstellar archaeology or sometimes cosmic archaeology. The detection of
intelligence elsewhere in the Universe with interstellar archaeology or SETI
would have broad implications for science. For example, the constraints of the
anthropic principle would have to be loosened if a different type of intelligence
was discovered elsewhere. A variety of interstellar archaeology signatures are
discussed including non-natural planetary atmospheric constituents, stellar doping
with isotopes of nuclear wastes, Dyson spheres, as well as signatures of stellar
and galactic-scale engineering. The concept of a Fermi bubble due to interstellar
migration is introduced in the discussion of galactic signatures. These potential
interstellar archaeological signatures are classified using the Kardashev scale. A
modified Drake equation is used to evaluate the relative challenges of finding
various sources. With few exceptions interstellar archaeological signatures are
clouded and beyond current technological capabilities. However SETI for socalled cultural transmissions and planetary atmosphere signatures are within
reach.
Keywords: Interstellar archaeology, Dyson spheres, Kardashev scale, SETI,
Drake equation

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
*Operated by the Fermi Research Alliance, LLC under Contract No. DE-AC02-07CH11359 with
the United States Department of Energy.

1

1. INTRODUCTION
In Starry Messenger [1], Galileo tells how he used one of the first telescopes to discover
Jupiter’s moons. Now, four centuries later, these objects have been observed in great detail by
planetary probes. Almost as exciting, extra-solar planetary atmospheres have been detected [2].
There are hopes for observing atmospheric signatures of life. Mission planners for future
exoplanet atmosphere studies even ask if signs of intelligence could be detected [3].
The search for exoplanet atmospheric markers of intelligence is one example of interstellar
archaeology or cosmic archaeology. Another example is the search for a Dyson sphere [4]. The
Dyson sphere conjecture speculates that a planet could be purposely broken up to form a heat
absorbing shield around a star to provide more useful energy. One fanciful model of a Dyson
sphere would be a star enclosed in a shroud of solar-cell calculator chips. A recent whole sky
search for Dyson spheres using the database from the IRAS satellite [5] has shown that there are
at most only a few lackluster candidates in a region containing a million suns. A search for
Dyson spheres is an illustration of a directed search for intelligence assuming a specific
hypothesis. An alternative is to search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) by looking for
actively generated signals such as radio waves. A search is now underway at the Allen Telescope
Array to look for radio signals from a sample of a thousand older stars that are plausible
candidates for harboring life along the lines here on Earth.
These are three examples of interstellar archaeology. Other possibilities include searching for
non-natural components in the atmospheres of stars or looking for examples of stellar or astroengineering. Some of these possibilities have been discussed in Lemarchand’s seminal work [6]
on the detectability of technological activities beyond the earth.
SETI and interstellar archaeology are parts of a wave of developments that have emerged in the
last decade or so under the umbrella of the search for life in the universe. Even particle physics
and cosmology are linked to this search through the anthropic principle [7], the idea that only a
universe with physical laws tuned to the requirements of life as it exists on Earth would be
suitable for mankind. Other developments have included the enormously broadened picture of
the solar system, a deepening understanding of the emergence of life on Earth and the ability of
so-called extremophiles to adapt to hostile environments perhaps including such unlikely places
as Mars [8], Titan [9] and Enceladus [10] as well as the discovery and investigation of large
numbers of exoplanets.
The paradigm that underlies interstellar archaeology, indeed archaeology in general, is different
than the one that ordinarily drives radio and optical SETI. Much of the SETI program is
predicated on the originating civilization making a decision to transmit a radio or optical signal.
This might be a beacon that mainly says “look at me!” In the case of archaeology an arrow head,
a pyramid, a sunken Titanic, or a Dyson sphere was created for a purpose and only incidentally
became a peephole to look back in time to another civilization. Clearly SETI may stumble on a
interstellar TV program advertising cigarettes or astronauts could find a Rosetta stone on Mars.
But generally, signals suitable for SETI require a motivated sender while archaeological artifacts
were motivated by other circumstances such as hunting or building monuments to gods.

2

While interstellar archaeology signatures will generally not have been motivated by the urge to
communicate, they may have been engendered by other considerations. Interstellar archaeology
signatures could be driven by habitable zone change [11], stellar catastrophes such as a nearby
supernova, going off the main sequence to become a red giant, or aging planets with evolving
bad atmospheres. As a star proceeds through its evolutionary path it eventually drops off the
main sequence and perhaps on to the asymptotic giant branch (AGB). If it turns into a red giant
the stellar atmosphere may reach out and engulf the planets. Are there “cosmic engineering”
strategies that an advanced civilization could take to escape this disaster such as migration to a
nearby star? Would these efforts lead to interstellar archaeological signatures? This topic has
been discussed by Beech [12] in a book where he gives illustrations of some possible
engineering solutions to extending the life of a star. Beech [13] has recently noted that planet-star
systems near the end of their main sequence lifetime are logical places to look for evidence of
planetary engineering. Zuckerman [14] estimates up to 10,000 civilizations in our galaxy may
have already faced this challenge.
Even now there are some primitive examples of archaeology across the void of space.
Extraterrestrials (astronauts) in the International Space Station routinely observe pyramids on
Earth that are more than four millennia old. The nearly forty year old Apollo 15 landing site on
the moon has been photographed from space. The Mars Global Surveyor has been able to
photograph the Mars Spirit Rover landing track, as well as the rover itself and the parachute and
heat shield. Since 2005 Venus Express, now circling Venus, has been used to look for signs of
life on Earth. Earth only occupies one pixel in the imaging sensor so that the task is harder than it
might sound. In fact, researchers such as Carlotto [15], Sivier [16] and Dietrich and Perron [17]
have already given some thought to distinguishing man-made artifacts and other signs of life
from natural phenomena both on Earth and Mars.
This article focuses on larger scale projects. Searches for artifacts within our solar system such as
artificial Kuiper belt objects [18] have been suggested. These are not discussed.

2. THE KARDASHEV CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
Almost at the beginning of modern interest in SETI Kardashev [19] proposed a classification
scale for advanced civilizations based on their use of energy. Kardashev appropriately used
Roman numerals which follows the convention of using them as an index. Type I civilizations
might harness all the stellar power falling on the surface of a planet, 2*1017 W for Earth.
(Kardashev used 4*1012 W, the “level presently attained on the Earth.” World power
consumption is ~2*1013 W [20].) A Type II civilization would consume the power of a star
(4*1026 W for the Sun). A full Dyson sphere is an example of a Type II civilization. A Type III
civilization would exploit the power of a galaxy (on the order of 4*1037 W). Fig. 1 is a schematic
illustration of the Kardashev scale.
Several amplifications to the Kardashev scale have been suggested. To accommodate cases
where a civilization had not yet fully exploited available energy resources Sagan [21] introduced
a logarithmic interpolation:
log10 W  6
K
10

3

where K is a decimal Kardashev index and W is the power output for the civilization. Others
such as Galanti [22] have suggested an extension of the scale to Type IV in order to include the
visible universe. The volume defined by the comoving distance to the edge of the visible
universe (14 billion parsecs) is about 1031 cubic parsecs. It contains on the order of 1013 large
galaxies. This could be extended even further to Type V, to include the concept of multiverses
(see later section). By the same token one could ask about smaller civilizations, for example a
town of 10,000 people (Type 0; 100 W/person), several thousand fleas (Type -I; 10-4 W), or
mycoplasma genitalium (Type -II; 10–14 W). An individual mycoplasma genitalium contains on
the order of a billion protons. Note that the Romans had no form for negative numbers, decimal
fractions, or zero (a version was introduced later). For the Sagan scale an appropriate notation
might be a Roman integer with a minus sign if needed followed by an Arabic decimal fraction.
Interestingly going from Type –II (sub-micron microbes) to Type IV (the visible universe) spans
a range of 1060 in mass and power if mass is a rough proxy for power. This bears some
relationship to the famous observation that there are 1080 protons in the visible universe.
Earth itself is an illustration that civilizations can approach a Type I Kardashev classification.
Amazingly, the Earth is only four orders of magnitude away from a power use that would qualify
as Type I. Other examples of near Type I signatures are non-natural constituents in extrasolar
planetary atmospheres and evidence for nuclear fuel disposal in a star. For example a prominent
CO2 line in a planetary atmosphere might suggest heavy use of fossil fuels. In the case of Earth,
operating at about a ten thousandth of a Type I civilization, the CO2 fraction in the atmosphere
has increased by 35% in the course of the Industrial Revolution probably due to heavy fuel use.
Many other activities that could be extraterrestrial signatures of civilization involve power
outputs well below Type I. These include radio and TV transmissions, visible night lighting,
rocket launch trails and the explosion of nuclear weapons.
The recent Dyson sphere search [5] using IRAS may well have been the first systematic wholesky search for a Type II signature. Dyson sphere searches are discussed later in the article. About
a decade ago Annis [23] at Fermilab looked for Type III civilizations by searching for dark
galaxies. This is discussed later in the section on galactic-scale signatures.
3. THE DRAKE EQUATION
The foundation for a scientific approach to SETI is the Drake equation. Drake devised the
equation to organize the results from perhaps the first meeting on SETI. The equation appears in
several forms. Typically it is used to calculate N, the number of communicative civilizations in
the Milky Way galaxy. One version is
N  Rf p ne f l f i f c Lc

where R is the formation rate of intelligent life-friendly stars, fp is the fraction of these stars with
planets, ne is the average number of planets in a planetary system that are hospitable to life, fl is
the fraction of these planets where life emerges, fi is the fraction of these planets on which
intelligent life arises, fc is the fraction of these where an interstellar-worthy civilization emerges
and Lc is the length of time the civilization remains detectable.

4

From the outset this equation has been seen as a guide to the factors going in to SETI rather than
a precise statement of the probability of detecting signs of extrasolar intelligence. Some of the
factors may be mutually linked so that they are not independent variables. As an illustration,
Livio [24] notes that the timescale of biological evolution and the lifetime of the host star are not
necessarily independent. Some other factors may be missing. For example, there is not an
average stellar lifetime in the equation. The use of the word “civilization” may subtly understate
possibilities related to robotics and computers. Nevertheless, the Drake equation is a useful
yardstick for understanding SETI and where the interesting questions are.
A second set of factors is not embodied directly in the Drake equation. These concern the
“degree of difficulty” for a civilization in executing something that may relate to factors in the
Drake equation. For example, building a Dyson sphere out of the shards of a planet is a
challenging project. Engineering the useful lifetime of a star is even more so. Possible proxies
for the degree of difficulty are the energy harnessed or the mass involved.
The variable that is most directly related to interstellar archaeology is Lc, the time the civilization
is detectable. To emphasize this point the Drake equation for some interstellar signature, x, can
be rewritten as:
Nx  f

Lx
Lc

where Lx is the lifetime and f = Rfpneflfifc. For some cases of interstellar archaeology this
lifetime, Lx, could be substantially longer than the lifetime of the originating civilization. To
roughly paraphrase Gautier’s famous lines “art alone endures: the bust outlasts the throne, the
coin, Tiberius.” Some of these interstellar archaeology cases are discussed below.
4. SETI
SETI and the search for interstellar archaeology are not competing programs but complimentary
and related efforts. The most common paradigm for SETI is to look for an intentional signal
from a radio or optical beacon. Typically this is assumed to be a narrow-band electromagnetic
carrier in an obvious place in the radio or optical spectrum. Such a signal with little or no signal
content can have the maximum range. It is noteworthy that signals from relatively nearby stars
might be less constrained by the need for powerful narrow band, narrow cone antennatransmitter systems and therefore could be more information-rich. Nearby transmitting
civilizations might also be in a better position to beam signals to a limited number of suitable
candidate stars or even have gleaned evidence of intelligent activity on Earth from their own
interstellar archaeology searches directed at our solar system.
Our civilization now emits background radio emissions. Some of the transmissions from Earth
are beamed while others are more or less omni-directional. A civilization fifty light years away
detecting Earth’s first radio signals could have broadcast a return signal that would now be
reaching Earth. There are about 400 stars within this fifty light year sphere. Tarter [25] has
estimated that an ordinary strong TV transmission from Earth could be detected by our current
technology out to about a light year. With the Square Kilometer Array (SKA) the sensitivity
5

would increase more than 10 fold so that the reach could be 4 light years, a volume
encompassing a star or two.
A radio SETI signal search can be narrowed by using information about habitable zones, stellar
age and increasingly even information concerning exoplanets around a star [26]. Indeed results
from interstellar archaeology investigations can also help to delineate SETI search strategies. In
this spirit an investigation of 13 of the least implausible Dyson sphere candidates in the recent
IRAS search [5] is planned for the Allen Telescope.
Searching for a radio or optical SETI message, directed or omni-directional, intentional or
cultural, is a form of archaeological investigation. Ordinary radio and optical searches expect to
have their greatest sensitivity for directed beams with narrow bandwidth signals. Directional
transmission from the Arecibo planetary radar could be detected out to 3000 ly. Note that there is
a problem with looking for leakage radiation since the signal strength is low compared to a
directed source. In addition as a civilization progresses the emission of stray radiation may be
much more limited. Some years ago Sullivan and Knowles [27] investigated this challenge of
looking for leakage radiation by detecting radio signals bounced off the moon. In any case,
current SETI searches will continue to probe the radio and optical sky and may at some point
detect cultural as distinguished from intentional signals.
Over the last decades several wide-ranging searches have been made for radio ETI signals [25].
No interesting signatures have been found that could be replicated. The searches using the
Arecibo 300 m diameter radio telescope are among the most interesting. The Phoenix search has
targeted about 1000 stars within 250 light years principally selected for characteristics that might
be hospitable for life. The system monitored the band from 1.2 to 3 GHz. This band includes the
“water hole” extending from the neutral hydrogen line at 1420 MHz to the OH radical line at
1720 MHz. A region from -2º to +38º declination in celestial coordinates was searched with a
sensitivity of 1 Jy. No ETI signals have been observed in the Phoenix survey. At Arecibo the
Berkeley group that operates the SETI@home program has carried out a commensal survey with
other Arecibo programs. This program, SERENDIP [28] has collected data in a side lobe of the
main Arecibo beam. As a result they had full coverage over the Arecibo portion of the sky but
the sensitivity has been an order of magnitude lower than Phoenix. Like Phoenix they have
detected no ETI signal.
Motivation is an interesting question for intentional SETI signals. This is not a consideration for
most other examples of interstellar archaeology. Specifically, a message from an extrasolar
civilization could have an agenda behind it. This agenda might not necessarily be positive.
Indeed, it might be malevolent. A somewhat parallel case, biological contamination from space
samples, is a remote but accepted possibility. Could a similar problem occur with information
from an extrasolar civilization? Many consider this "SETI Hacker" conjecture [29] deeply flawed
[30].
The challenges of both originating and receiving SETI signals is modest compared with many
other examples of interstellar archaeology. In his thesis Leigh [31] estimated that sending a word
4000 light years over a directed link using 200 m dishes might cost about $1 at $0.1/KWh.
Sustaining the activity may be more of a problem. There are relatively few illustrations on earth

6

where a technology-based signal has continued for more than a century or so. In any case when a
civilization dies any transmission will probably cease. A second problem concerns the duty
factor for transmission. For example one transmitter might be used to beam signals at a number
of different stars. The transmitter might only be “visible” for a portion of the extrasolar planetary
day. Some of these problems could be solved by a diligent transmitting civilization.
In summary, the current reach of radio SETI programs is in the range of 250 to 1000 light years.
The advent of the Allen telescope will effectively result in much more telescope time devoted to
SETI work. That will increase the number of surveyed sources by a factor of several hundred and
the range to the center of the galaxy and beyond.
Some of the relevant factors for SETI searches are summarized in the Table of various examples
of interstellar archaeology. The table includes rough estimates for the reach, associated lifetimes,
power requirements and mass involved as surrogates for the degree of difficulty of the search.

5. EXOPLANET ATMOSPHERES
Could synthetic or unnatural constituents in an exoplanet atmosphere serve as an interstellar
archaeological marker? Freon®, part of a family of chloro-fluorocarbons, is an example of such
a contaminant. The recent observations of exoplanet atmospheres have now opened the
extraordinary possibility of searching for non-natural signatures.
More than 400 exoplanets have now been discovered. The limits of current observational
techniques introduce biases into the distributions for the masses and periods of planets that have
been found. Even with the challenges of instrumental biases there have still been major surprises
such as the existence of so-called hot Jupiters. In the next decade several space missions should
expand the exoplanet sample considerably. Both the French-ESU COROT satellite launched in
2007 and NASA’s Kepler are now in space. COROT and Kepler look for terrestrial-scale planets
by detecting small reductions in the stellar light when a planet transits in front of the star. These
missions should easily double the number of known exoplanets.
Exoplanetary atmospheres have been detected by watching the spectral behavior of a planet-star
system as the planet transits the star. Employing this technique Charbonneau [32] and his
colleagues used the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph (STIS) on the Hubble Telescope to
make the first detection of a sodium atmosphere around Osiris b (HD 209458b). Another group
[33] using the STIS to look at Osiris saw spectral lines from H, C and O absorbed by the
atmosphere as well as evidence for a tail behind the planet due to atmospheric loss. Richardson
et al. [34] using the Spitzer infrared spectrograph reported only the presence of a 9.65 micron
peak from the atmosphere suggesting silicates and the possibility of a molecule with similarities
to benzene. Missing from any of these measurements on Osiris so far has been any sign of water
vapor or methane [35]. A very interesting development has been the detection of methane, water
and carbon dioxide [36] in the atmosphere of another exoplanet, HD 189733b some 63 light
years away. With current technology there is an approximately 10 σ signature of CO2 at 2.1 µm
in the HD 189733b atmosphere. A 2 σ signature might be seen out to 140 light years. Clearly
these techniques for investigating extrasolar planetary atmospheres have turned out to be
surprisingly powerful. They can already be used to eliminate atmospheric models.

7

Burrows [37] and others have developed models for “natural” extrasolar planet atmospheres.
Detailed knowledge of planetary atmospheres in the Solar System is useful for extrasolar
planetary atmosphere modeling. As a cross check recent observations of the visible and near
infrared spectra of the moon during an eclipse have been used to determine the transmission and
reflection spectral features of the Earth’s atmosphere in a way that simulates exoplanet transits
[38].
An important step along the way toward interstellar archaeology is finding signatures for life in
an exoplanet atmosphere [39]. About a decade ago Perryman [11] examined atmospheric
signatures for life that might be found by imaging planets and concluded it is a difficult
challenge. Carbon-based life would seem to require water in a stable environment. O2, O3
(ozone) and CH4 (methane) have been investigated as atmospheric signatures of life. In this vein
Lovelock [40] suggests that all the molecular oxygen and ozone gas content in Earth’s
atmosphere is due to biogenic processes.
As noted earlier, the nature of an extrasolar planetary atmosphere might give some clue to the
existence of intelligence. What is needed is a unique signal such as a Freon line that indicates
intelligent activity. However, positive identification of a Freon molecule with low resolution
spectroscopy could be challenging [41]. Better understanding of the composition of Earth’s
atmosphere and the changes with time might help to identify extrasolar system signatures of the
existence of a civilization. For example the carbon dioxide fraction in Earth’s atmosphere due to
heating and the use of internal combustion engines could signal the activities of civilization on
the earth. The CO2 fraction by volume has risen from 284 ppmv in 1832 to 384 ppmv in 2007.
This amounts to a CO2 change of 8*1014 kg or 1.3*10-10 of the mass of the earth. Some suggest
that at least part of the atmospheric CO2 rise could come from natural processes and nonintelligent life. This is illustrative of the ambiguity of putative signals of interstellar archaeology.
In summary, while remarkable exoplanet atmospheric signatures have been obtained for several
cases there is still some distance to go before there is enough sensitivity to find meaningful
signatures of life and intelligence. COROT and Kepler should double the number of identified
exoplanets in the next three years. However even the next rounds of satellites and observatories
will probably not reach the necessary spectral sensitivity to clearly identify signatures of life or
intelligence. On the other hand progress is also being made in modeling atmospheres and using
lunar eclipses to infer the spectral observation conditions for exoplanets.
The appropriate lifetime for the equivalent Drake equation for an exoplanet atmosphere signature
would be the life of the detectable atmospheric perturbation introduced into the atmosphere. This
could be some combination of the time to inject the contaminant into the atmosphere and the
time for the contaminant to disappear from the atmosphere.
6. STELLAR SPECTRAL SIGNATURES
The challenge of looking for optical spectral signatures from planetary atmospheres is that the
light output is miniscule compared to the signal from the host star. An alternative interstellar
archaeology strategy might be to find signatures from the host star that reflect the presence of

8

intelligence. A signature could result from a process such as waste disposal in the star or even
active salting of the stellar envelope with artificially produced isotopes. Processing by life itself
can change an isotopic ratio. This happens with the ratio of carbon 12 to carbon 14 used in
radioactive dating of organic material. Another intriguing possibility is modulating a stellar
maser or a stellar optical signature with something such as clouds.
6.1

Stellar salting

The idea of actively salting a star was originally independently by Drake [42] and Shklovskii
[43] in the context of possible active signaling. Independently they suggested that feeding a
short-lived nuclear species with a strong resonant absorption line into a stellar atmosphere might
be used to signal the presence of an advanced civilization. A search for such a signature would
be in the spirit of looking for a radio or optical signal transmission rather than searching for
astroengineering. For radioactive salting the signature has to arise from an atom or atomic
isotope not normally present in the star. Drake suggested technetium (Z = 43) for this purpose.
Technetium is the element with the lowest atomic number with no stable isotope. The other
possible unstable atom in the low to medium Z range is promethium with Z = 61. The half lives
of promethium’s isotopes are in the year range and may be too short for signaling over an
extended period of time.
Technetium is found in trace amounts in red giants and also on Earth where it is produced by
uranium fission. Typically the red giants are relatively cold, variable S stars in the so-called third
dredge-up period (3DUP) after hydrogen burning. There are a number of isotopes of technetium
with lifetimes ranging from shorter than an hour to millions of years. A technetium line would
probably be used as a beacon. To have a higher data transmission rate one would pick the
shortest lived isotope but this would require a larger quantity of the dopant.
The reach for observation of a technetium signal is quite good. Recent optical observations by
Uttenthaler, et al. [44] find stars containing technetium spectral lines in the galactic bulge 8.5 kpc
away. Clearly this range depends on the concentration of the contaminant. Indeed the extraction
of the technetium lines in the Uttenthaler paper involves a very significant analysis employing
challenging observations with the ESO Very Large Telescope. Note that the properties of stellar
atomic technetium lines are also difficult to calculate [45].
Lemarchand [6] using an approach employed by Drake estimated that about 100,000 tons of
technetium would be required to produce a recognizable spectral signal. For roughly the same
conditions Drake estimated 4000 tons. This is a large amount of technetium. Even so this
estimate of the amount may be rather low because it assumes each atom emits light at the
maximum rate and absorbs like a black disc. Several examples give a sense of scale for putting
105 tons of exotic material into a star. A plutonium bomb might weigh on the order of 10
kilograms. One solar panel carried aloft by the Space Shuttle weighed 18 tons. Reactors have
produced on the order of 100 tons of technetium over the last 6-7 decades.
This approach seems like an unlikely candidate for an interstellar archaeology search because of
the existence of trace natural technetium signals in some stars, the mass required and the fact that
modulating the signal with an isotope with a shorter lifetime would require much more material.

9

6.2

Nuclear waste

A second search strategy suggested by Whitmire and Wright [46] is to look for signatures of
nuclear fission waste products that have been disposed of in a star. Looking for such signals is
the interstellar archaeological equivalent of searching ancient waste dumps for cultural artifacts.
Whitmire and Wright note that convective mixing and stellar lifetimes restrict the possible
candidates for observation of nuclear waste disposal to stars in the spectral classes A5 to F2.
Their point is that slow neutron fission products such as neodymium and praseodymium can
result in anomalous abundances relative to normal stellar nucleosynthesis. Fission-produced
unstable elements such as technetium and plutonium could also be markers.
Generating an observable signature could require the nuclear waste products derived from a
substantial fraction of a planet’s fissile material. In turn that material would have to be
transported to the host star. As with isotope salting, there would be a high cost premium to move
radioactive waste from a planet to a star, although the energy cost to move it would be small
compared to the power yield that could be obtained from the material. Finally, it would not be
possible to easily modulate the signal. As a consequence a line from waste would only serve as a
cultural marker. Identification of a candidate would rest on abnormal line intensities, not the
presence or absence of a spectral line.
In most essentials concerning scale, the Drake equation for the nuclear waste case follows
isotope salting.
6.3

Isotopic ratios

Isotopic ratio such as 26Al/27Al and 12C/ 14C are used as dating tools for the solar system and
archaeology on the Earth. Neither of these ratios is germane as a sign of intelligence near a star.
Still, there are other possible isotopic anomalies such as those from nuclear waste disposal
discussed above. There is also a possibility that some form of stellar engineering might change
isotopic ratios.
Some atomic isotopic spectroscopy splittings are in the range 0.1 - 0.2 Angstroms (0.01-0.02
nm). This can be resolved with a high resolution spectrograph on a telescope [47]. Once again
the problem is that the signature is modulated by natural effects. For example, Cowley et al. [48]
find that the isotopes of heavy metals will be selectively segregated in chemically peculiar (CP)
stars with the heavier isotopes rising in the atmosphere because of isotope dependent lightinduced drift, somewhat in the spirit of laser isotope separation. The root causes of these effects
are often complicated involving such factors as the stellar atmosphere profile and magnetic
fields. As a result it would probably be quite difficult to make a case for an artifact due to a nonnatural effect involved with stellar engineering.
6.4

Spectral modulation

Another intriguing possibility is to look for evidence of intelligent modulation of cosmic lasers
and the optical and infrared signatures of carbon stars. In the relatively late phase of stellar

10

evolution carbon stars are surrounded by dust clouds that modulate both visible and infrared
signals. Typically the mass loss rate is 10-6 stellar masses per year. Of course the environment of
a carbon star is probably not conducive to life [49]. As noted earlier, in the red giant phase Earth
will most likely be swallowed as the sun expands. On the other hand if there was some
possibility of life continuing the situation might engender a spirit of grand engineering and also
an urge to communicate. In many cases the red giant environment generates varying maser
signals. Modulation could emerge from dust clouds [50] moving and transforming in the spirit of
weather systems on the Earth. (“Dust clouds” here is used to describe dust clumps around a star.)
Modulation could also arise from linking the magnetic field from a Jupiter-scale planet and the
stellar equivalent of the solar wind [51]. A “movie” produced using a very long base line
interferometer [52] shows a spectacular demonstration of natural modulation of a number of
maser spots around the Mira Variable TX Cam.
The solar wind produces magnetic anomalies of order 1% on Earth in conjunction with the
aurora. High altitude nuclear explosions such as the Argus tests of the late fifties and early sixties
can produce geomagnetic effects and artificial Van Allen belts that last several weeks.
Something along this line might be used to produce temporary planetary magnetic field
variations. Perhaps visible and infrared modulation could be produced by seeding carbon dust
clouds or by trying to raise and lower them by inducing surface heat transfer over a small part of
the stellar area.
A limitation here is to find a unique trait that is a signature of intelligence. Red giants already
exhibit a variety of different modulations. The overall process has the flavor of the child’s game
of looking for faces in clouds. One handle might be to look for modulations on very short time
scales that would not occur with ordinary physical processes.
To summarize, the possibility of observing a stellar spectral effect from some non-natural cause
will be severely hampered by the diversity of natural effects. In many cases, these natural effects
will be difficult to model and observe in their own right. By current standards these techniques
require large quantities of rare isotopes or large scale engineering.
The equivalent Drake equation for stellar spectral signals varies from case to case. For some
cases involving salting, nuclear waste and isotopic ratio modification the marker could persists
for very long times so that for that case
N sp  fL sp / Lc

where Lsp is the lifetime of the spectral signature. On the other hand modulation of stellar masers
or optical spectral lines would be more like conventional SETI. That is to say, the lifetime of the
modulation signature could be the effective life of the transmitting civilization. For cases that
occurred during a red giant phase this lifetime would be the lifetime of the red giant phase, often
a short time. An important point for all these cases is that a different form of the Drake equation
holds for each of them where one factor has been replaced by another.

11

7. DYSON SPHERES
Dyson spheres [4] are among the more intriguing possibilities for interstellar archaeology
signatures. The swarm of tiny objects in a Dyson shell would greatly increase the useful area for
advanced activities and absorb all of the visible light. The stellar energy would be reradiated at
lower temperature. If the visible light was totally absorbed a pure Dyson sphere signature would
be an infrared object with luminosity equivalent to the invisible star and a blackbody-like
thermal distribution with a temperature corresponding to the radius of the shell. This is similar to
a carbon star surrounded by a thick, low temperature dust cloud. The assumption of a fullyshrouded body is restrictive. A partial Dyson sphere, for example a ring, would be a more
practical object to build. By looking for infra-red excesses around visible stars several
astronomers including D. Werthimer [53] and J. Jugaku [54] have searched for partial Dyson
spheres where the star is only partly obscured. No likely candidates were reported in searches of
several thousand stars.
The mass of a Jupiter-scale Dyson sphere would be 2*1027 kg. Earth’s biomass is in the 1015 kg
range. The largest ocean liner is 1.5*108 kg while the immobile Great Wall of China is on the
order of 1012 kg and took 2500 years to build. The International Space Station weighs 2*105 kg
so that it is a factor of ten billion trillion smaller than a Jupiter-class Dyson sphere. In short, a
Dyson sphere is a large object! Dyson’s perspective on this is to note that increases of scale such
as this can be reached in 3000 to 4000 years based on a population growth of O(1%/year).
The energy cost of constructing a Dyson sphere is high. In his paper Dyson notes that the energy
to disassemble and rearrange a Jupiter size planet is equivalent to 800 years of total solar
radiation, not the much smaller amount of solar radiation falling on the planet’s surface. (The
800 year number is of the order of Jupiter’s gravitational self energy.) This poses a bootstrap
problem in the building process. Initially the available power would be low but could rise as
more surface area developed. In any case the construction time would probably be much longer
than 103 years.
One of the criticisms of Dyson’s proposal has been based on the incorrect presumption that
Dyson’s object was a rigid, hollow sphere. Such a large object would be unstable. This argument
ignores the possibility of a shroud consisting principally of thin silicon chips, solar panels, or
carbon nanotubes. Put differently, it is difficult to anticipate the size or the technology going in
to the individual cells in a Dyson shroud developed by an advanced intelligence. Another
criticism of the Dyson hypothesis is that a spherical swarm is not a stable system. On the other
hand the individual cells in the shroud could be actively steered, perhaps by solar sails.
At first sight a pure Dyson sphere is a clean signature for an interstellar archaeology search.
However there are a number of natural astronomical objects which bear some resemblance to a
Dyson sphere. To definitely identify a Dyson sphere one has to rule out the more conventional
and plausible natural sources that are mimics. The birth and death phases of many stars are
characteristically associated with heavy dust clouds around the star. Since the associated
lifetimes of the processes giving rise to these clouds are short, the objects are rare. Many of these
sources show silicate emission while others exhibit silicate absorption. They may behave as
natural masers or show pulsations.

12

The IRAS spacecraft that flew in the mid-eighties was almost an ideal instrument for a Dyson
sphere search. It covered nearly the entire sky. Importantly, IRAS carried a low resolution
infrared spectrometer (LRS) in addition to a set of four filters. The spectrometer sensitivity was 1
Jansky while the angular resolution was 1 minute. Two hundred fifty thousand point sources
were identified. A comprehensive atlas of more than eleven thousand sources containing a
significant portion of the available useful IRAS Low Resolution Spectra has been compiled by a
Calgary group [55].
Recently Carrigan [5] has used information from the IRAS LRS database to build on earlier
IRAS filter-based searches by several astronomers including Kardashev [56] and Slysh [57]. The
IRAS-LRS search used a sequential series of cuts to select a set of objects that could be Dyson
sphere candidates. The cuts included factors such as temperature and a scan of the spectral
distribution to look for features including spectral lines or a blackbody-like spectrum. Fig. 2
shows a common signature for a low temperature carbon star with a silicon carbide line. The line
rules this out as a Dyson sphere. For this source there is a distinct difference between the filters
and the LRS, likely due to source variability. This is a source that is barely inside the 600 ºK
upper temperature bound used in the search.
A source with a well-established classification was generally discarded unless there was some
reason to doubt the classification. The cuts along with statistical tests narrowed the sample to
sixteen mildly interesting sources. Only three of these had relatively low spectral statistical
fluctuations. All of the sixteen sources have some feature which clouds their identification as a
Dyson sphere. In practice, most of the LRS candidates have higher temperatures and just don’t
look much like the spectrum expected from a Dyson sphere. The search suggests that there are
few if any even mildly interesting candidates within several hundred light years of Earth.
Fig. 3 is the spectral distribution for one of the more interesting examples, IRAS 20369+5131.
This source is one of the best fits to a Planck distribution. The temperature is around the boiling
point of water and there is no visible star. The SIMBAD catalog classifies this as a carbon star
while Calgary classifies it as U, an unusual candidate.
The largest one-Sun bolometric distance in the 16 source sample is 118 pc. This was for a
maximum peak flux of 8.6 Jy. (The one Sun bolometric distance is defined in [5] based on an
equation developed by Slysh [57].) The 11,000 source Calgary sample extended down to 1-2 Jy
which would have given a maximum one-Sun bolometric distance of 300 pc for LRS sources.
This region includes something in the neighborhood of a million stars. For a galactic scale height
of 100-200 pc the bolometric distances of the most interesting sources suggests they should be
scattered over the whole sky rather than lying near the galactic plane. As seen in the galactic
Aitoff plot in fig. 4 only one quarter of the 16 sources are scattered over the sky indicating that
many of the sources are at greater distances and are more luminous. Fig. 4 also shows several
thousand sources with the classifications and temperatures selected for the search. They follow
the galaxy but show no bulge at the galactic center suggesting they are closer than the center.
In summary a Dyson sphere does not require intent to communicate on the part of a civilization.
The current detection reach is comparable to a SETI search. However there is a problem of

13

confounding signatures from mimics such as carbon stars. Searches for potential Dyson spheres
would be sharpened by developing more realistic pictures of construction scenarios including
such factors as time to build and approaches to stability. (Parenthetically M. Fogg has prepared a
relevant bibliography [58] on terraforming and astroengineering.) Finally it would be interesting
to consider how stellar evolution might stimulate the necessity of such large scale structures with
a view to looking at candidate objects in the later stage of evolution along the main sequence.
The equivalent Drake equation for a Dyson sphere is
N Dy  fL Dy / Lc

where LDy is the lifetime of a typical Dyson sphere. This could be similar to a deterioration time
for an archaeological ruin or it might relate to the collapse of the sphere if active control was
turned off. Characteristically LDy could be substantially longer than the lifetime of a civilization.

8. STELLAR ENGINEERING
Since its birth 4.6 billion years ago Earth has led a relatively tranquil existence. While solar
luminosity may have increased by 40% the Earth’s surface temperature has remained essentially
constant, probably due in part to the mitigating effect of the atmosphere [59]. The next five
billion years will not be as hospitable. A main sequence star such as the Sun becomes cooler and
redder as it burns its core hydrogen. The stellar surface expands and the luminosity increases. In
Rejuvenating the Sun and Avoiding Other Global Catastrophes [12] Beech notes that roughly
speaking a one percent change in luminosity will lead to a rise in temperature at the Earth’s
surface of one degree Kelvin. In five billion years the solar luminosity will increase by a factor
of two to three, probably enough to destroy life. After that the Sun will enter a red giant phase in
which the stellar radius expands by one hundred so the Earth is engulfed by the Sun.
Characteristically by the red giant phase the star has only burned several percent of its hydrogen.
The details of a star’s path along the main sequence and into the red giant phase depend on
factors such as the stellar mass and metallicity. Obviously the fate of the planets associated with
a star also depend on all the parameters of the planetary system as well as the stellar history. (For
a recent discussion of this see Villaver and Livio [49].)
At some time before the temperature rises too high our descendants will have to take drastic
steps to avoid the fateful impact of rising luminosity and an expanding Sun. One possibility
might be interplanetary or interstellar migration. Another potential option would be stellar
engineering.
Are there astroengineering projects a civilization could undertake to engineer the path of the host
star along the main sequence and thereby extend planetary life? A typical main sequence star
turns into a red giant when the hydrogen of the inner core is exhausted. The useful stellar life
could be extended by mixing the unused hydrogen in the outer envelope with the core. This is no
easy astroengineering project. Beech [60] has studied the possibilities for this type of
astroengineering in detail. His book [12] reviews some options. Beyond Beech’s work there has
been little recent technical discussion of astroengineering the Sun. Many, probably most
astronomers view stellar engineering as an impossible task.
14

Beech examines a number of possibilities for engineering the stellar life cycle including mixing
the stellar core with outer layers, inducing stellar mass loss, changing the pressure by adjusting
the sun’s rotation rate, or increasing the opacity by introducing heavy elements. He uses an
equation for luminosity, L, which incorporates functional forms for the stellar temperature
gradient and the opacity:
L  LKR

 7.5

1  X 

M5

where M is the mass of the star, µ is the mean molecular weight, X is the hydrogen mass fraction
and LKR is a constant. Because the Kramer’s expression for opacity has been introduced this
formula for the luminosity differs from the more familiar version that goes as M3. Beech’s form
is appropriate for stars in the Sun’s mass range. Differentiating this to give fractional changes
results in:
dL
dM
.
5
L
M
This suggests that roughly 60% of the solar material would have to be dispersed to keep the
luminosity constant to the end of the main sequence.
The tools Beech discusses for producing these changes such as mass loss are staggering. They
include black hole pumps, ramjets and super-sized accelerators. In the framework of the twentyfirst century none of these would be straightforward. For example, problems associated with
induced mass loss would resemble some of the natural processes associated with the red giant
phase.
For some sense of scale consider several absurd examples. The largest nuclear bomb exploded
on Earth had an energy release of 50 megatons or 2*1017 J. The energy may have been released
over 5*10-8 s so that the instantaneous power output was 4*1024 W or 1/100 of the power output
of the sun. The outer pressure on the sun could be increased momentarily (opposite to the desired
effect) by simultaneously exploding a very large number of bombs over the solar surface. But for
a sustained effect this would have to be repeated ten million times a second. In the process
visible light coming from the direction of the sun would increase many-fold. The point of the
example is that very large inputs of power are required to affect solar changes. Another
possibility is to drop the planet Mercury into the sun (again this would appear to be in the
opposite sense needed to decrease the luminosity). That would bring some heavier elements such
as sodium and oxygen into the solar surface and perhaps increase opacity starting at the surface.
Leaving to the reader the details of how to drop Mercury into the sun, the net contribution to the
solar mass would be on the order of one part in ten million or one hundred thousandth of the
heavy element fraction. The point is that one of these engineering processes must proceed on a
heroic and post twenty-first century scale if it is to happen at all.
In the discussions of the Dyson sphere the details of sphere assembly were put aside and instead
one looked for signatures of the process. The same approach can be used for stellar engineering.
For example, Beech suggested looking for hot, massive stars called blue stragglers that lie on an
extension of the main sequence line beyond the AGB turn-off point to the red giant phase. He
noted that some of these blue stragglers might be examples of astroengineering where the outer
shell hydrogen had been mixed into the inner core to prolong the main sequence life. Blue
15

stragglers had been something of a mystery although work using the Hubble telescope has shown
that they could arise in “intimate” stellar encounters leading to coalescence of two stars in
crowded globular clusters such as 47 Tucanae [61]. Recent population studies [62] lend
additional weight to this picture. Beech recognizes the emerging consensus on a natural
explanation for most blue stragglers but also suggests that one could look for isolated cases
where the coalescence picture could not explain them.
The characteristic dense stellar globular cluster environment for blue stragglers also seems a less
likely home for planetary life because of the disrupting effects of stellar collisions on planets.
“Frequent” stellar collisions (say one every billion years) are bad for both planetary systems and
life. Livio [63] notes that globular clusters are notoriously metal poor and are therefore not
expected to be fertile hunting grounds for Earth-like planets. Livio goes on to ask “Why invoke
astroengineering within globular clusters to explain what is a very natural blue-straggler
phenomenon?” Now it probably makes sense to regard a blue straggler as a natural phenomenon
that bears some resemblance to what a re-engineered star would look like.
In summary the grand scale of programs to homogenize the interior of a star or reduce luminosity
by inducing stellar mass loss is overwhelming. This does not mean possibilities such as these
should not be considered. For example, could the mass loss in the red giant phase be used as a
mechanism to push a planetary civilization out to greater distances from the growing star?
(Thompson, et al. contains a useful discussion of dust evolution in the red giant phase [64].)
Little is gained here by ungrounded speculation. Often a simple calculation will show that some
putative project is untenable. Critical review by a serious astrophysicist is helpful. Still, the
challenge of a SETI enthusiast or astrobiologist to the astrophysicist should be “What would you
do, professor, when our raging sun is about to reach out and consume us?”
Seen from our twenty-first century perspective there are few, if any, astroengineering
possibilities that are even mildly plausible. As a result there appear to be no very stimulating
candidate signatures for astroengineering. Even with the enormous problems associated with
extending the useful life of a star there is another way astrophysics can direct the search for
astroengineering. If other extrasolar civilizations followed the behavior patterns of our cultures
the most likely time for undertaking a heroic project would be when a situation was changing
most rapidly. One way to search for intelligence –driven stellar activity would be to look at stars
undergoing rapid evolutionary changes. In this picture a star close to the end of its main
sequence lifetime might be a place to find signs of activities along the lines Beech suggests [13].
For very successful stellar engineering the Drake equation could take the form
N se  fL s / Lc

where Ls is the order of the lifetime of a main sequence star. In some sense this would make an
example of stellar engineering relatively more common than a SETI case. However this is one
case where a new factor perhaps should be added relating to the degree of difficulty in carrying
out the necessary engineering.

16

9. GALACTIC AND TRANS-GALACTIC SIGNATURES
Kardashev and others have proposed several pictures of possible Type III galactic-scale
astroengineering projects. Typically these have been framed in terms of a Dyson sphere model.
A galactic-scale Dyson sphere would require all the stars in the galaxy to build it leaving nothing
left over as a heat source. This also ignores the cost of the energy to construct the object and
other onerous problems. An alternative would be a galaxy completely populated with individual
stellar Dyson spheres. Parenthetically, a Type III Dyson sphere object could act like a dark patch
in the cosmos on a galactic scale with an associated infrared signature. This bears some relation
to the topic of dark matter galaxies, a subject of interest in its own right.
9.1

Natural signals – dark galaxies

Dark matter was originally proposed seven decades ago by Zwicky [65] to explain the rotation
behavior of galactic clusters. Zwicky found that the light yield in the Coma galaxy cluster was
low compared to the mass expected on the basis of the virial theorem. Investigations of galactic
rotation curves by Rubin [66] and others solidified confidence in the dark matter hypothesis. In
the eighties dark matter became profoundly interwoven with particle cosmology. While there is
general agreement that dark matter is very important and exists in nature there is still not an
understanding of what it is. In recent years several galaxies have been suggested as possible pure
dark matter galaxies, that is, galaxies containing only dark matter. An interesting but
controversial candidate for a dark galaxy has been observed in Virgo about 60 million light years
away (VirgoHI21) [67]. Critics have suggested that tidal shredding, not dark matter, explains the
image. Several other relatively dark dwarf galaxies [68] such as the Ursa Major dwarf spheroidal
UMa dSph [69] have been found recently. Any explanation involving ensembles of Dyson
spheres would have to compete with other far more plausible possibilities. Many have suggested
that dwarf dark matter galaxies should exist in large numbers but the data is inconclusive.
Finally, examining candidates for dark matter galaxies requires detailed understanding of stellar
populations and types as well as radio astronomy measurements to get neutral hydrogen spectral
line information on either side of the galaxy and thereby determine the rotation rate. In this
context, searching for an unnatural signature from galactic engineering is similar to looking for
an eyeless needle in a disorganized haystack. The following discussion should be viewed in the
light of this backdrop.
9.2

The Annis search

There has been at least one serious search for Kardashev Type III cases. Annis [23] has searched
for Type III civilizations by looking for outliers on galactic distributions used to study the TullyFisher [70] or L-T scaling relation (for a recent summary see Tully’s article in Scholarpedia [71]).
The distribution of galaxies on a plot of galactic optical brightness or luminosity versus the
maximum rotation velocity or radius of the galaxy follows a fairly consistent pattern. Cases lying
below the typical galactic trend line reflect visible light that has been absorbed and emitted
somewhere else in the electromagnetic spectrum. Annis examined existing distributions for spiral
and elliptic galaxies and looked for sources below the normal trend lines where more than 75%
of the visible light would have been absorbed. No candidates were found in a sample of 137
galaxies. From this Annis inferred a very low probability of a Type III civilization appearing that

17

would be found using this search methodology. With more recent information [72] it is possible
to extend the search to samples that are considerably larger and also more robust. It may be time
to revisit this possibility. In particular with a sample ten to one hundred times larger one could
examine the nature of a handful of outliers in more detail looking for any unique features such as
a higher than normal infrared component. These outliers might be candidates for a radio SETI
search.
9.3

Fermi bubbles

Dyson [73] notes that “a type III (Kardashev civilization) in our own galaxy would change the

appearance of the sky so drastically that it could hardly have escaped our attention,” while Annis
[23] observes “It is quite clear that the Galaxy itself has not transformed into a type III
civilization based on starlight, nor have M31 or M33, our two large neighbors.” These statements
are reasonable but what would happen for a civilization on its way to becoming a type III
civilization, a type II.5 civilization so to say? If it was busily turning stars into Dyson spheres the
civilization could create a “Fermi bubble” or void in the visible light from a patch of the galaxy
with a corresponding upturn in the emission of infrared light. This bubble would grow following
the lines of a suggestion attributed to Fermi [74] that patient space travelers moving at 1/1000 to
1/100 of the speed of light could span a galaxy in one to ten million years. Here “Fermi bubble”
is used rather than “Fermi void”, in part because the latter is also a term in solid state physics and
also because such a region would only be a visible light void, not a matter void.
To get a sense of the time scale for a typical Fermi voyager recall that the escape velocity from
the solar system from the vicinity of Earth is 42 km/s or ~0.0001 of the speed of light. It is
notable that Voyager 1 is now traveling at a speed such that it will escape the gravitational
potential of the sun. For an expenditure of 100 times the energy, the velocity could have been
raised to 400 km/s. The diameter of the Milky Way is 60,000 light years so that a traveler going
at a velocity of 400 km/s or 10-3 c would take 60 million light years to cross it. The sun takes
roughly 200 million years to circle the center of the galaxy.
Newman and Sagan [75] modeled the possible diffusion of interstellar civilization across space.
One observation is that the time to colonize individual stars is not large compared to the time to
travel between stars. The expanding front of the civilization might move by a diffusive or
random walk process. However it might also go directly to the next star so that the front would
move forward at a rate comparable to the space travel velocity. In that spirit an intergalactic
civilization could envelop a galaxy on a time scale comparable to or even somewhat shorter than
the rotation period of the galaxy.
Searching for ETI-driven artificial bubbles in a spiral galaxy is challenging because the structure
pattern itself is based on voids of a sort. The M51 Whirlpool galaxy seen face on at 30 mly
illuminates the challenges. (A recent Spitzer study [76] is a useful guide to the M51 infrared
distribution.) The sky area covered by M51 is about 6000 kly2. A rough qualitative estimate
suggests that there are no unexplained bubbles or voids at the level of 5% of the M51 galactic
area. Transverse arm widths in the outer reaches are O(10 kly) so that it would be hard to
identify void features below this level. Even if an interesting void in the visible with a
corresponding infrared enhancement was identified for some galaxy it would be hard to make a
case for a non-natural explanation. Interestingly Churchwell [77] and others have already
18

established protocols and built catalogs to identify parsec-scale bubbles in the Milky Way
produced by individual stars. Annis [78] has suggested that elliptical galaxies might be a better
place to look for Fermi voids since they exhibit little structure.
9.4

Signatures transcending the galactic scale

Beyond the galactic scale lie galactic clusters, super-clusters and then penultimately, the visible
universe. Roughly speaking the number of galaxies in the visible universe is the same as the
number of stars in a galaxy. The overarching feature of the visible universe is the “Big Bang”,
the putative genesis of the universe. Through most of history the universe has been viewed as the
creation of a maker and, in some sense, the maker’s message to mankind. Now cosmologists
grapple with the origin of the universe. A recent conjecture in natural philosophy is the
combination of the so-called “anthropic principle” and a multiverse resting on string theory. The
anthropic principle was first suggested by Brandon Carter [7]. (For a technical discussion see the
article by Bjorken [79].) The idea is that the universe has to be just right for humans. It takes
note of many curious coincidences in the physics including such processes as the origin of the
elements. A particularly compelling example is the so-called triple alpha process discovered by
Hoyle [80]. Multiverses in string theory open up the possibility of generating universes with an
extremely wide range of different physical parameters. A characteristic string theory might offer
up 10500 different models. In this picture mankind lives in a universe that yields the correct
physical constants to give rise to the triple alpha reaction and everything else required for human
existence. There is no message from a maker, only the happy but not altogether fortuitous
circumstance that the universe is tuned just right for people.
9.5

Summary

In summary, there are several signatures for Kardashev Type III galactic –scale objects. By
looking at Tully-Fisher and R-I-T scaling distributions Annis has set a limit on the fraction of
galaxies that are dark that is below 1%. The Annis estimates could probably be improved by
factors of ten using additional information that has accumulated. A problem here is that the
signatures for so-called dark matter galaxies anticipated in many cosmological models bear some
rudimentary relationship to a Kardashev type III signature. It also appears to be quite difficult to
study the question of Fermi bubbles for spiral galaxies in any detail because natural bubbles and
voids occur in galaxies. Elliptical galaxies might be a better place to start an investigation.
The lifetime, Lc, in the Drake equation for a Type III civilization would probably be at least on
the order of the time to cross a galaxy. For relatively low energy outlays this could be tens of
millions of years. R, the rate of formation of life-friendly stars, could have different values
depending on the type of galaxy. Elliptical galaxies would have relatively older stars, increasing
the opportunity for intelligent life to emerge but decreasing the formation rate of stars. For a
galaxy saturated with Dyson spheres the ratio of the overall energy scale for a galaxy compared
to a star would be just the number of stars in a galaxy, characteristically 1010. Note that this
process would go on over a relatively longer time with conversion of one star being much like
the next.

19

10.

SUMMARY AND OBSERVATIONS

Year by year astronomy reaches further out into the Universe. Modern cosmology coupled with
elementary particle physics brings human vision ever closer to a moment of creation. The
understanding of astrophysical processes is becoming ever better so that even more is learned
about the creation of the elements heavier than helium, the stuff of life and many planets. In the
span of about a decade the understanding of the natural homeland of intelligent beings, planetary
systems, has taken a giant step forward. The subject is approaching the interest level of
cosmology or astrophysics. One can hope that soon signs of life may be detected beyond the
Earth’s solar system. Is it unreasonable then, to ask if searching for signs of intelligence in the
Universe may lead to new insights?
Interestingly searching for intelligence beyond the solar system teaches people about themselves –

how fragile the Earth’s atmosphere and place in the universe are and how far the signs of
civilization have already spread across the galaxy. The very detailed understanding of planetary
atmospheres strikes a cautionary note about how Earth’s global resources should be marshaled.
Several of the most persuasive messages in this regard have come from Carl Sagan, one of the
pioneers of modern studies of planetary atmospheres, astrobiology and SETI. SETI and
interstellar archaeology help to set the measure of just what the so-called anthropic principle has
to address. The constraints on the laws of a universe that the anthropic principle addresses would
be loosened if life and intelligence in the Universe were found to be rich and diverse.
The search for interstellar archaeology highlights many of the difficulties and challenges facing
the search for intelligence beyond the solar system. With several exceptions most of the
examples of putative civilizations capable of executing projects on a grand interstellar scale
require technology extrapolation so far beyond the present that it is difficult to imagine the
situations at the source. The exceptions are active SETI and the study of extrasolar planetary
atmospheres. Emerging SETI tools may be able to see cultural radio backgrounds many light
years away. In the next several decades observatories should become available that will be able
to study extrasolar planetary atmospheres in some detail.
Much of the discussion here has addressed signatures of interstellar archaeology. The emphasis
has been on messages, not methods. Questions about how these signatures might come into being
are important. For example, there has been little discussion of the details of building a Dyson
sphere. In part this is because the projects are so fantastic. On the other hand after completing a
backyard fence one can start to conceptualize building the Great Wall of China and still hope to
gain perspective on the process. In another direction, Beech has outlined some of the possibilities
for stellar engineering but much more could be investigated. In any case, it is clear that more
work on processes leading to all the putative signatures would be helpful.
The Table ranks various examples of interstellar archaeology on the Kardashev scale. The values
in the Table are intended only to be suggestive. The Kardashev scale does roughly correspond to
the magnitude of the challenge or “degree of difficulty” faced by the corresponding civilization.
Groups on Earth have already beamed purposeful radio messages to outer space, so-called active
SETI. Planetary atmospheres are more challenging. Producing a detectable extrasolar signature
requires a step up on non-natural atmospheric changes so far introduced in Earth’s atmosphere

20

by a factor of 103. Stellar salting to cause optical spectral modification and nuclear waste
dumping are well beyond any technology or resources available on Earth now. In addition the
signatures would not shed much light on the circumstances of the originating civilization.
Breaking up a planet to build a Dyson sphere completely transcends the will, ability and long
term dedication of contemporary civilization. There is not even a mildly plausible technique for
stellar engineering. Surprisingly the step from a Dyson sphere to a galaxy filled with Dyson
spheres only involves a strengthened capability for space travel. On the time scale of Dyson
Sphere construction this type of relatively slow space travel can be discussed even now. To
recapitulate, SETI and the search for planetary signatures of life and intelligence currently appear
to be the most accessible signatures. For Dyson spheres and stellar engineering work should
mostly be directed toward investigating engineering techniques and limitations.
One measure of the likelihood of finding a signature of interstellar archaeology is the lifetime of
the signature. Extremely rough estimates for these lifetimes are given in the Table. The lifetimes
also appear in the appropriate versions of the Drake equation. This does raise a question about
whether even a modified version of the Drake equation is appropriate for interstellar
archaeology. For example, perhaps some factor proportional to the degree of difficulty should
appear. More consideration needs to be given to this.
Annis [78] has raised the interesting possibility that his approach to looking for Kardashev
Type III civilizations could be applied to study other astronomical distributions to look for nonnatural outliers. Indeed, this embodies some of the spirit of recent discussions about blue
stragglers by Livio [63] and Beech.
The presence of natural signatures that mimic interstellar archaeology signals is a significant
problem. Both Dyson sphere searches and searches for artificially-driven blue stragglers are
seriously compromised by natural signals. Conventional SETI is much better in this regard.
In short, interstellar archaeology has many problems. On the other hand the time may have come
when interstellar archaeology including SETI should be considered seriously as a part of the web
of science.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The material presented here builds in part on foundations developed by G. Lemarchand and M.
Beech. The author would like to thank J. Annis for guidance and help.

21

Examples of Interstellar Archaeology
Kar.
num.
0
0
0
0
I - II
II
II
II.5 III
III

Interstellar
archaeology
type
SETI(radio)

Ref.

Reach
(1000 ly)

Lc (lifetime)

Lc
(kyrs)

[25]

civilization

5

planetary
atmospheres
stellar salting

[39]

to 0.25
now,
30 soon
O(0.1)

O(0.1)

~1015

[43]

~30

atmospheric
perturbation
λ isotope

O(103)

108

nuclear waste
spectral
modulation
Dyson sphere

[46]

λ waste
civilization

O(101)
5

10

[5]

~30
60 (also
ext. gal.)
to 1

5

4*1026

1025

stellar
engineering
Fermi bubble

[12]

20

civilization
dyn. stab.
~stellar lives

106

4*1026

1030

104

1035

1034

galactic Dyson
sphere ensemble

[23]

0.1 galaxy
crossing
galaxy
crossing

105

1037

1036

O(105)
O(105)

Power
Needs
(W)
106

26

Mass
Involved
(kg)

108
1024/yr

Problems
often
needs
intent
ambiguity
natural
signals
ambiguity
natural
signals
mimics
blue
stragglers
confusing
signature
dark
galaxies

22

Figure captions
Figure 1: Kardashev scale. Type I –power harnessed from a planet (NASA image), Type II,
power from a star, perhaps via a Dyson sphere (based on schematic from Lemarchand), Type III,
power from a galaxy. The Type III graph is from the Annis search. The scale could be extended
to the visible universe or smaller systems.
Figure 2: IRAS 17446-4048, a typical carbon star. IRAS filter values: diamonds; DIRBE points:
open circles; 2MASS: triangles; LRS (low): crosses; LRS (high): dots; fit to filter: dotted line; fit
to LRS: solid line (scale: F(Jy) = y-axis/0.0046).
Figure 3: Closest approximation to a Dyson Sphere spectrum found in a recent search. The open
squares are MSX points. The DIRBE points at low wavelength do not agree with the 2MASS
values and are possibly from another source. (Same legend as Fig, 2, scale: F(Jy) = y
axis/0.0168, IRAS 20369+5131).
Fig. 4: Galactic Aitoff plot for the sixteen sources from a recent Dyson sphere search. Three
lowest least squares sources – squares, others - circles (one is shadowed). Sources in a selected
2240 source sample - dots. The SETI Arecibo region lies between the 38º and -2º bounds. The
galactic plane is clear in the distribution but not the galactic bulge.
Figures:
Figure 1

23

Figure 2

24

Figure 3

1.2

Normalized flux

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Lamda (microns)

25

Figure 4

Arecibo
60

38
º

-2º

30

-180

180
0

Arecibo

-30

-60

b

26

REFERENCES
1

G. Gallileo, Starry Messenger, Tommaso Baglioni, Venice, 1610.
2. C. Grillmair, et al., “Strong water absorption in the dayside emission spectrum of the planet HD 189733b”,
Nature, 456, pp.767-769, 2008. M. Swain, et al., “The presence of methane in the atmosphere of an extrasolar
planet”, Nature, 452, pp.329-331, 2008.
3. J. Schneider, et al., “The far future of exoplanet direct characterization”, arXiv:0910.0726v2 astro-ph.EP, 2009.
4. F. J. Dyson, “Search for Artificial Stellar Sources of Infrared Radiation”, Science, 131, pp.1667-1668, 1960 and
Science, “Letters and Response”, 132, pp.250-253.
5. R. Carrigan, “IRAS-Based Whole-Sky Upper Limit on Dyson Spheres”, Astrophysical Journal, 698, pp.20752086, 2009.
6. G. Lemarchand, “Detectability of Extraterrestrial Technological Activities”, http://www.coseti.org/lemarch1.htm.
(Date accessed 26 October 2009.)
7. B. Carter, “Large number coincidences and the anthropic principle in cosmology”, Confrontation of Cosmological
Theories with Observation, IAU Symposium 63, ed. M. Longair, pp.291-294, Reidel, Dordrecht, 1974.
8. M. Mumma, et al., “Strong Release of Methane on Mars in Northern Summer 2003”, Science, 323, pp.1041-1045,
2009.
9. R. H. Brown, et al., “The identification of liquid ethane in Titan's Ontario Lacus”, Nature, 454, pp.607-610, 2008.
10. F. Postberg, et al., "Sodium salts in E-ring ice grains from an ocean below the surface of Enceladus", Nature,
459, pp.1098-1101, 2009. N. Schneider et al., “No sodium in the vapour plumes of Enceladus”, Nature, 459,
pp.1102-1104, 2009.
11. See, for instance, M. Perryman, “Extra-solar planets”, Rep. Prog. Phys., 63, pp.1209-1272, 2000.
12. M. Beech, Rejuvenating the Sun and Avoiding Other Global Catastrophes, Springer – New York, 2008.
13. M. Beech, “Terraformed Exoplanets and SETI”, JBIS, 61 pp.43-46, 2008.
14. B. Zuckerman, “Stellar evolution - Motivation for mass interstellar migrations”, Q. Jl. R. Asst. Soc 26, pp.56-59,
1985.
15. M. Carlotto, “Detecting Patterns of a Technological Intelligence in Remotely Sensed Imagery”, JBIS, 60, pp.2839, 2007.
16. D. Sivier, “Extraterrestrial Hissarlik: Mars as Model for Planetary Archaeology”, JBIS, 56, pp.417-425, 2003.
17. W. Dietrich and J. T. Perron, “The search for a topographic signature of life”, Nature, 439, pp.411-418, 2006.
18. G. Matloff and A. Martin, “Suggested Targets for an Infrared Search for Artificial Kuiper Belt Objects” JBIS,
58, pp.51-61, 2005.
19. N. Kardashev, “Transmission of Information by Extraterrestrial Civilizations”, Soviet Astronomy, 8, pp.217-221,
1964. N. Kardashev, “On the Inevitability and the Possible Structures of Supercivilizations”, in The Search for
Extraterrestrial Life: Recent Developments, ed. M. Papagiannis, Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp.497-504, 1985.
20. P. Weisz, “Basic Choices and Constraints on Long-Term Energy Supplies”, Physics Today, pp.47-52, July 2004.
21. C. Sagan and J. Agel, The Cosmic Connection, 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000.
22. Z. Galantai, “After Kardashev: Farewell To Super Civilizations”,
http://www.educatedearth.net/story.php?id=850 2006. (Date accessed 26 October 2009.)
23. J. Annis, “Placing a limit on star-fed Kardashev type III civilisations”, JBIS, 52, pp.33-36, 1999.
24. M. Livio, “How Rare are Extraterrestrial Civilizations, and When Did They Emerge?”, Astrophysical Journal,
511, pp.429-431, 1999.
25. J. Tarter, “The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI)”, Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys., 39, pp.511-548,
2001.
26. M. Turnbull and J. Tarter, “Target Selection for SETI. I. A Catalog of Nearby Habitable Stellar Systems”,
Astrophysical Journal, SS 145 181-198, 2003 and “Target Selection for SETI. II. Tycho-2 Dwarfs, Old Open
Clusters, and the Nearest 100 Stars”, 149, pp.423–436, 2003.
27. W. Sullivan, III and S. H. Knowles, “Lunar Reflections of Terrestrial Radio Leakage”, in The Search for
Extraterrestrial Life, ed. M. Papagiannis, Boston, MA, IAU symposium 112, pp.327-334, 1985, Reidel Publishing
Co., Dordrecht.
28. D. Werthimer, private communication.
29. R. A. Carrigan, Jr., “Do potential SETI signals need to be decontaminated?”, Acta Astronautica 58, pp.112-117,
2006.

27

30. See, for example,
http://home.fnal.gov/~carrigan/SETI/SETI_Hacker_comments.htm#Interesting_comments_and_observations. (Date
accessed 26 October 2009.)
31. D. L. Leigh, p.5, “An Interference-Resistant Search for Extraterrestrial Microwave Beacons”, Harvard thesis,
1998.
32. D. Charboneau, et al., “Detection of an Extrasolar Planet Atmosphere”, Astrophysical Journal, 568, pp.377-384,
2002.
33. A. Vidal-Madjar et al., “Detection of Oxygen and Carbon in the Hydrodynamically Escaping Atmosphere of the
Extrasolar Planet Hd 209458b”, Astrophysical Journal, 604, pp.L69-L72, 2004.
34. L. J. Richardson, et al., “A Spectrum of an Extrasolar Planet”, Nature, 445, pp.892-895, 2007.
35. L. Richardson, “Infrared Observations During the Secondary Eclipse of HD 209458b. I. 3.6 Micron Occultation
Spectroscopy Using the Very Large Telescope”, Astrophysical Journal, 584, pp.1053-1062, 2003.
36. M. Swain, et. al., “Molecular Signatures in the Near Infrared Dayside Spectrum of HD 189733b”, Astrophysical
Journal, 690, pp.L114-L117, 2009.
37. A. Burrows, “A Theoretical Look at the Direct Detection of Giant Planets Outside the Solar System”, Nature,
433, pp.261-268, 2005. Also “Extrasolar Planets: Remote Climes”, Nature, 447, pp.155-156, 2007.
38. E. Pallé, et al., Nature, “Earth's Transmission Spectrum from Lunar Eclipse Observations”, 459, pp.814-816,
2009.
39. For a recent summary see Chapter 4, Exoplanet Community Report, P. R. Lawson, W. A. Traub and S. C.
Unwin, JPL Publication 09-X, 2008 – draft, (http://exep.jpl.nasa.gov/documents/Forum2008_268_small.pdf). (Date
accessed 26 October 2009.)
40. J. Lovelock, “Thermodynamics and the Recognition of Alien Biospheres”, Proc. of the Roy. Soc. of Lon., Series
B, Biol. Sci., 189, pp.167-180, 1975.
41. See for example, Chap. 6 “Sampling the Atmosphere: Atmospheric Science”, NASA NP-119 Science in Orbit:
The Shuttle & Spacelab Experience, 1988.
42. F. Drake, “The Radio Search for Intelligent Extraterrestrial Life”, pp.323–345, in Current Aspects of
Exobiology, eds. G. Mamikunian, Pergamon Press, 1965. See also JPL 32-428, Current Aspects of Exobiology, G.
Mamikunian and M. Briggs.
43. See C. Sagan and I. S. Shklovskii., p. 406, Intelligent Life in the Universe, Holden-Day, Inc., San Francisco,
California, 1966.
44. S. Uttenthaler, et al., “Technetium and the third dredge up in AGB stars II. Bulge stars”, Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 463, pp.251-259, 2007.
45. P. Palmeri, et al., “Oscillator strength calculations in neutral technetium”, Mon. Not. R. Astr. Soc., 363, pp.452–
458, 2005.
46. D. P. Whitmire and D. P. Wright, “Nuclear Waste Spectrum as Evidence of Technological Extraterrestrial
Civilizations”, Icarus, vol. 42, pp.149-156, 1980.
47. R. Kurucz, “Atomic Data for Interpreting Stellar Spectra : Isotopic and Hyperfine Data”, Physica Scripta, T47,
pp.110-117, 1993.
48. C. Coley, et al., “Stratification and Isotope Separation in CP Stars”, to be published in Mon. Not. R. Astr. Soc.
http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/arxiv/pdf/0903/0903.0611v1.pdf. (Date accessed 26 October 2009.)
49. See, for example, E. Villaver and M. Livio, “Can Planets Survive Stellar Evolution?”, Astrophysical Journal,
661, pp.1192-1201, 2007.
50. C. Lane, et al., “Rotational Modulation of M/L Dwarfs due to Magnetic Spots”, Astrophysical Journal, 668,
pp.L163-L166, 2007.
51. H. Wiesemeyer, “The modulation of SiO maser polarization by Jovian planets”, to be published in Astronomy &
Astrophysic. http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/arxiv/pdf/0809/0809.0214v3.pdf. (Date accessed 26 October 2009.)
52. P. Diamond and A. Kemball, “A Movie of a Star: Multiepoch Very Long Baseline Array Imaging of the SiO
Masers toward the Mira Variable TX Cam”, Astrophysical Journal, 599, pp.1372-1382, 2003.
53. C. Conroy and D. Werthimer, “A Search for Partial Dyson Spheres Around FKG Stars”, preprint, 2003.
54. J. Jugaku and S. Nishimura, “A Search for Dyson Spheres Around Late-type Stars in the Solar Neighborhood”,
Bioastronomy 2002: Life Among the Stars, eds. R. Norris and F. Stootman, eds, IAU Symposium, 213, pp.437-438,
2002.
55. S. Kwok, K. Volk and W. P. Bidelman, “Classification and Identification of IRAS Sources with Low-Resolution
Spectra”, Astrophysical Journal Supplement, 112, pp.557-584, 1997.

28

56. M. Y. Timofeev, N. S. Kardashev and V. G. Promyslov, “A Search of the IRAS Database for Evidence of Dyson
Spheres”, Acta Astronautica, 46, pp.655-659, 2000.
57. V. I. Slysh, “A Search in the Infrared to Microwave for Astroengineering Activity”, pp.315-319 in The Search
for Extraterrestrial Life: Recent Developments, ed. M. Papagiannis, D., Reidel Pub. Co., Boston, Massachusetts,
1985.
58. M. Fogg, “Planetary Engineering Bibliography”, http://www.users.globalnet.co.uk/~mfogg/biblio.htm, 2009.
(Date accessed 26 October 2009.)
59. K-P. Schröder and R. Smith, “Distant Future of the Sun and Earth Revisited”, Mon. Not. R. Astr. Soc., 386,
pp.155-163, 2008.
60. M. Beech, “Blue Stragglers as Indicators of Extraterrestrial Civilizations?”, Earth, Moon, and Planets, 49,
pp.177-186, 1990.
61. M. Shara, R. Saffer and M. Livio., “The First Direct Measurement of the Mass of a Blue Straggler in the Core of
a Globular Cluster: BSS 19 in 47 Tucanae”, Astrophysical Journal Letters, 489, pp.L59-L62, 1997.
62. C. Knigge, N. Leigh and A. Sills, “A Binary Origin for Blue Stragglers in Globular Clusters”, Nature, 457,
pp.288-290, 2009.
63. M. Livio as quoted by B. Dorminey, Physics World, April, 32, 2008.
64. G. D. Thompson, et al., “Challenging the Carbon Star Dust Condensation Sequence: Anarchistic Stars”,
Astrophysical Journal, 652, pp.1654-1673, 2006.
65. F. Zwicky, “"Die Rotverschiebung von Extragalaktischen Nebeln”, Helvetica Physica Acta., 6, pp.110-127,
1933. “On the Masses of Nebulae and of Clusters of Nebulae”, Astrophysical Journal, 86, pp.217-246, 1937.
66. Y. Sofue and V. Rubin, “Rotation Curves of Spiral Galaxies”, Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 39, pp.137-174,
2001.
67. R. Minchin, et al., “A Dark Hydrogen Cloud in the Virgo Cluster”, Astrophysical Journal, 622, pp.L21-L24,
2005.
68. L. Mayer at al., “Early Gas Stripping as the Origin of the Darkest Galaxies in the Universe”, Nature, 445,
pp.738-740, 2007.
69. B. Willman, et al., “A New Milky Way Dwarf Galaxy in Ursa Major”, Astrophysical Journal, 626, pp.L85-L88,
2005.
70. R. B. Tully and J. R. Fisher 1977, “A New Method of Determining Distances to Galaxies”, Astron. Astrophys.,
54, pp.661-673, 1977.
71. R. B. Tully, “Tully-Fisher Relation”, http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Tully-Fisher_relation. (Date accessed
26 October 2009.)
72. R. B. Tully and M. J. Pierce, “Distances to Galaxies from the Correlation between Luminosities and Line
Widths. III. Cluster Template and Global Measurement of H 0”, Astrophysical Journal, 533, pp.744-780, 2000. Also
A.S. Saburova, et al., “Spiral Galaxies with Non-typical Mass-to-light Ratios”, arxiv/0906.0284v1, 2009. (Date
accessed 26 October 2009.)
73. F. Dyson and R. Carrigan, “Dyson sphere”, Scholarpedia, 4(5):6647, 2009.
http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Dyson_sphere. (Date accessed 26 October 2009.)
74. E. M. Jones, "Where is Everybody?", pp.11-13, Physics Today, August 1985. P. Horowitz, “The Fermi
Paradox”, p.373-374, SETI 2020, eds R. Ekers, D. K. Cullers, J. Billingham and L. Scheffer , SETI Institute, 2002.
See also M. Hart, “An Explanation for the Absence of Extraterrestrial Life on Earth”, Q. J. R. astr. Soc, 16, pp.128135, 1975.
75. W. Newman and C. Sagan, “Galactic Civilizations: Population Dynamics and Interstellar Diffusion”, Icarus, 4,
pp.293-327, 1981.
76. G. Brunner, et al., “Warm Molecular Gas in M51: Mapping the Excitation Temperature and Mass of H2 with the
Spitzer Infrared Spectrograph”, Astrophysical Journal, 675, pp.316-329, 2008.
77. C. Watson, et al., “IR Dust Bubbles. II. Probing the Detailed Structure and Young Massive Stellar Populations of
Galactic H II Regions”, Astrophysical Journal, 694, pp.546-555, 2009.
78. J. Annis, private communication.
79. J. Bjorken, “Cosmology and the standard model”, Phys. Rev. D, 67, pp.043508-043508-18, 2003.
80. F. Hoyle, “On Nuclear Reactions Occurring in Very Hot Stars. I. the Synthesis of Elements from Carbon to
Nickel.”, Astrophysical Journal Suppl., 1, pp.121-146, 1954.

29

