[0708.3004] The Far-Infrared Surveyor (FIS) for AKARIAKARI is a JAXA project with the participation of ESA 

 \draft \SetRunningHead 
 M. Kawada et al.The Far-Infrared Surveyor (FIS)
 \Received 2007/**/** \Accepted 2007/**/**

 \KeyWords 
 infrared: general–instrumentation: detectors–vehicles: instruments

 The Far-Infrared Surveyor (FIS) for AKARI † † thanks: AKARI is a
JAXA project with the participation of ESA 

 Mitsunobu Kawada 

 1 1 affiliation: Graduate School of Sciences, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan 
Hajime Baba 

 2 2 affiliation: Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, JAXA,
3-1-1 Yoshinodai, Sagamihara 229-8510, Japan 
Peter D. Barthel 

 3 3 affiliation: Groningen Kapteyn Institute, Rijksuniversiteit,
Landleven 12, Postbus 800, 9700 AV Groningen, Netherlands 
David Clements 

 4 4 affiliation: Imperial College, London, Blackett Laboratory,
Prince Consort Road, London, SW7 2AZ, UK 
Martin Cohen 

 5 5 affiliation: Radio Astronomy Laboratory, 601 Campbell Hall,
University of California, Berkeley, CA94720, USA 
Yasuo Doi 

 6 6 affiliation: Department of General System Studies,
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku,
Tokyo 153-8902, Japan 
Elysandra Figueredo 

 7 7 affiliation: Department of Physics and Astronomy, Faculty of Science,
The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK 
Mikio Fujiwara 

 8 8 affiliation: Advanced Communications Technology Group,
New Generation Network Research Center,
NICT, 4-2-1 Nukui-Kitamachi, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8795, Japan 
Tomotsugu Goto 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 
Sunao Hasegawa 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 
Yasunori Hibi 

 9 9 affiliation: Advanced Technology Center,
National Astronomical Observatory of Japan,
2-21-1 Osawa, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-8588, Japan 
Takanori Hirao 

 1 1 affiliationmark: 

Norihisa Hiromoto 
 Present Address is Japan Science and Technology Agency,
4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan 
    
 10 10 affiliation: Optelectronics and Electromagnetic Wave Engineering,
Shizuoka University, 3-5-1 Johoku, Hamamatsu, Japan 
Woong-Seob Jeong 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 
Hidehiro Kaneda 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 
Toshihide Kawai 

 11 11 affiliation: Technical Center of Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku,
Nagoya 464-8601, Japan 
Akiko Kawamura 

 1 1 affiliationmark: 
Do Kester 

 12 12 affiliation: Netherlands Institute for Space Reasearch SRON,
Landleven 12, PO Box 800, 9700 AV Groningen, Netherlands 
Tsuneo Kii 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 
Hisato Kobayashi 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 13 13 affiliation: Department of Physics, Graduate School of Science,
The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan 
Suk Minn Kwon 

 14 14 affiliation: Department of Science Education,
Kangwon National University,
192-1 Hyoja-Dong, Chuncheon, Gangwon-Do, 200-701, Korea 
Hyung Mok Lee 

 15 15 affiliation: Astronomy Program, Department of Physics and Astronomy,
FPRD, Seoul National University,
Shillim-dong, Kwanak-gu, Seoul 151-742, Korea 
Sin’itirou Makiuti 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 
Hiroshi Matsuo 

 9 9 affiliationmark: 
Shuji Matsuura 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 
Thomas G. Müller 

 16 16 affiliation: Max-Planck-Institut für extraterrestrische Physik,
Giessenbachstrasse, 85748 Garching, Germany 
Noriko Murakami 

 1 1 affiliationmark: 
Hirohisa Nagata 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 
Takao Nakagawa 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 
Masanao Narita 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 
Manabu Noda 

 17 17 affiliation: Nagoya City Science Museum, 2-17-1 Sakae, Naka-ku,
Nagoya 460-0008, Japan 
Sang Hoon Oh 

 15 15 affiliationmark: 
Yoko Okada 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 
Haruyuki Okuda 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 
Sebastian Oliver 

 18 18 affiliation: Astronomy Centre, University of Sussex, Falmer,
Brighton, BN1 9QJ, UK 
Takafumi Ootsubo 

 1 1 affiliationmark: 
Soojong Pak 

 19 19 affiliation: Department of Astronomy and Space Science,
Kyung Hee University,
Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do 446-701, Korea 
Yong-Sun Park 

 15 15 affiliationmark: 
Chris P. Pearson 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 20 20 affiliation: European Space Astronomy Centre, ESA,
Villanueva de la Canada, Post Box 78, 28691 Madrid, Spain 
Michael Rowan-Robinson 

 4 4 affiliationmark: 
Toshinobu Saito 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 13 13 affiliationmark: 
Alberto Salama 

 20 20 affiliationmark: 
Shinji Sato 

 1 1 affiliationmark: 
Richard S. Savage 

 18 18 affiliationmark: 
Stephen Serjeant 

 7 7 affiliationmark: 
Hiroshi Shibai 

 1 1 affiliationmark: 
Mai Shirahata 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 
Jungjoo Sohn 

 15 15 affiliationmark: 
Toyoaki Suzuki 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 13 13 affiliationmark: 
Toshinobu Takagi 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 
Hidenori Takahashi 

 21 21 affiliation: Gunma Astronomical Observatory, 6860-86 Nakayama,
Takayama-mura, Agatsuma-gun, Gunma 377-0702, Japan 
Matthew Thomson 

 18 18 affiliationmark: 
Fumihiko Usui 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 
Eva Verdugo 

 20 20 affiliationmark: 
Toyoki Watabe 

 11 11 affiliationmark: 
Glenn J. White 

 7 7 affiliationmark: 22 22 affiliation: Space Science and Technology Division, The Rutherford
Appleton Laboratory, Chilton, Didcot, Oxfordshire OX11 0QX, England 
Lingyu Wang 

 4 4 affiliationmark: 
Issei Yamamura 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 
Chisato Yamamuchi 

 2 2 affiliationmark: 
and
Akiko Yasuda 2 2 affiliationmark: 23 23 affiliation: The Graduate University for Advanced Studies,
Shonan Village, Hayama, Kanagawa 240-0193, Japan 
 
 kawada@u.phys.nagoya-u.ac.jp 

 Abstract

 The Far-Infrared Surveyor (FIS) is one of two focal plane instruments on the
AKARI satellite. FIS has four photometric bands at 65, 90, 140, and 160 \micron \micron \micron ,
and uses two kinds of array detectors. The FIS arrays and optics are designed to
sweep the sky with high spatial resolution and redundancy. The actual scan width
is more than eight arcmin, and the pixel pitch is matches the diffraction
limit of the telescope. Derived point spread functions (PSFs) from observations
of asteroids are similar to the optical model. Significant excesses, however, are
clearly seen around tails of the PSFs, whose contributions are about 30% of the
total power. All FIS functions are operating well in orbit, and its performance
meets the laboratory characterizations, except for the two longer wavelength bands,
which are not performing as well as characterized. Furthermore, the FIS has
a spectroscopic capability using a Fourier transform spectrometer (FTS).
Because the FTS takes advantage of the optics and detectors of the photometer, it can
simultaneously make a spectral map. This paper summarizes the in-flight technical
and operational performance of the FIS.

 1 Introduction

 The first extensive survey of the far-infrared sky was made by the Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS) launched in 1983, more than two decades
ago. IRAS provided point source catalogs, as well as infrared sky maps, for
almost the entire sky, revealing the infrared view of the universe. The IRAS
products became a standard dataset, not only for infrared astronomy but also for
many other fields.
With the widespread use of the IRAS dataset, observations in the infrared are now
considered an irreplaceable tool. Compared with the datasets at other
wavelengths, the IRAS dataset appears rather shallow, although it provides an
unbiased and wide area coverage survey. However, a next-generation infrared
dataset is needed to push the frontier of astrophysics. The Far-Infrared
Surveyor (FIS) on the AKARI satellite (Shibai H., 2007a ; Murakami et al., 2007 ) was
developed to provide this new dataset in the far-infrared region, taking
advantage of recent technology, including the cryogenics (Nakagawa et al., 2007 ) .
The FIS was designed to perform an all-sky survey in the far-infrared region
with higher spatial resolution and higher sensitivity than the IRAS. A
combination of the Infrared Camera (IRC) (Onaka et al., 2007 ) on the AKARI
satellite also enables a wider wavelength coverage than IRAS.

 The Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) (Werner et al., 2004 ) , which is used
extensively in the observation of various objects in the infrared region, has
brought new insights into the universe with its high spatial resolution and high
sensitivity. FIS is a complementary instrument because of its capability of
covering wide areas, and its multiple photometric bands. Furthermore, the FIS has
the advantage of allowing far-infrared spectroscopy with a Fourier transform
spectrometer (FTS). The Infrared Space Observatory (ISO) (Kessler et al., 1996 ) 
demonstrated the potential of spectroscopy in the infrared region for
diagnostics of the interstellar medium and radiation field. Adopting
two-dimensional array detectors, the FTS of FIS works as an imaging FTS.
Consequently, it affords high efficiency observations of the spatial structure
in spectra.

 This paper describes the design and operation of FIS in two sections, and then
discusses its flight performance and advantage.

 2 Instrument Design

 The FIS is a composite instrument, consisting of a scanner and a spectrometer.
Adopting the newly developed large format array detectors, FIS achieves high
spatial resolution and sensitivity. Fig. 1 shows a picture of FIS
during final integration; the top cover is removed to show the interior.

 2.1 Optical Design

 Fig. 2 illustrates the FIS optical design. FIS is about
50 cm along the major axis and weighs about 5.5 kg. To reduce the size
and resources required, the scanner and spectrometer share some optical
components and detector units. Rotating the filter wheel selects the
appropriate function.

 Light coming from the telescope is focused near the FIS input aperture.
After passing through the input aperture, the beam is bent into the
FIS optical plane and led to the collimator mirror. The collimated beam goes
to the filter wheel, which selects the scanner or the spectrometer by
choosing the filter combination. In the scanner mode, it selects a the
combination of an open hole and a dichroic beam splitter. The beam passes
through the hole, and is reflected by a flat mirror to the dichroic filter
on the filter wheel. Longer wavelength photons ( > 110 absent 110 >110 \micron ) pass through
the filter and shorter wavelength photons are reflected. Camera optics
focus the beams onto the detector units according to their wavelength.

 A Fourier transform spectrometer (FTS) serves as the spectroscopic component.
A polarizing Michelson interferometer, the so-called
Martin–Puplett interferometer (Martin and Puplett, 1969 ) , is employed in the FTS
optics. This type of interferometer requires input and output polarizers
to provide linear polarization. These two polarizers are on the filter
wheel, and are selected in the spectrometer mode. The collimated beam is
reflected by the input polarizer to the interferometer, while the remaining
component is absorbed by a blocking wall. A beam splitter divides the
linearly polarized beam into two beams. The beam splitter is also a
polarizer, whose polarizing angle is rotated by 45 degrees relative to the
incident linear polarized beam. All polarizers are wire-grid filters printed
on thin Mylar films supplied by QMC Instruments Ltd. The divided beams are
reflected by roof-top mirrors; one is fixed and the other is
movable to change the optical path difference between two beams. After that,
the beam splitter recombines the two beams, and the interfered beam goes
to the output polarizer. Finally, the elliptically polarized beam is
separated into two axis components by the output polarizer. Each component
is focused on the corresponding detector unit.

 FIS has a cold shutter at the input aperture to allow measurement of the
dark current of the detector. For the calibration of the detectors, there are
three light sources in the FIS housing. One is in the light path of the
scanner, and the others irradiate the front of each detector. The
intensity and emitting duration of each lamp are independently controlled by
commands independently. These lamps can also simulate the light curve of the point
source in the all-sky survey. Since the simulated light curve is quite
stable and reproducible, the detector responses to a point source can be
monitored at any time. In addition to these calibration lamps, there is a
blackbody source, whose temperature is controllable up to 40K, opposite
the interferometer input that is used to check that operation of the FTS.
Furthermore,
to improve the transient response of the long wavelength detector, a
background light source, with controllable power, is placed on the detector
unit to continuously irradiate detector pixels. At the current setting,
the incident power corresponds to a sky brightness of ∼ similar-to \sim 100 MJy/sr.

 2.2 Instrumentation Description

 2.2.1 Field-of-View

 We use two types of photoconductive detector array to cover the far-infrared
wavelengths (50 – 180 \micron \micron \micron ). One is the direct-hybrid monolithic Ge:Ga
array (Fujiwara et al., 2003 ) for the shorter wavelength of 50 to 110 \micron \micron \micron 
(labeled SW), which was developed by the National Institute of Information
and Communications Technology (NICT). The Ge:Ga monolithic array is
bump-bonded by Indium with Silicon-based cryogenic readout electronics
 (Nagata et al., 2004 ) . The other is a compact stressed Ge:Ga array for longer
wavelengths of 110 to 180 \micron \micron \micron (labeled LW), which is an evolved
version of a previous model (Doi et al., 2002 ) . The LW detector also employs
cryogenic readout electronics. All Ge:Ga chips were supplied by NICT.

 There are two arrays in each detector unit for the different photometric
bands — WIDE-S and N60 for the SW detector and WIDE-L and N160 for the LW
detector. The array formats are 3 × 20 3 20 3\times 20 , 2 × 20 2 20 2\times 20 , 3 × 15 3 15 3\times 15 ,
and 2 × 15 2 15 2\times 15 for WIDE-S, N60, WIDE-L, and N160, respectively, as shown
in Fig. 3 . Several pixels did not work properly after
fabrication (shown by hatching in the figure); however, no additional bad
pixels appeared after the launch.

 The fields-of-view (FOVs) of WIDE-S and WIDE-L, N60 and N160 detectors
overlap, although their coverage differs. The pixel scales are designed to
be comparable to the telescope’s diffraction limits. The arrays are
rotated by 26.5 degrees relative to the scanning direction. Because of
this configuration, the width of the stripe swept out on the sky is reduced to
about 90 % percent 90 90\% of the array width, although the spatial sampling grid
becomes half of the pixel pitch in the cross-scan direction.

 The FOVs of the SW and LW detectors were measured in space by observing point
sources. The measured FOVs are shifted from the designed
position by about 1 arcmin in both in-scan and cross-scan directions
referred to the telescope’s boresight (see top panel of
Fig. 3 ). In the spectrometer mode (bottom panel of
Fig. 3 ), the misalignment of each array is larger than
in the scanner mode, which limits the observational efficiency of spectral
mapping.

 The distortion of the FOVs due to the FIS optics is evaluated by optical
simulation. Although the actual distortion and magnification factor of the
FIS optics do not match precisely, no significant discrepancy with the
design is indicated.

 2.2.2 System Spectral Response

 The four photometric bands of FIS are defined by the combination of the
optical filters and the spectral response of the detectors, as the
incident photons reach the detectors through the optical filters. The
collimated beam passes through two blocking filters that block
the mid- and near-infrared photons contributed mainly by stars. The
dichroic filter then divides the beam in the frequency domain: higher
frequency photons ( > 91 absent 91 >91 cm -1 in wavenumber) are reflected and
lower frequency photons are transmitted. Finally, two filters on the
front of each detector shape the photometric bands. Four photometric
bands cover the 50 to 180 \micron \micron \micron wavelength region; two are wide
bands (WIDE-S and WIDE-L) and the other two are narrow (N60 and N160).

 In the spectrometer mode, the dichroic beam splitter is replaced by a
combination of three polarizers. The other optical filters are the same
as for the scanner mode. Only the wide bands (WIDE-S and WIDE-L) are used
for spectroscopy. The spectrometer could in principle take interferograms with
narrow bands, although some of the outer pixels of the arrays will vignette
the telescope beam.

 Fig. 4 shows the FIS system’s spectral response in
the photometric mode. The responses are normalized at the peak. The
filters and optics were measured in an end-to-end system configuration
at room temperature, although the narrow band filters for N60 and N160 were
measured individually at cryogenic temperature, since their properties
depend on temperature.

 The spectral responses of the detectors were evaluated by a
spectrometer, each pixel of the detector array having a different spectral
response. This difference is larger in the LW detector, due to
non-uniformity of the effective stress on the Ge:Ga chips. The plot in
Fig. 4 provides typical profiles. The spectral
response of each pixel must be used to calculate precise pixel-to-pixel
color corrections.

 The spectral response can also be measured by the FIS spectrometer itself,
using the internal and external blackbody sources at different
temperatures. In orbit, we confirmed the system spectral response of FIS
in this manner. The spectra of the internal
blackbody source taken in orbit are within 10 % percent 10 10\% of those measured in
the laboratory after scaling the responsivity. Since the filters and
optics are considered stable, the system spectral response of each
photometric band is expected to be similar to that measured in the
laboratory as shown in Fig. 4 .

 The blocking filters are expected to avoid leakage of the mid- and
near-infrared photons. The blocking efficiency required from the
scientific observations is 10 − 5 superscript 10 5 10^{-5} at 10 \micron \micron \micron and 10 − 9 superscript 10 9 10^{-9} at
0.5 \micron \micron \micron , which are realized optimally, and will in future
be checked by observations of well-known stars.

 3 Observation Modes

 3.1 All-Sky Survey

 FIS is designed primarily to perform an all-sky survey with four
photometric bands. The goal is to observe the entire sky for at least two
independent orbits. The first half year following the performance
verification phase is dedicated to observations for the all-sky survey.
During the remaining life, supplemental survey observations will fill in
the incomplete sky areas, sharing the observation time with dedicated
science programs.

 During the survey, the detectors are read out continuously with a constant
sampling rate for each array, corresponding to about three samples in a
pixel crossing time. Detectors are reset to discharge the photo current
at appropriate intervals of about 2 sec nominally, 0.5 sec for bright
sky, and for each
sampling (correlated double sampling: CDS) at the Galactic plane, whose
reset intervals correspond to about 26 and 45 ms for the SW and LW
detectors, respectively. Calibration flashes with illuminator lamps are
inserted periodically every minute while keeping the shutter open to trace
the detector responsivity. Near the ecliptic poles, where the detectors
sweep frequently, a one-minute calibration sequence with the shutter
closed is executed for nearly every orbit to monitor the long term trend
of the detector responsivity.

 3.2 Pointing Observation

 Before launch of the AKARI satellite, the project science team members
selected the core programs and target sources were selected. In addition
to the core
programs, some portion of the observation time was open to the community.
For the scientific programs and the Open Time proposals, the AKARI
instruments operate in a pointing mode. The FIS observations are
categorized in three major astronomical observation templates (AOTs),
— two for photometry and one for spectroscopy. Details of each AOT are
described below.

 3.2.1 FIS01: Compact Source Photometry

 The FIS01 template is used to observe point-like or small scale sources. In
this AOT, for one pointing observation, the detectors sweep the sky two
times in round trips. Between two round trips, the scan path is shifted by
either a few pixels (70 arcsec) or half of the FOV (240 arcsec) in the cross-scan
direction, which is selectable. The other adjustable parameters are the
reset interval and scan speed. The scan speed is selectable from 8”/sec or
15”/sec, which are nearly 14 to 30 times slower than that of the all-sky
survey. The detection limits should be improved by a factor of the
exposure time or more using the charge integration amplifier. Furthermore,
using a slower scanning speed reduces the transient response effects of the
detector response.

 An observation sequence takes about 30 minutes as shown in the top panel
of Fig. 5 . During about 10 minutes of maneuvering to the
spacecraft to point toward the target, the standard calibration sequence
is executed with the
shutter closed, i.e., measuring dark current, illuminating the calibration
lamps continuously for about two min and flashing the calibration lamps
several times. After opening the shutter and waiting 210 sec, the
scanning sequence begins and continues for about 12 minutes. Then, the
shutter is closed again and the maneuver to the all-sky survey begins
with the post observation calibrations. During scanning observations, at
the scan turning points, the shutter is closed for 30 sec and the
calibration lamps are turned on for about eight sec to monitor the drift
of the detector responsivity during the pointing observation.

 3.2.2 FIS02: Wide Area Mapping

 FIS02 is the template for wide area mapping. This AOT executes only one
round trip. The detectors sweep a longer strip than for FIS01, but the
detection redundancy is reduced. Overlapping scans are critical for high
quality wide area mapping. By selecting the 15”/sec scan speed, the
strip length reaches over one degree. The calibration sequences in the
pre- and post observation phase and at the turning point are the same as
for FIS01. The middle panel of Fig. 5 
illustrates the observation sequence.

 3.2.3 FIS03: Imaging Spectroscopy

 FIS03 is the template for spectroscopic observations. The bottom panel of
Fig. 5 illustrates the observation sequence. In this AOT,
the target is locked on the detectors. To use the FTS, the optics are
switched to FTS mode by rotating the filter wheel during the maneuver to
the target position. The sampling sequence changes for the FTS and the
movable mirror starts to operate. Important parameters in FIS03 are the
spectral resolution and array selection. Users choose from two spectral
resolution modes: a full resolution mode and a low resolution mode (named
SED mode), with spectral resolution of 0.19 cm -1 and 1.2 cm -1 
without apodization, respectively. Taking one interferogram in the full
resolution mode takes four times longer than that in the SED mode.
Consequently, in one pointing observation, 15 full resolution or 59 SED
mode interferograms can be taken. The other important parameter is the
array selection, which was added after launch, because the FOVs of the two
detectors are misaligned as shown in Fig. 3 . Depending
on the position of the target on the detectors, there are three choices:
nominal, SW, and LW positions.

 During the maneuver to the target position, the internal blackbody source
is turned on at the proper temperature, with the shutter closed, and
interferograms are taken as reference spectra. A short calibration
sequence using the calibration lamps is also conducted at the pre- and
post observation phase. After the observation, the observation mode
changes to photometry mode for the all-sky survey, during the recovery
maneuver to the all-sky survey.

 Parameters for each AOT are summarized in Table 1 .

 3.2.4 Parallel Observation

 FIS can operate in parallel with the IRC observations. Since the FOVs of FIS
are separated from the FOVs of the IRC by about half a degree, they can not
observe the same target. Nevertheless, taking data with FIS is
interesting in many cases as a serendipitous survey. The nominal
operation of the IRC is to make observations with long exposure times to
provide deep images or spectra. Since the FIS photometry is designed for
scanning mode, the pointed observations of the photometry are ineffective
due to the narrow array formats and larger pixel scales. Therefore, FIS
is operated in the spectrometer mode, if the sky is bright enough to
detect signals by the FTS. The observation sequence for parallel
observation is the same as for FIS03. These parallel observations are
productive, especially for the Large Magellanic Cloud, where IRC is making
systematic surveys, as well as toward bright complex regions like the
Galactic plane.

 Specific calibration sequences operates during the remaining IRC oriented
observations. Once a day, the calibration sequence to evaluate
detector transient response is executed. About once every three days,
the calibration lamp stability is also measured. These calibration data
are used to track long term trends in detector performance.

 4 Flight Performance

 In orbit, all FIS functions are working as designed. The cold shutter and
the filter wheel have operated constantly while in orbit, more than ten
thousand times and a few hundred times, respectively. All the functions
are controlled by the onboard electronics without any difficulty. In the
following subsections, the FIS flight performance is described.

 4.1 Imaging Quality

 The point spread functions (PSFs) of FIS were measured in the laboratory
using a pin hole source. Widths of the measured PSFs were almost consistent
with those expected from the optical simulation. In orbit, the system PSFs
including the telescope system are constructed from observations of bright
point sources. The PSFs are similar to the laboratory measurements.
As shown in Fig. 6 , the PSFs conform to the estimations
from the optical model at more than the half maximum of the peak. The
full widths at the half maximum of the PSFs, derived from Gaussian
fitting, are summarized in Table 2 . At the tails of the
PSFs, there are significant enhancements, whose power is about 30% of the
total power. This extended halo is a cause for the degradation of source
detection.

 In the spectrometer mode, the PSFs are evaluated by slow scan observations of
the point sources with the spectrometer optics, and are about 20 % percent 20 20\% wider
than in the photometer mode. It is, however, possible to take spectra for
each pixel and images with nearly one arc minute spatial resolution,
simultaneously.

 An additional factor degrades the imaging quality of the SW detector,
namely, considerable cross talk between pixels in both axes of the
arrays.
One possibility to explain this phenomenon is that the incident
far-infrared photons diffuse into the monolithic Ge:Ga array
during multiple reflection on the front and back surfaces of the
detector substrate.
Furthermore, both
the SW and the LW detectors show significant ghost signals. The
reason for the ghost is, presumably, electrical cross talk in the
multiplexer of the cryogenic readout electronics. In this case, the ghost
appears in other arrays of the same detector. The images of the asteroid
 Ceres observed by FIS01 are shown in Fig. 7 , as an
example. To enhance the effect of the cross talk, the color level has been
adjusted. Since the position and strength of the cross talk are stable,
it should be possible to remove it from the original.

 Another possible degradation of the image quality comes from the
detector’s transient response. For pointed observations, the detector
scans a source, both forward and backward on the same pixel. The effect
of transient response has been evaluated for each observation, and is not
significant for slow scan observations.

 4.2 Detector Performance

 The readout method for the FIS detectors is based on a Capacitive
Trans-Impedance Amplifier (CTIA) using newly developed cryogenic devices
 (Nagata et al., 2004 ) . Although the CTIA has a wide dynamic range, the
linearity is rather poor, and the effective bias on the detectors drifts. In
laboratory measurements, the relation between the output signal and the
amount of the stored charge was well calibrated, and the relation is
confirmed in orbit. Therefore, the photo current can be accurately
reproduced from the output signal.

 Charged particle hits are another important influence on detector
performance. About once a minute, charged particles hit a pixel, and in
some cases, the responsivity drifts for between several seconds and several
minutes. Near the South Atlantic Anomaly (SAA), the hit rate of charged
particles is too high to observe the sky signal. After passing the SAA
region, the detector responsivity increases significantly and relaxes
gradually with a decay on the order of hours. To cure the effect of the
SAA, bias boosting is applied just after passing through the SAA. By
increasing the bias voltage to breakdown for a short time, the detector
responsivity quickly relaxes to a stable level.

 Finally, the pixel-to-pixel variations of the detector responsivity are
shown in Fig. 8 , which are the relative detector
signals in the observation of flat sky. The unevenness of the detector
responsivity could come from the non-uniformity of the effective detector
bias, due to the offset of the readout electronics. This is particularly
an issue for the LW detector, because of its small bias voltage. In
addition, due to variations of the spectral response for each pixel in
the LW detector, it has poor flatness as compared to the SW detector.

 4.3 Photometric Calibration

 For absolute calibration, several kinds of astronomical sources are used
— well-modeled objects such as asteroids, planets, stars and galaxies,
as well as the spectra of bright IR cirrus or interplanetary dust
emission. To calibrate the absolute flux from point like sources, the
aperture photometry procedure must be defined, and then applied to the
observations of asteroids, stars and galaxies with a wide range of
fluxes. The relation between the signal and the source flux for several
sources has a good linear correlation as shown in
Fig. 9 . The uncertainties of the current signal to
flux calibration are no more than 20% for the N60 and WIDE-S bands, and
30% and 40% for the WIDE-L and N160, respectively. Our goal is to reach
an absolute calibration accuracy of about 10% in all bands. We will
achieve this by mitigation of various image artifacts described in this
paper, and through analyses of many repeated observations of our network
of well-known calibration sources, that are performed continually.

 Comparing the signals of the sky brightness measured by FIS and DIRBE on
COBE, which provide a well calibrated infrared sky map, we can obtain the
absolute calibration for sky brightness.
The observations of bright IR
cirrus regions with no significant small scale structure are compared with
values measured by DIRBE to make an absolute calibration. The resulting
calibration, however, disagrees with the calibration derived from the
point like sources by a factor of about two. The absolute calibration for
diffuse sources still has a large uncertainty due to the difficulty of
baseline estimation. Furthermore, the contribution of detector transient
response differs between the two calibration methods.

 According to the absolute calibration derived from the compact sources,
the nominal detection limits evaluated from the signal-to-noise ratio of
the detected sources are listed in Table 2 . The
performance of the pointed observation is demonstrated by
 Matsuura et al. ( 2007 ) .

 4.4 Spectroscopic Performance

 All the spectrometer functions work as they did in the laboratory. After
tuning the control sequence of the movable mirror, interferograms of the
internal blackbody source and sky were measured. The Fourier transformed
spectra of the internal blackbody source are consistent with that taken in
the laboratory, within a 10% error after scaling the responsivity, which
means that the laboratory optical performance is reproduced in space.

 The data reduction to reproduce source spectra is difficult because the
interferogram is distorted by the detector transient response as described
above. Furthermore, a channel fringe in the interferogram also causes
complications. Through observations of well-known bright sources, line
sensitivity and reproducibility of spectra were evaluated. The FTS system
performance is almost same as the estimates from the laboratory
measurements. The line spectrum observed by the FTS is shown in the
Fig. 10 as an example. The spectral resolution of the FTS
in full resolution mode is about 0.19 cm -1 , which agrees well with
the expected value of 0.185 cm -1 . Interim detection limits of the
FTS derived for on-source pixels from observations of bright sources are
roughly 20 Jy, 50 Jy and 100 Jy for continuum spectra in wavenumber of
 65 − 85 65 85 65-85 cm -1 , 90 − 120 90 120 90-120 cm -1 and > 120 absent 120 >120 cm -1 ,
respectively, and, 3 × 10 − 15 3 superscript 10 15 3\times 10^{-15} W ​ m − 2 𝑊 superscript 𝑚 2 Wm^{-2} and
 5 × 10 − 14 5 superscript 10 14 5\times 10^{-14} W ​ m − 2 𝑊 superscript 𝑚 2 Wm^{-2} for line emissions of
[CII](158 \micron \micron \micron ) and [OIII](88 \micron \micron \micron ), respectively, which are
 5 ​ σ 5 𝜎 5\sigma values for one-pointed observation.

 4.5 Comparison with Other Instruments

 FIS strives to provide an improved version of the all-sky survey performed
by IRAS more than two decades ago. The spectral coverage of FIS is
extended to longer wavelength by the WIDE-L and N160 bands, which cover up
to 180 \micron \micron \micron . The longer wavelength coverage allows determination of
the contribution of cold dust components, which perform important roles in
the interaction of the interstellar medium and radiation field. The
advantage of longer wavelength capability has been demonstrated by the
ISOPHOT Serendipity Survey (ISOSS) of ISO (Stickel et al., 2007b ) . Although the
sky coverage of ISOSS is about 15 % percent 15 15\% of the whole sky, the ISOSS 170
 \micron \micron \micron Sky Atlas is utilized in variety of fields, especially, related
to galaxies and cold galactic sources. This precursor survey indicates
the benefit of the longer wavelength bands in the FIS all-sky survey. The
high spatial resolution of the FIS all-sky survey is a great advantage for
source detection and detailed mapping. As shown in above, the spatial
resolution of the FIS, which is about 0.7 acrmin for the N60 and WIDE-S
bands, and about 1 arcmin for the WIDE-L and N160 bands, is more than
five times better than IRAS even in the longer wavelength bands. The
higher spatial resolution comes from the progress of detector technology,
although the 60 cm diameter telescope
of IRAS is comparable with the AKARI telescope (Kaneda et al., 2007a ) . These
advantages of the FIS all-sky survey are demonstrated by Jeong et al. ( 2007 ) and
 Doi et al. ( 2007 ) .

 The point source flux levels at signal-to-noise ratio of five for
one scan are listed in Table 2 . We processed the observed data
using the preliminary version of the data-processing pipeline for
the all-sky survey data. We estimated the system sensitivity based on
a series of observations of asteroids as calibration sources in
the all-sky survey. We used Sussextractor, which is a point source
extraction and photometry software dedicated for the AKARI all-sky
survey (Savage et al., 2007 ) , to make the photometry of the asteroids.
We derived noise levels by observing dark areas of the sky. The
estimated flux levels are significantly degraded from the detection
limits estimated prior to the launch (see Table 3 in Matsuhara et al. ( 2006 ) ).
We found several causes for the degradation. Firstly, we observed
several types of excess noise in orbit. The current version of the
pipeline successfully removed the effects of some types of noises.
Secondly, we also observe the response to point sources is smaller
than we expected. This is partly due to the PSFs described above,
and partly due to the detector AC response. Thirdly, we reduced the
bias voltage for Wide-L and N160 in orbit to stabilize the behaviour
of detectors after irradiation of high-energy particles.
Furthermore, the actual source detection is degraded by various
effects, e.g. frequent glitches due to high energy particles and
low-frequency baseline fluctuation due to the change of the detector
responsivity, in the data reduction process. The potential performance of
90 \micron \micron \micron band (WIDE-S), however, is higher than that of the IRAS
100 \micron \micron \micron band. Unfortunately, the detection limits of the LW
detector, which provides new wavelength bands, are also degraded.
The potential performance of the longer wavelength bands is comparable to or
better than the ISOSS. The galaxy list of ISOSS has a 170 \micron \micron \micron 
completeness limit of about 2 Jy (Stickel et al., 2007a ) , and is useful
for a cross calibration of the all-sky survey. The performance of
the all-sky survey evaluated from an initial mini-survey will be
discussed by Shibai et al. ( 2007b ) .

 The performance of the detailed observations using the pointing
observation mode should be compared with the recent instrument MIPS on
SST. MIPS has advantages in spatial resolution and sensitivity, as a
result of its larger telescope, small pixel scales, and long exposure
capability. The advantage of FIS is that it has four photometric bands
between 50 and 180 \micron \micron \micron , whereas MIPS has only two bands (70
 \micron \micron \micron and 160 \micron \micron \micron ) in the corresponding wavelength range.
Multi-band photometry with FIS is effective for determining a spectral
energy distribution (Kaneda et al., 2007b ; Suzuki et al., 2007 ) . The performance of
the slow scan observation is demonstrated by Matsuura et al. ( 2007 ) , who
reported the detection limit at 90 \micron \micron \micron (WIDE-S) achieves 26 mJy
(3 σ 𝜎 \sigma ) using the observations at the Lockman Hole. In the paper,
they discuss about the source counts, and point out that the number of
sources detected at 90 \micron \micron \micron is significantly smaller at the faint
end compared to the expected values from the model, which explains the
MIPS source counts well. This implies that FIS is a complementary
instrument to MIPS in the SED coverage. In the main observation
phase, the low cirrus region near the South Ecliptic Pole (SEP) is
observed by FIS intensively with almost the same sensitivity at the Lockman
Hole for about 10 square degrees (Matsuhara et al., 2006 ) . The deep survey
near the SEP will become a legacy survey of FIS for extragalactic studies.

 The spectroscopic capability in the far-infrared region is a unique
feature of FIS in contrast to MIPS. Previously, LWS on ISO was available
for far-infrared spectroscopy. The wavelength coverage and the spectral
resolution of LWS in the grating mode are comparable with the FIS
spectrometer. The sensitivity of FIS in the spectrometer mode is not so
excellent as mention above. However, the spectrometer of FIS has the
advantage of high observational efficiency. Since it is an imaging FTS, FIS can
take spectra with arcminute spatial resolution.
For example, FIS could map the M82 galaxy with spectra in several pointed
observations, which correspond to about one hour exposure time.
Furthermore, the spectroscopic serendipity survey by parallel observations
is expected to provide a unique dataset.

 5 Summary

 The Far-Infrared Surveyor was designed to survey the far-infrared region
with four photometric bands within 50 – 180 \micron \micron \micron , with high spatial
resolution and sensitivity. Additionally, a spectroscopic capability was
installed as an imaging Fourier transform spectrometer. All functions of
FIS work very well in orbit. FIS performance is demonstrated in the
initial papers of this volume. The all-sky survey is performed
continuously and should provide a new generation all-sky catalog in the
far-infrared. In addition to the all-sky survey, a large area deep survey
( ∼ 10 similar-to absent 10 \sim 10 square degrees) near the South Ecliptic Pole and many scientific
programs are being executed.

 To bring out the potential of the FIS instrument, the data processing
methods are continuously being improved. Since calibration data are
accumulated constantly by the end of the mission life, the FIS data
quality should be substantially better than that listed here.

 The AKARI project, previously named ASTRO-F, is managed and operated by
the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS) of Japan Aerospace
Exploration Agency (JAXA) in collaboration with the groups in universities
and research institutes in Japan, the European Space Agency, and Korean
group. We thank all the members of the AKARI/ASTRO-F project for their
continuous help and support.
FIS was developed in collaboration with ISAS, Nagoya University, University
of Tokyo, National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
(NICT), National Astronomical Observatory of Japan (NAOJ), and other research
institutes. The AKARI/FIS All-Sky Survey data are processed by the
international team which consists of members from the IOSG (Imprerial
College, UK, Open University, UK, University of Sussex, UK, and
University of Groningen, Netherlands) Consortium, Seoul National University,
Korea, and the Japanese AKARI team. The pointing reconstruction for the
All-Sky Survey mode is performed by the pointing reconstruction team
at European Space Astronomy Center (ESAC). We thank all the members related
to FIS for their intensive efforts toward creating new frontier.
M. Cohen’s contribution to this paper was partially supported by a grant
from the American Astronomical Society. We would like to express thanks to
Dr. Raphael Moreno for providing flux models of giant planets.

 References

 Doi et al. (2002) 
 
Doi Y., et al., 2002, Adv. in Space Research, 30, 2099

 Doi et al. (2007) 
 
Doi Y., et al., 2007, PASJ, 00, 000

 Fujiwara et al. (2003) 
 
Fujiwara M., Hirao T., Kawada M., Shibai H., Matsuura S., Kaneda H., Patrashin M.A., & Nakagawa T.,
2003, Appl. Opt., 42, 2166

 Jeong et al. (2007) 
 
Jeong W-S., et al., 2007, PASJ, 00, 000

 Kaneda et al. (2007a) 
 
Kaneda H., Kim W., Onaka T., Wada T. Ira Y., Sakon I., & Takagi T., 2007a, PASJ, 00, 000

 Kaneda et al. (2007b) 
 
Kaneda H., et al., 2007b, PASJ, 00, 000

 Kessler et al. (1996) 
 
Kessler M.F., et al. 1996, A&A, 315, L27

 Martin and Puplett (1969) 
 
Martin D.H., & Puplett E., 1969, Infrared Phys., 10, 105

 Matsuhara et al. (2006) 
 
Matsuhara, H., et al., 2006, PASJ, 58, 673

 Matsuura et al. (2007) 
 
Matsuura, S., et al., 2007, PASJ, 00, 000

 Murakami et al. (2007) 
 
Murakami H., et al. 2007, PASJ, 00, 000

 Nagata et al. (2004) 
 
Nagata H., Shibai H., Hirao T., Watabe T., Noda M., Hibi Y., Kawada M., & Nakagawa T.,
2004, IEEE Trans. on Elec. Devices, 51, 270

 Nakagawa et al. (2007) 
 
Nakagawa T., et al., 2007, PASJ, 00, 0000

 Onaka et al. (2007) 
 
Onaka T., et al. 2007, PASJ, 00, 000

 Savage et al. (2007) 
 
Savage R., et al. 2007 in preparation

 Shibai H. (2007a) 
 
Shibai H., 2007a, Adv. in Space Research, accepted for publication

 Shibai et al. (2007b) 
 
Shibai H., 2007b, in preparation

 Stickel et al. (2007a) 
 
Stickel, M., Klaas, U., and Lemke, D., 2007a, A&A, 466, 831

 Stickel et al. (2007b) 
 
Stickel, M., Krause, O., Klaas, U., and Lemke, D., 2007b, A&A, 466, 1205

 Suzuki et al. (2007) 
 
Suzuki T., Kaneda H., Nakagawa T., Makiuti S., Doi Y., & Shibai H., 2007, PASJ, 00, 000

 Werner et al. (2004) 
 
Werner M.W., et al. 2004, ApJS, 154, 1

 Table 1: Parameters of FIS AOTs 

 AOT 
 FIS01 
 FIS02 
 FIS03 

 observation mode 
 slow scan 
 pointing 

 observation target 
 compact source 
 area mapping 
 spectroscopy 

 parameters: 

 - target position 
 center of scan area 
 source 

 - reset interval ∗* ∗* footnotemark: ∗ * 
 
 [CDS, 0.25 s, 0.5 s, 1.0 s, 2.0 s] 
 [0.1 s, 0.25 s, 0.5 s, 1.0 s, (2.0 s)] 

 - parameter 1 ∗* ∗* footnotemark: ∗ * 
 
 scan speed 
 spectral resolution 

 [8”/s, 15”/s, (30”/s)] 
 [full res., SED] 

 - parameter 2 
 shift size 
 - 
 array selection 

 [70”, 240”] 
 - 
 [MOD, SW, LW] 

 amount of data ††\dagger ††\dagger footnotemark: † † \dagger 
 
 17.5 MB 
 49.8 MB 

 Notes. 
 
 ∗* ∗* footnotemark: ∗ * 
 Parenthetic values of parameters are option. 
 
 ††\dagger ††\dagger footnotemark: † † \dagger 
 Data size that FIS generates in one pointing observation. 

 Table 2: Flight Performance of FIS 

 BAND 
 N60 
 WIDE-S 
 WIDE-L 
 N160 

 band center 
 65 65 65 
 90 90 90 
 140 140 140 
 160 160 160 
 [ \micron \micron \micron ] 

 effective band width ∗* ∗* footnotemark: ∗ * 
 
 21.7 21.7 21.7 
 37.9 37.9 37.9 
 52.4 52.4 52.4 
 34.1 34.1 34.1 
 [ \micron \micron \micron ] 

 pixel scale 
 26.8 
 26.8 
 44.2 
 44.2 
 [arcsec] 

 pixel pitch 
 29.5 
 29.5 
 49.1 
 49.1 
 [arcsec] 

 point spread functions: 

 - measured FWHM ††\dagger ††\dagger footnotemark: † † \dagger 
 
 37 ± plus-or-minus \pm 1 
 39 ± plus-or-minus \pm 1 
 58 ± plus-or-minus \pm 3 
 61 ± plus-or-minus \pm 4 
 [arcsec] 

 flat field: 

 - variation ‡‡\ddagger ‡‡\ddagger footnotemark: ‡ ‡ \ddagger 
 
 19% 
 14% 
 43% 
 53% 

 5 ​ σ 5 𝜎 5\sigma flux level: 

 - survey mode $currency-dollar\$ $currency-dollar\$ footnotemark: $ currency-dollar \$ 
 
 2.4 
 0.55 
 1.4 
 6.3 
 [Jy] 

 - pointing mode ∥∥\| ∥∥\| footnotemark: ∥ ∥ \| 
 
 110 
 34 
 350 
 1350 
 [mJy] 

 Notes. 
 
 ∗* ∗* footnotemark: ∗ * 
 Effective band width for the given band center under
the assumption of ν ​ F ν = c ​ o ​ n ​ s ​ t 𝜈 subscript 𝐹 𝜈 𝑐 𝑜 𝑛 𝑠 𝑡 \nu F_{\nu}=const . 
 
 ††\dagger ††\dagger footnotemark: † † \dagger 
 FWHM derived from Gaussian fitting of PSFs constructed
from observations of asteroids in the photometer mode. 
 
 ‡‡\ddagger ‡‡\ddagger footnotemark: ‡ ‡ \ddagger 
 Relative variations (standard deviations) to the averages for each array. 
 
 $currency-dollar\$ $currency-dollar\$ footnotemark: $ currency-dollar \$ 
 Point source flux level with signal-to-noise ratio of 5 for one scan in the
all-sky survey mode. 
 
 ∥∥\| ∥∥\| footnotemark: ∥ ∥ \| 
 Point source flux level for one-pointed observation by FIS01
with 8”/sec scan speed and 2 sec integration time, which include both detector
and source noises. 

 \FigureFile 

 (80mm,70mm)figure1.eps

 Figure 1: A picture of FIS at final integration. The top cover is removed
to show the FIS optics. The orientation of the FIS is the same as
in Fig. 2 

 \FigureFile 

 (150mm,100mm)figure2.eps

 Figure 2: Drawings of the FIS optical configuration. The major optical
components are shown with labels. The FIS instrument provides two
functions — the scanner (left side) and the spectrometer (right
side), which use different optical paths. Each function is
selected by rotating the filter wheel. 

 \FigureFile 

 (80mm,105mm)figure3.eps

 Figure 3: Details of the FOVs of FIS. The upper panel shows the FOVs in
the scanner mode. The FOVs measured in orbit are drawn on the
designed FOVs with light gray. The detector’s field-of-views are
shifted from the designed location, which is referred to the
boresight of the telescope. The misalignments of each array are
about one pixel. The major axis of the arrays is rotated by 26.5
degrees in the scan direction to improve the grid pitch in the
cross-scan direction. The lower panel shows FOVs in the
spectrometer mode, in which WIDE-S and WIDE-L are active. The
misalignment of each array is larger than in the scanner mode.
The accuracy of the measured alignment is about half of a pixel
size. Inactive pixels are indicated by hatching. 

 \FigureFile 

 (80mm,55mm)figure4.eps

 Figure 4: Plots of the system spectral responses of the FIS photometric
bands. These shapes are obtained from spectral measurements of
optical components and detectors. The achieved optical efficiency
is nearly 50% for all bands, except N60. This plot is typical,
however, pixel-to-pixel variation can be seen. 

 \FigureFile 

 (160mm,100mm)figure5.eps

 Figure 5: Observation sequences of each AOT are illustrated on the real
signal of the SW detector. The top panel shows the sequence for
FIS01, which has two round trips with different offsets to the
target position in the cross-scan direction. The middle panel is
for FIS02, which has one round trip. In pre- and post-calibration,
calibration lamps are turned on for two minutes with the shutter
closed. At the turning points, calibration lamps are illuminated
for about eight seconds with the shutter closed. The bottom panel
indicate the sequence of FIS03, which is for spectroscopy. During
pre calibration, the internal blackbody source is activated, and
the reference spectra are taken for about six minutes. In the
following 12 minutes, sky spectra are observed continuously.
Signals before pre-calibration and after post-calibration are the
one-minute calibration for the all-sky survey.

 \FigureFile 

 (150mm,100mm)figure6.eps

 Figure 6: The PSF for each band constructed from the observations of
asteroids (data points) with the Gaussian fit (thin line) at the
central part. Expected PSFs from the optical model are indicated
by dotted lines. There are significant enhancement at the tails
of the PSFs in all bands.

 \FigureFile 

 (150mm,70mm)figure7.eps

 Figure 7: A demonstration of the imaging quality of FIS. The raw image
of the asteroid Ceres for each band is shown in each panel,
observed by FIS01. The panels are N60, WIDE-S, WIDE-L, and N160
(from left to right). The color scale is modified to enhance the
lower signal level. The ghost signals are seen in all bands,
especially for narrow bands. In the images of the SW detector,
cross talk signal is clearly seen along both array axes.

 \FigureFile 

 (80mm,65mm)figure8.eps

 Figure 8: The histogram of the pixel variation for relative
responsivity. The horizontal axis is normalized by the mean value
for each array excluding the anomalously high responsivity pixels,
which are marked by asterisks in the figure. The variation in the
LW detector is larger than in the SW detector.

 \FigureFile 

 (150mm,90mm)figure9.eps

 Figure 9: The relation between the output signal and the model flux of
point sources for each band, observed in the pointing mode by FIS01.
The output signal is the integrated power within the definite
aperture size, and is corrected by the calibration lamps. Clear
linear relations between the source flux and the output signal are
seen in all bands for more than one order of magnitude in flux range.

 \FigureFile 

 (80mm,70mm)figure10.eps

 Figure 10: A line shape detected by the FTS. This plot is a close up
around the [CII](157.74 \micron \micron \micron ) line observed in M82. Filled
circles with error bars are the measured spectrum without
apodization in arbitrary units. The line is the best fit curve
using a sinc function. The derived spectral resolution from the
fitting is about 0.19 cm -1 , which is consistent with the
expected resolution of 0.185 cm -1 .

 ◄ 
 
 Feeling
lucky? 
 
 Conversion
report 
 Report
an issue 
 View original
on arXiv ► 

 Copyright 
 Privacy Policy 

 Generated on Mon Mar 18 18:16:18 2024 by L a T e XML