[0811.2867] Performance of the Imaging Fourier Transform Spectrometer with Photoconductive Detector Arrays: An Application for the AKARI Far-Infrared Instrument 

 \SetRunningHead 
 M. KawadaImaging FTS for AKARI
 \Received 2008/06/00 \Accepted 2008/00/00

 \KeyWords 
 instrumentation:spectrographs — space vehicles:instruments — techniques:spectroscopic

 Performance of the Imaging Fourier Transform Spectrometer
with Photoconductive Detector Arrays:

 An Application for the AKARI Far-Infrared Instrument

 Mitsunobu Kawada 1 1 affiliation: Graduate School of Sciences, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan 

Hidenori Takahashi 2 2 affiliation: Gunma Astronomical Observatory, 6860-86 Nakayama,
Takayama, Agatsuma, Gunma 377-0702, Japan 

Noriko Murakami 1 1 affiliationmark: 3 3 affiliation: Bisei Astronomical Observatory, Okura, Bisei-cho,
Ibara-shi, Okayama 714-1411, Japan 

Hiroshi Matsuo 4 4 affiliation: Advanced Technology Center,
National Astronomical Observatory of Japan,
2-21-1 Osawa, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-8588, Japan 

Yoko Okada 5 5 affiliation: Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, JAXA,
3-1-1 Yoshinodai, Sagamihara 229-8510, Japan 

Akiko Yasuda 5 5 affiliationmark: 

Shuji Matsuura 5 5 affiliationmark: 

Mai Shirahata 5 5 affiliationmark: 

Yasuo Doi 6 6 affiliation: Department of General System Studies,
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku,
Tokyo 153-8902, Japan 

Hidehiro Kaneda 5 5 affiliationmark: 

Takafumi Ootsubo 

 5 5 affiliationmark: 
Takao Nakagawa 5 5 affiliationmark: 

and
Hiroshi Shibai 1 1 affiliationmark: 7 7 affiliation: Graduate School of Sciences, Osaka University,
1-1 Machikaneyama-cho,Toyonaka-shi,Osaka 560-0043,Japan 
 
 kawada@u.phys.nagoya-u.ac.jp 

 Abstract

 We have developed an imaging Fourier transform spectrometer (FTS) for
space-based far-infrared astronomical observations. The FTS employs a
newly developed photoconductive detector arrays with a capacitive
trans-impedance amplifier, which makes the FTS a completely unique
instrument. The FTS was installed as a function of the far-infrared
instrument (FIS: Far-Infrared Surveyor) on the Japanese astronomical
satellite, AKARI, which was launched on February 21, 2006 (UT) from
the Uchinoura Space Center. The FIS-FTS had been operated for more
than one year before liquid helium ran out on August 26, 2007. The
FIS-FTS was operated nearly six hundreds times, which corresponds to
more than one hundred hours of astronomical observations and almost
the same amount of time for calibrations. As expected from laboratory
measurements, the FIS-FTS performed well and has produced a large
set of astronomical data for valuable objects. Meanwhile, it becomes
clear that the detector transient effect is a considerable factor
for FTSs with photoconductive detectors. In this paper, the
instrumentation of the FIS-FTS and interesting phenomena related
to FTS using photoconductive detectors are described, and future
applications of this kind of FTS system are discussed.

 1 Introduction

 Observations using infrared wavelengths are progressing in many fields
of science and technology. In astrophysics, space-based infrared
astronomy has become a powerful tool for deep insights into the universe
ever since the first astronomical satellite, IRAS, was launched in 1983
 (Neugebauer et al., 1984 ) .
The earliest instruments for infrared astronomy were photometers using
discrete detectors, and observations become gradually more precise,
driven by the evolution of infrared technology. The development of
detector arrays allowed detailed images to be recorded efficiently,
and when coupled with spectrometers, provided detailed imaging
spectroscopy. The COBE satellite
 (Mather, 1993 ) ,
which was launched in 1989, measured the precise spectra and absolute
power of the cosmic infrared background radiation.
IRTS (Murakami et al., 1996 ) , which was launched in 1995 as the first
Japanese infrared telescope in space, have mapped 7 % of the sky,
and have provided near- (Tanaka et al., 1996 ) , mid- (Onaka et al., 1996 ) , and
far- (Shibai et al., 1996 ) infrared spectra and line intensities as well as
sub-millimeter brightness distribution (Hirao et al., 1996 ) .
The ISO (Kessler et al., 1996 ; Kessler, 2002 ) ,
which was launched in 1995, provided a lot of infrared spectra for
various objects, and emphasized the importance of studying infrared
lines for investigations of the interstellar medium. The Spitzer Space
Telescope
 (Werner et al., 2004 ) ,
the infrared astronomical satellite launched in 2003, provides
valuable images and spectra for various objects, but has only limited
spectroscopic capabilities in the far infrared wavelength range.

 The AKARI satellite (Murakami et al., 2007 ) 
is the Japanese infrared astronomical satellite, which was launched in
2006. AKARI has a 68.5 cm diameter cooled telescope (Kaneda et al., 2007 ) 
and two focal plane instruments; one is the IRC (InfraRed Camera)
 (Onaka et al., 2007 ) 
for near to mid infrared range and the other is the FIS (Far-Infrared
Surveyor) (Kawada et al., 2007 ) 
for far-infrared imaging photometry. The FIS has spectroscopic
capabilities as an optional function, provided by a Fourier transform
spectrometer (FTS) (Takahashi et al., 2003 ) .
The FTS of the FIS (hereafter FIS-FTS) is the second spectrometer for
far-infrared astronomy operated in space after FIRAS (Mather et al., 1993 ) 
of the COBE satellite. A unique feature of the FIS-FTS is the imaging
FTS design using a photoconductive detector system. The design,
operation and performance of the FIS-FTS are described in this paper;
the data reduction and the calibration of the FIS-FTS are treated in
the companion paper (Murakami et al., 2008 ) ,
and some scientific results related to the FIS-FTS are discussed by
some authors (Yasuda et al., 2008 ; Okada et al., 2008 ; Takahashi et al., 2008 ) .
In the next section, the optical and mechanical design of the FIS-FTS
are described. After explaining the operation of the FIS-FTS in
section 3, the performance and some interesting properties of the
FIS-FTS are presented in section 4. In section 5, we discuss special
topics related to the FIS-FTS and future applications of FTSs with
photoconductive detectors.

 2 Instrumentation

 2.1 Optical Design

 \FigureFile 

 (150mm,100mm)figure1.eps

 Figure 1: Drawings of the FIS optical configuration. The major optical
components are shown with labels. The FIS instrument provides two
functions — the photometer (right side) and the spectrometer (left
side), which use different optical paths. Each function is
selected by rotating the filter wheel. 

 The FIS-FTS adopts a polarized Michelson-type Martin-Puplett
interferometer (MPI) design (Martin & Puplett, 1969 ) .
MPIs require a linear polarized light for input, which is then divided
into two polarization components by a polarizing beam splitter.
The two components are interfered as an elliptically polarized beam
according to the incident spectrum and the optical path difference
between the two components. By picking up the polarization component
parallel or perpendicular to the polarization angle of the incident
beam, interferograms can be recorded.

 A schematic view of the FIS-FTS optics is shown in figure 1 .
The photometer and the FTS are individually selected by rotating the
filter wheel. The collimator and camera optics, some optical filters
and the detector system are commonly used in both functions. The
incident beam ( I 0 subscript 𝐼 0 I_{0} ) is collimated by the collimator mirror and passed
to the input polarizer (PL IN ) on the filter wheel through the blocking
filters (BF#1 & #2).
The input polarizer (PL IN ) produces linear polarization; the reflected
component ( I r subscript 𝐼 𝑟 I_{r} )
goes into the interferometer and the transmitted component ( I t subscript 𝐼 𝑡 I_{t} )
is absorbed by a black wall. The linear polarized beam ( I r subscript 𝐼 𝑟 I_{r} )
is divided by the polarizing beam splitter (PL BS ), whose polarization angle
is rotated by 45 degrees to the polarization angle of the incident beam.
The two divided components ( I r ∥ I_{r\parallel} and I r ⟂ subscript 𝐼 perpendicular-to 𝑟 absent I_{r\perp} )
are reflected by roof-top mirrors; one is fixed and the other is
movable to produce an optical path difference. Since the polarization
angle of each component is rotated by 90 degrees by roof-top mirrors, the
reflected component ( I r ∥ I_{r\parallel} )
is transmitted and the transmitted component ( I r ⟂ subscript 𝐼 perpendicular-to 𝑟 absent I_{r\perp} )
is reflected by the beam splitter (PL BS ). The two interfering beams ( I r ​ i subscript 𝐼 𝑟 𝑖 I_{ri} )
are modulated as an elliptical polarization and divided into two axis
components by the output polarizer (PL OUT ) on the filter wheel, whose polarizing
angle is the same with that of the input polarizer. The component reflected
by the output polarizer ( I r i ∥ I_{ri\parallel} )
is focused on the LW detector through the low pass filter (WL) which covers
the 55 – 90 cm -1 wavenumber range (110 – 180 \micron \micron \micron in wavelength),
and the other component ( I r ​ i ⟂ subscript 𝐼 perpendicular-to 𝑟 𝑖 absent I_{ri\perp} ) is focused on the SW detector through
the low pass filter (WS) which covers the 90 – 200
cm -1 wavenumber range (50 – 110 \micron \micron \micron in wavelength).
The modulated powers on each detector ( I r i ∥ I_{ri\parallel} and I r ​ i ⟂ subscript 𝐼 perpendicular-to 𝑟 𝑖 absent I_{ri\perp} )
are described for incident photons of a wavenumber σ 𝜎 \sigma ,

 I r i ∥ ​ ( σ ) = I r 2 ​ ( 1 + c ​ o ​ s ​ 2 ​ π ​ σ ​ x ) , I r ​ i ⟂ ​ ( σ ) = I r 2 ​ ( 1 − c ​ o ​ s ​ 2 ​ π ​ σ ​ x ) I_{ri\parallel}(\sigma)=\frac{I_{r}}{2}(1+cos2\pi\sigma x),\\
I_{ri\perp}(\sigma)=\frac{I_{r}}{2}(1-cos2\pi\sigma x) 

 where the x 𝑥 x 
is the optical path difference. As shown in eq. ( 2.1 ),
the polarities of the modulated signals are opposite each other.

 To reduce the size of the optics, the incident angles of the polarizers
are 30 and 60 degrees instead of the usual 45 degrees. All polarizers
are wire grid type filters. The structure of the
filters is thin copper wires printed on thin Mylar film mounted in a
stainless frame. All optical filters used in the FIS-FTS are listed
in table 1 , which were supplied by QMC Ins. Ltd.
As the result of the optical configuration of MPIs, only one fourth of
the incident power is utilized for each detector for unpolarized
incident flux, even in the ideal case. The actual optical efficiency is
degraded by the quality of the optical components. Furthermore, the
modulation efficiency depends on the optical alignment of the
interferometer and on the detector properties. The performance of the
FIS-FTS is described in section 4 .

 Table 1: Specifications of optical filters using in the FIS-FTS. 

 GROUP 
 NAME 
 TYPE 
 EFFECTIVE SIZE 
 PROPERTY 

 blocking filter 
 BF#1 
 multi mesh LPF 
 27 mm ϕ italic-ϕ \phi 

 σ c ​ u ​ t subscript 𝜎 𝑐 𝑢 𝑡 \sigma_{cut} = 430 cm -1 

 BF#2 
 multi mesh LPF 
 27 mm ϕ italic-ϕ \phi 

 σ c ​ u ​ t subscript 𝜎 𝑐 𝑢 𝑡 \sigma_{cut} = 300 cm -1 

 polarizing filter 
 PL IN 
 
 wire grid 
 30 mm ϕ italic-ϕ \phi 

 PL BS 
 
 wire grid 
 85 mm ϕ italic-ϕ \phi 

 PL OUT 
 
 wire grid 
 56 mm ϕ italic-ϕ \phi 

 shaping filter 
 WS 
 multi mesh LPF 
 22 mm ϕ italic-ϕ \phi 

 σ c ​ u ​ t subscript 𝜎 𝑐 𝑢 𝑡 \sigma_{cut} = 218 cm -1 (for SW) 

 WL 
 multi mesh LPF 
 22 mm ϕ italic-ϕ \phi 

 σ c ​ u ​ t subscript 𝜎 𝑐 𝑢 𝑡 \sigma_{cut} = 90 cm -1 (for LW) 

 Notes: All filters were supplied by QMC Instruments Ltd. 

 The FIS-FTS has two internal calibration sources; one consists of
micro-lamps to monitor the detector responsivity and the other is a
small blackbody source, whose temperature is controllable up to about
50K. The blackbody source is put at the input of the interferometer
opposite to the input polarizer. The attenuation factor of the small
blackbody source relative to the sky signal is about 10 − 3 superscript 10 3 10^{-3} 
due to its small aperture size of 0.7 mm ϕ italic-ϕ \phi .
As the results of the small aperture size of the internal blackbody
source, the effects of vignetting for pixels at the edge of the
detector arrays and the modulation efficiency due to the misalignment
of the two beams are smaller than for sky signals.
Furthermore, the polarity of the blackbody interferograms is opposite
to those for astronomical sources, since the transmitted beam is used
for the internal blackbody source.

 2.2 Mechanical Design

 To realize the interferometer described above, the mechanical and
thermal designs were optimized for the operation in space and
cryogenic environment. The fundamental mechanical component of the
interferometer is the mirror driving mechanism which produces the
optical path difference between the two interfering beams. The
driving mechanism for the FIS-FTS is based on the mechanism of the
CIRS instrument on the Cassini spacecraft (Kunde et al., 1996 ) .
The roof-top mirror is mounted on a moving coil supported by four
parallel tri-symmetrical leaf springs made of phosphor bronze,
although the CIRS adopts a moving magnet. The coil, made of
superconducting wire to reduce power dissipation, is enclosed in a
magnet made of rare earth metals, which is designed to optimize both
of the magnetic field and weight. The driving mechanism of the FIS-FTS
is shown in figure 2 .
The traveling length of the mirror driver is about ± plus-or-minus \pm 9.2 mm
from the mechanical neutral position. The optical zero is set at the
offset position about the half of the near side span. As the result of
this configuration, the maximum optical path difference is about
27.6 mm (twice of 13.8 mm) and the shorter side is about 9.2 mm.

 \FigureFile 

 (80mm,60mm)figure2.eps

 Figure 2: A photograph of the mirror driving mechanism before installing on the FIS
instrument. Optical shield is removed to see the inside of the mechanism. 

 To measure the mirror position, a Heidenhain type optical scale is
adopted. The optical scale and sensor optics used are from a
commercial grade Heidenhain LIP-401P module. The sensor unit,
however, is modified because the original module does not work at
cryogenic temperatures. The resolution of the mirror position is 1 \micron \micron \micron 
at ambient temperature (half of the scale pitch), corresponding to 2 \micron \micron \micron 
in optical path difference. However, the actual step size is reduced
at the operation temperature of about 3K, because of its thermal
contraction. Since we did not calibrate the scale in laboratory, we
have to calibrate the scale in space using well known astronomical
lines. Unfortunately, we have no sensor to detect the optical zero
position. The optical zero position must be determined from the
interferograms themselves. The specifications of the mirror
mechanism is summarized in table 2 
with general properties of the FIS-FTS.

 The mirror driving mechanism is quite fragile, because of its
requirements of optical accuracy and high mobility to reduce power
consumption. This is not a problem for operation in space, but is
troublesome as a result of the strong vibrations experienced during
the launch. To survive the launch, a launch lock mechanism was adopted
which fixes all movable parts by electromagnetic force during launch.
The launch lock mechanism worked very well and the interferometer works
as well in space as it did in the laboratory.

 Table 2: Specifications of the FIS-FTS. 

 Imaging Fourier Transform Spectrometer for Far-Infrared Surceyor 

 Optics 
 Polarized Michelson Interferometer 
 Martin-Puplett type 

 Mirror driving mechanism 
 leaf springs axis support with voice coil actuator 

 Position Sensor 
 optical scale (2 μ 𝜇 \mu m in o.p.d. ∗* ∗* footnotemark: ∗ * ) 
 no zero path detector 

 Spectral coverage 
 55 – 200 cm -1 
 
 50 – 180 μ 𝜇 \mu m 

 Maximum o.p.d. ∗* ∗* footnotemark: ∗ * ( L 𝐿 L ) 
 -0.9 – +2.8 cm 

 Spectra resolution (1/2 L 𝐿 L ) 
 0.19 cm -1 (full res. mode) 
 1.2 cm -1 (SED mode) 
 without apodization 

 Mirror scan speed 
 
 ∼ similar-to \sim 0.08 cm s -1 

 Detector system 
 2D photoconductive detector arrays with CTIAs ††\dagger ††\dagger footnotemark: † † \dagger 

 Detector unit name 
 SW 
 LW 

 Detector type 
 monolithic Ge:Ga array 
 stressed Ge:Ga array 

 Array format 
 3 × \times 20 
 3 × \times 15 

 Pixel size 
 0.5 (0.55) mm 
 0.9 (1.0) mm 
 (pixel pitch) 

 Pixel FOV 
 26.8 × \times 26.8 arcsec 2 
 
 44.2 × \times 44.2 arcsec 2 

 PSF ‡‡\ddagger ‡‡\ddagger footnotemark: ‡ ‡ \ddagger (model) 
 
 P F ​ T ​ S ​ ( x , y ) = P p ​ h ​ o ​ t ​ ( x − 7 ​ " , y ) + P p ​ h ​ o ​ t ​ ( x + 7 ​ " , y ) subscript 𝑃 𝐹 𝑇 𝑆 𝑥 𝑦 subscript 𝑃 𝑝 ℎ 𝑜 𝑡 𝑥 7 " 𝑦 subscript 𝑃 𝑝 ℎ 𝑜 𝑡 𝑥 7 " 𝑦 P_{FTS}(x,y)=P_{phot}(x-7",y)+P_{phot}(x+7",y) 
; ( x 𝑥 x : major axis of array) 

    FWHM 
 44” / 39” 
 57” / 53” 
 (major/minor) 

 Spectral coverage 
 85 – 200 cm -1 
 
 55 - 90 cm -1 

 Sampling rate 
 85.336Hz 
 170.672Hz 

 Notes. 
 
 ∗* ∗* footnotemark: ∗ * 
 optical path difference 
 
 ††\dagger ††\dagger footnotemark: † † \dagger 
 Charge Trans-Impedance Amplifiers 
 
 ‡‡\ddagger ‡‡\ddagger footnotemark: ‡ ‡ \ddagger 
 Point Spread Function for the photometer: P p ​ h ​ o ​ t = ε ​ e − ( x 2 + y 2 ) / 2 ​ σ 1 2 + ( 1 − ε ) ​ e − ( x 2 + y 2 ) / 2 ​ σ 2 2 subscript 𝑃 𝑝 ℎ 𝑜 𝑡 𝜀 superscript 𝑒 superscript 𝑥 2 superscript 𝑦 2 2 superscript subscript 𝜎 1 2 1 𝜀 superscript 𝑒 superscript 𝑥 2 superscript 𝑦 2 2 superscript subscript 𝜎 2 2 P_{phot}=\varepsilon e^{-(x^{2}+y^{2})/2{\sigma_{1}}^{2}}+(1-\varepsilon)e^{-(x^{2}+y^{2})/2{\sigma_{2}}^{2}} ; 
 ε 𝜀 \varepsilon = 0.8; σ 1 subscript 𝜎 1 \sigma_{1} = 14.2”; σ 2 subscript 𝜎 2 \sigma_{2} = 40.0” (for SW),
 ε 𝜀 \quad\varepsilon = 0.65; σ 1 subscript 𝜎 1 \sigma_{1} = 17.0”; σ 2 subscript 𝜎 2 \sigma_{2} = 46.5” (for LW) 

 2.3 Detector System

 The FIS-FTS is an imaging FTS incorporating two, two-dimensional
detector arrays. The detectors for the FIS-FTS are common with the
photometer of the FIS instrument. There are two sets of detector array,
one is a monolithic Ge:Ga array which covers 90 – 200 cm -1 
(50 – 110 \micron \micron \micron ) (SW)
 (Fujiwara et al., 2003 ; Shirahata et al., 2004 ) 
and the other is a compact stressed Ge:Ga array for 55 – 90 cm -1 
(110 – 180 \micron \micron \micron ) (LW) (Doi et al., 2002 ) .
The readout method of both detectors is a Charge Trans-Impedance
Amplifier (CTIA) realized by cryogenic Silicon MOS-FETs
 (Nagata et al., 2004 ) .
The CTIA integrates the photo-current of detector and is must be
discharged periodically. The actual detector system has
non-linearity due to the CTIA circuit itself, and additionally, the
responsivity changes due to the drift of the effective detector bias
voltage during the charge integration. Furthermore, extrinsic
photoconductive detectors have a transient response with properties
depending on both the background flux and the modulation amplitude
 (Kaneda et al., 2002 ) .
These properties of the detector system make it difficult to analyze
the interferometer output. In particular, since FTSs measure the
modulation of the signal in the time domain, understanding the detector
transient response is critical. Effects of these properties on the
interferograms and spectra are described later.

 3 Operation

 The FIS-FTS is operated in time domain. The moving mirror is controlled
without mirror position feedback. That is, the mirror position is
controlled by certain fixed pattern of the driving current. The driving
current pattern is optimized to drive the mirror with constant speed.
Sampling timing is also determined in the time domain and not in the
optical phase domain. As a result, the sampling interval is not
constant in optical path difference, but constant in time.
The nominal mirror speed is nearly 0.08 cm sec -1 
in optical path difference. The actual mirror speed has a global trend
which is slower at the travel limits; the variation of the speed is
less than ± plus-or-minus \pm 5%
across the whole travel span. The amplitude of the mirror speed
fluctuation is also less than ± plus-or-minus \pm 5%
at the Nyquist sampling frequency without any disturbance. The normal
sampling rate is nearly five times higher than the highest Nyquist
frequency, which is helpful for reconstructing the interferograms from
the integrated signal. After installing the FIS-FTS into the AKARI
satellite, a mechanical interference between the mechanical cooler
 (Nakagawa et al., 2007 ) 
and the mirror driving mechanism was recognized. The driving speed is
modulated by the 15 Hz drive frequency of the cooler, with an amplitude
of about ± plus-or-minus \pm 25%
of the mirror speed, reduced to about ± plus-or-minus \pm 15%
in space. Since the interference frequency is almost out of the optical
modulation frequency corresponding to the effective wavelength ( < < 15Hz),
its influence can not be seen in spectra.
The sampling timing and the mirror driving pattern are synchronized by
the FIS-FTS controller. All pixel signals for each detector array are
acquired at nearly the same time as the mirror position.
The data reduction method of the FIS-FTS is described by Murakami et al. ( 2008 ) .

 For observation using the FIS-FTS, an astronomical observation template (AOT)
is provided (see Kawada et al. ( 2007 ) ),
in which the calibration and the observation sequence are combined with
some selectable parameters. Two driving current patterns are prepared
for observations; one supports full travel span for high spectral
resolution (full-res. mode) and the other reduces the span to one fourth
but enables four times more scans (low-res. mode, which is called SED
(Spectral Energy Distribution) mode).
Driving speeds are almost the same in both modes.

 4 Performances

 4.1 Optical Performances

 4.1.1 Modulation Efficiency

 Optical performance of the interferometer is indicated by the modulation
efficiency, which is defined as a ratio of the peak value of interferograms
at the optical zero position to the constant signal level (constant part in
eq. ( 2.1 )). The modulation efficiency is primarily
affected by two factors; filter properties and optical alignment.

 Three polarizing filters are used in the FIS-FTS; all the same type of
wire grid filter. The polarizing efficiency was measured for each in the
laboratory and is more than 90%
for all. The resulting modulation efficiency due to the three polarizing
filters in the MPIs configuration is about 80%.
The misalignment of the polarization angle of three filters and ridge
angle of roof-top mirrors reduce this efficiency. Since the
misalignment of these angles was expected to be on the order of one
degree, the effect of the misalignment to the modulation efficiency is
negligible (less than 1%).
A major factor affecting the modulation efficiency is the misalignment
of optical axes of the two beams, which is generated by the roof-top
mirrors. That is, the opening angle of the roof-top mirrors and the
alignment of the tilt angle to the optical axis. The opening angle of
the roof-top mirrors is less than one arcmin from 90 degrees, which was
measured in the laboratory at cryogenic temperature. The remaining
misalignment of two beams is due to the tilt of the roof-top mirrors.
The misalignment of the two beam axes can be derived from the
interferograms. If the tilting angles of the two roof-top mirrors are
the same, the optical zero will appear at the same time for all pixels.
The actual optical zero for each pixel, however, appear at different
times; there is a delay along the major axis of the detector array.
From the measurement of this delay, the displacement angle of the two
roof-top mirrors could be estimated at about 3.5 arcmin in orbit, which
corresponds to a misalignment of about 7 arcmin for the two beams. This
value is consistent with the laboratory measurement, and means that
there is no degradation in optical alignment due to the launch. The
expected optical modulation efficiency was calculated for several
degrees of misalignment. As shown in figure 3 ,
the optical modulation efficiency due to the misalignment of two beams
is about 95–85% for LW detector and about 85–60% for SW detector.

 The modulation efficiency can be estimated from the measured signal ratio
of the peak value of the interferogram at the optical zero to the DC value,
which indicates the total incident power containing both coherent and
incoherent components. Due to the transient response of the detectors,
however, it is difficult to estimate the actual modulation efficiency
from the interferograms. In suction 5, we discuss the interferometric
efficiency of the FIS-FTS estimated from the derived spectra, which
include the detector transient response.

 \FigureFile 

 (80mm,60mm)figure3.eps

 Figure 3: Optical modulation efficiency expected as a function of misalignment of
the two beams. Several cases of misalignment are calculated and the seven
arcmin (red line) is the plausible case which is derived from the analysis
of zero path positions (see text for details). 

 4.1.2 Image Quality

 \FigureFile 

 (80mm,60mm)figure4.eps

 Figure 4: The relative responsivity measured by telescope lid, which should be a flat source with
temperature of 35K. The plot show the ratio of the integrated power of derived spectra of
the lid to that of the internal blackbody source (T=52K) or to that of the DC component.
The ratio of the lid to the internal blackbody (filled square) indicate the no uniformity
of the internal blackbody source primarily, though the ratio affected by the spectral
response and the transient response of the detector. The ratios to the DC component (open
square) indicates the interferometric efficiency, which includes the optical modulation
efficiency and the detector transient effect. The plot of this value show wide variety
from pixel to pixel, especially for the LW detector. 

 Image quality, which is a prominent feature of the FIS-FTS, was
evaluated in orbit by observing Neptune with the FTS optics. The image of
Neptune, which can be considered as a point source for the FIS
instrument, was taken by a scanning observation mode. During the
scanning observation, the movable mirror is in free motion away from the
optical zero position ( ∼ similar-to \sim 0.9 cm
in optical path difference). Neptune was observed with the same scanning
mode with the photometer optics. The point spread functions (PSFs) of the
photometer are well described by double Gaussian profiles, whose
parameters are summarized in table 2 .
The resulting PSF of the FIS-FTS is rather broader than that of the
photometer. The width of the PSF along the major axis of the detector
array is wider, but there is no significant difference along the minor
axis. This means that there is little affect on the image quality due
to the FTS optics, i.e. the reflections at the surface of thin film
polarizers. On the other hand, due to the misalignment of the roof-top
mirrors, the image is elongated along the major axis of the detector.
The elongated image of Neptune along the major axis of detector is
consistent with an image derived from a beam misaligned by 7 arcmin,
as described above. The imaging spectroscopic performance is
demonstrated by observations of the Galactic center region
 (Yasuda et al., 2008 ) ,
the star forming regions on the Galactic plane (Okada et al., 2008 ) ,
and nearby galaxies (Takahashi et al., 2008 ) .

 The FIS-FTS measures a wide wavenumber region (55 - 200 cm -1 )
at the same time with two kinds of detector array. To produce the whole
spectrum of a sky position, we have to know the alignment of the field
of views (FOVs) of two detector arrays. The alignment of two arrays was
determined from scanning observations of point like sources. The FOVs
of two detector arrays are not aligned well on the sky as shown in
figure 3 in Kawada et al. ( 2007 ) .
The overlap region of the FOVs for the FIS-FTS is different from that
of the FIS photometer, possibly arising from the alignment of the
filter wheel. The smaller overlap region made it difficult to observe
point like objects with both the arrays simultaneously.

 Another factor affecting the image quality is a pixel-to-pixel
variation in detector responsivity. During ground measurements of the
instrument, the aperture lid of the cryostat was observed with the FIS-FTS as
a flat source. The variations of the integrated signal power were
about ± plus-or-minus \pm 30%
for the SW detector and ± plus-or-minus \pm 50%
for the LW detector, excluding a few extremely high pixels (see
figure 4 ).
Since pixels of the LW detector were made from discrete chips, in
contrast to the monolithic array of the SW detector, it exhibits much
larger variations in the integrated signal power, which is coupled
with the variation of the spectral response of each pixel. In
combination with the internal blackbody source, which is not a flat
source due to the influence of the FIS-FTS optics, we expect to
improve the flatness of each detector to about ± plus-or-minus \pm 15%
and ± plus-or-minus \pm 30%
for the SW and LW detectors, respectively.

 4.2 Performance as a Spectrometer

 4.2.1 Distortion of Interferograms

 An example of the detector signal is shown in
figures 5 (a) and 5 (f).
The output signal is an integration ramp curve with periodic resets
due to the CTIA readout circuit. By differentiating the signal, a
nominal intereferogram including a DC component is derived
(figures 5 (b) and 5 (g)).
The periodic feature in the reset interval as mentioned in
section 2.3 
can be clearly seen. The periodic structure in the reset interval and
random spikes due to cosmic ray hits must be removed. The standard
data reduction flow for the FIS-FTS is described in Murakami et al. ( 2008 ) .
A typical FIS-FTS interferogram after processing by the standard data
reduction tool is shown in figures 5 (c) and
 5 (h).
The left panels in figure 5 
are plots of the LW detector (LW07) and the right panels are of the SW
detector (SW32) using the internal blackbody source in the SED mode.
This interferogram still has asymmetrical feature at the optical zero
position, which can be clearly seen in the LW detector
(figure 5 (c)).
The distortion of the interferogram comes from the detector transient
response (time is from left to right in the figure). Due to the
difference in the time constant between upward and downward signals,
the baseline is decreasing near the optical zero position. The
influence of the distortion of interferograms is discussed in next
section.

 \FigureFile (80mm,50mm)figure5ab.eps 
 
 \FigureFile (80mm,50mm)figure5fg.eps 

 \FigureFile (80mm,60mm)figure5c.eps 
 
 \FigureFile (80mm,60mm)figure5h.eps 

 \FigureFile (80mm,60mm)figure5de.eps 
 
 \FigureFile (80mm,60mm)figure5ij.eps 

 Figure 5: An Example of the FIS-FTS signals, interferograms and spectra as an
demonstration, which is measurement of the internal blackbody taken by the SED mode.
The left panels are plots of the LW detector and the right panels are of the SW
detector. Top panels (a) and (f) are raw signals of the LW07 and SW32 pixels, which
are typical pixels of each detector. Panels of (b) and (g) show differentiations
of raw signal in time domain. The corrected signals of the non-linearity related
to the readout electronics are also plotted on the raw signals. The middle panels
(c) and (h) indicate the averaged interferograms of twelve scans (for same scan
direction). The bottom panels (d) and (i) show raw spectra of the interferograms shown in
(c) and (h). Both real and imaginary part are plotted, and the phase signal are indicated
in (e) and (j). Low frequency structures appeared in (d) and (i) come from the distortion
of the interferograms. The contribution of low frequency components ( < < 50 cm -1 )
are plotted on the interfergrams (c) and (h), which are derived by the inverse Fourier
transformation. 

 4.2.2 Channel Fringes

 As shown in figure 6 ,
there is a strong fringe structure in both SW and LW signals, especially
in the SW. A periodic structure can be seen in the SW interferogram
with about ± plus-or-minus \pm 0.4 cm
periodicity, occurring on both sides of the optical zero position
(figure 6 (a)).
This fringe can be identified to the third order at least, and comes
from multi-beam interference in the detector substrate, which is made
of Ge crystal with 0.5 mm thickness. The optical path difference due to
one reflection is
0.5 mm × \times 4 (refraction index of Ge) × \times 2 = 4 mm,
and the actual value derived from the signal is 3.946 mm. The
reflectivity estimated from the fringe contrast is about 0.4, which is
consistent with reflectivity expected from the refractive index of Ge
(n = 4).

 Another type of channel fringe exists in the FIS-FTS, which can be
clearly seen in the LW interferograms shown in figure 6 (a).
The first order of peaks appear on both sides of the main peak with
about 0.8 cm separation in optical path difference. The corresponding
fringe pitch in the spectra is about 1.21 cm -1 
(figure 6 (b)),
with modulation amplitude significantly smaller than the other fringe
seen in the SW spectrum. The observed fringes are nearly reproduced by
a two parallel multi-reflection model with 4.1 mm gap and with about 20%
reflectivity. A plausible explanation of this phenomena is the two
blocking filters put on the optical path just after the collimator
mirror (BF#1 & #2 in figure 1 ), with a physical
gap of about 4 mm. The fact that this type of
fringe can be seen in only sky signals, and not in the internal
blackbody source, supports the multi-reflection model due to the
blocking filters. The reflectivity of 20%,
however, is rather high compared to the laboratory measurements of the
filters (about 10%).
In SW detector spectrum, this type of fringe is not clear because the
other fringe dominates, but it can be found in the SW interferograms.

 As the result of the fringe structure, the spectral response of the
FIS-FTS changes rapidly with frequency. It is important to correct the
fringe structure to derive line intensities. Details of the treatment
of the fringe in the data reduction are described in Murakami et al. ( 2008 ) .

 4.2.3 Spectral Resolution

 The spectral resolution of the FIS-FTS is evaluated only in orbit
using well known far-infrared lines of several sources. The expected
spectral resolution from the maximum optical path difference
( L ∼ similar-to 𝐿 absent L\sim 2.7 cm)
is about 1/2 L ∼ similar-to 𝐿 absent L\sim 0.19 cm -1 
(rectangle apodization) for the full-res. mode. Some fine structure
lines, like [CII] (63.40 cm -1 ),
[NII] (82.10 cm -1 ),
[OIII] (113.18 cm -1 ),
are detected from many observations. An example of the detected lines
is shown in figure 10 in Kawada et al. ( 2007 ) ,
which is the [CII] line of the M82 galaxy. Physical line broadening of
sources are negligible for the FIS-FTS because of its rather low
spectral resolution ( R ∼ similar-to 𝑅 absent R\sim 300 at [CII] line).
A spectral resolution derived from the observed lines is in good
agreement with the expected value, which means the mirror driving
mechanism works very well over the full travel span. There is no
evidence of wavenumber and pixel position dependence to the spectral
resolution. A wavenumber scale correction, however, is required for
each pixel according to the actual optical path length, which is
longer than scale length because of the off-axis beam. The maximum
scale factor is expected to be less than 0.2%,
for ideal, which is consistent with the observed trend.

 \FigureFile 

 (80mm,50mm)figure6a.eps

 \FigureFile 

 (80mm,60mm)figure6b.eps

 Figure 6: An example of spectra taken by the full res. mode, which are spectra of the
telescope lid. The top panel (a) shows interferograms averaging 6 scans of same
scanning direction. There are sub-structures in the interferograms. The upper
interferogram is of LW07, and the lower one is of SW32. In the SW32 interferogram,
same sub-feature seen in the LW07 can be recognized adding to the own
periodic sub-structures. The bottom panel (b) indicates the Fourier transformed
spectra of the interferograms in the top panel. There are fringe structures in
both SW and LW spectra, whose periods are different from each other. 

 4.3 Stability and Reproducibility

 There are two types of internal calibration sources in the FIS-FTS: one
is a micro lamp put in front of the detectors, the other is a small
blackbody source put at the opposite port of the input polarizer. In
the AOT of the FIS-FTS, the micro lamps are flashed at the beginning
and end of each observation. The duration of each observation is about
30 minutes. The blackbody source is activated prior to observing the
sky for about 7 minutes, with temperature fixed to about 38 K. Since
the blackbody source is quite stable and reproducible, it can be used
as the health check of the FIS-FTS.

 In the one and half year lifetime of the AKARI cryogens, the FIS-FTS
has been operated for about 600 sets of pointed observations,
corresponding to a total
operation time of the FIS-FTS of about 200 hours. Using all observation
data, we monitored the spectra of the internal blackbody source. Except
for a few observations, which may be affected by radiation effects, the
spectra of the internal blackbody source taken by the FIS-FTS are well
reproducible within about ± plus-or-minus \pm 10%
variation. If the spectra are scaled with the integrated power of
spectra, the variation of the spectra is reduced to less than ± plus-or-minus \pm 5%
for whole effective wavenumber region. The FIS-FTS system is quite
stable and reproducible in spectra over the whole observation period.

 The FIS-FTS covers a wide wavenumber region with two kinds of detector
arrays. To get the whole spectrum, we must combine two spectra taken by
both detector arrays. The effective wavenumber overlap of the two
detector arrays is around 85 – 90 cm -1 ,
which is helpful to check the reproducibility of the spectra for both
detector arrays.

 5 Discussions

 The overall spectral response of the FIS-FTS is determined by three
factors, mainly; the filter transmission including multi-beam
interference, the modulation efficiency due to the optical alignment,
and the detector spectral response including the multi-beam reflections.
In addition to the optical response, the transient response of the
photoconductive detectors affects the resulting spectra through the
distortion of the interferograms. In this section, we discuss about the
performance as the FTS with photoconductive detectors.

 The fringe structure in the spectra complicates derivation of line
intensities. Though the multiple reflections in the substrate of the
SW detector contribute to the improvement of the total responsivity,
the mulit-beam interference fringes make it difficult to measure the
spectra. The fringes could be modeled by multi-beam interference of
the detector substrate or two parallel blocking filters. The actual
fringe shape is, however, different from an ideal Airy function with
proper parameters. It may be effects of the convergent beam or
imperfect parallelism of the two flat surfaces. In practice, correction
using templates made from actual data are effective. The continuum
spectra derived from the short range interferograms are equal to the
smoothed spectra with high resolution. If the responsivity at the line
center is higher than the smoothed responsivity, a line to continuum
ratio should be an overestimation, and vice versa. The data analysis
and calibration methods are discussed in detail by Murakami et al. ( 2008 ) .

 The FIS-FTS is the first FTS operating with an extrinsic photoconductive
detector in space. As shown in figure 5 ,
interferograms are distorted by the detector transient response. As the
result of the distorted interferogram, the spectrum has a prominent
structure at lower frequency as shown in figure 5 (d)(i).
The low frequency component comes from the bump in the baseline around
the optical zero position. It can be clearly seen as the inverse
Fourier transform of the low frequency component (see figure
 5 (c)(h)). For the nominal
operation of the FIS-FTS, the effective wavenumber ranges correspond to
the modulation frequency ranges of 3.5 - 7 Hz and 7 - 15 Hz for the LW
detector and the SW detector, respectively. As shown in figure 5 (d)(i),
which are the data of LW07 and SW32 pixels, the real spectrum may be
isolated from the low frequency component, which comes from the detector
transient response artifact. The influence of the detector transient
effect on the spectra are different from pixel to pixel. The LW
detector has an especially wide variation in the transient response
from pixel to pixel. Therefore, the distortion of the real spectrum
by the detector transient effect should be evaluated carefully for
precise analysis. In the zero order analysis, however, it may be
acceptable to ignore the detector transient effects. The calibration
strategy and accuracy of the FIS-FTS are discussed in Murakami et al. ( 2008 ) .

 We can derive the interferometric efficiency by comparing the integrated
power of the spectrum in the effective wavenumber range with the incident
power. The overall efficiencies are around 50% and 20% for SW and
LW detectors, respectively (open squares in figure 4 ).
Considering the optical modulation efficiency
(see 4.1.1 ),
the degradation factors due to the detector transient response are
 ∼ similar-to \sim 0.7 and ∼ similar-to \sim 0.25 for SW and LW detectors, respectively.
In a future paper, we will
discuss the correction of the interferograms in the time domain
considering the physical model of the photoconductive detector response.
The operation of the FIS-FTS, unfortunately, was not optimized for
photoconductive detectors because of our poor experience of FTS with
photoconductive detectors. For future missions, such as SPICA which is
the large infrared telescope mission (Nakagawa & Murakami, 2007 ) ,
a FTS with photoconductive detectors is one of the possible choices for
a high performance spectrometer. To bring out the maximum performance,
we have to study the FTS with photoconductive detectors and a proper
physical model of the photoconductive detector. The data produced by
the FIS-FTS are quite valuable for this purpose as a precursor mission.

 6 Summary

 The FIS-FTS instrument is the first imaging Fourier transform
spectrometer for far-infrared astronomy operated in space. The FIS-FTS
was installed as an function of the Far-Infrared Surveyor (FIS) on the
AKARI satellite, which was launched on February 21, 2006 (UT). All
functions of the FIS-FTS worked in orbit as well as they did in the
laboratory. The performance of the FIS-FTS also achieved the same level
seen in the laboratory. During the one and half year lifetime of the
FIS instrument, the total operation time reached more than 200 hours or
about 600 sets of pointed observations. The sensitivity, spectral response and
resolution are quite stable for all observations.

 A unique feature of the FIS-FTS is the detector system; it is the first
case to adopt a photoconductive detector array to FTSs. Photoconductive
detectors have high responsivity on one side, but severe transient
response effect on the other side. As the result of this combination,
the interferograms taken by the FIS-FTS are distorted and the spectra
are affected by the transient response of the detectors. These
difficulties in measuring the spectra should be avoided or reduced in
future missions, if adopting a FTS with photoconductive detectors.
The FIS-FTS provides good data for studying the detector transient
effects on FTSs.

 The AKARI project, previously named ASTRO-F, is managed and operated by
the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS) of Japan
Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) in collaboration with groups in
universities and research institutes in Japan, the European Space
Agency, and Korea. We thank all the members of the AKARI/ASTRO-F
project for their continuous help and support. FIS was developed in
collaboration with Nagoya University, ISAS, University of Tokyo,
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT),
National Astronomical Observatory of Japan (NAOJ), and other research
institutes. Optical design of the FIS-FTS was done with the help of
JASCO, and mechanical design was done with the Technical Center of
Nagoya University. QMC Instruments Ltd developed optical filters for
the FIS instrument. Many graduate students, especially Mr. Yasushi
Tsuzuku, Mr. Yoshikazu Kuwata, Mr. Hiroshi Utsuno, Mr. Keita Ozawa and
Mr. Tetsuo Imamura, worked for development, fabrication and testing of
the FIS-FTS. We thank all the members related to the FIS-FTS for their
intensive efforts. We really appreciate the useful advice on FTSs
from Prof. Donald E. Jennings at NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center.
We would like to thank Prof. Annie Zavagno and Dr. Jean-Paul Baluteau
at the Laboratoire d’Astrophysique de Marseille in France, Peter Davis
at Blue Sky Spectroscopy in Canada, and Prof. David Naylor and Brad Gom
at the University of Lethbridge in Canada for their contributions to
the FIS-FTS data reduction and valuable discussions.

 References

 Doi et al. (2002) 
 
Doi, Y. et al. 2002, Adv. Space Res., 30, 2099–2104

 Fujiwara et al. (2003) 
 
Fujiwara, M., Hirao, T., Kawada, M., Shibai, H., Matsuura, S., Kaneda, H.,
Patrashin, M. A., & Nakagawa, T. 2003, Appl. Opt., 42, 2166–2173

 Hirao et al. (1996) 
 
Hirao, T., Matsumoto, T., Sato, S., Ganga, K., Lange, A. E.,
Smith, B. J., & Freund, M. 1996, PASJ, 48, L77–L82

 Kaneda et al. (2002) 
 
Kaneda, H., Okamura, Y., Nakagawa, T., & Shibai, H. 2002,
Adv. Space Res., 30, 2105–2110

 Kaneda et al. (2007) 
 
Kaneda, H., Kim, W., Onaka, T., Wada, T., Ita, Y.,
Sakon, I., & Takagi, T. 2007, PASJ, 59, 423–427

 Kawada et al. (2007) 
 
Kawada, M. et al. 2007, PASJ, 59, 389–400

 Kessler et al. (1996) 
 
Kessler, M. F. et al. 1996, A&A, 315, L27–L31

 Kessler (2002) 
 
Kessler, M. F. 2002, Adv. Space Res., 30, 1957–1965

 Kunde et al. (1996) 
 
Kunde, V. G. et al. 1996, Proc. SPIE, 2803, Ed. L. Horn, 162–177

 Martin & Puplett (1969) 
 
Martin, D. H., & Puplett, E. 1969, Infrared Phys., 10, 105

 Mather (1993) 
 
Mather, J. C. 1993, Proc. SPIE, 2019, Ed. M. S. Scholl, 146–157

 Mather et al. (1993) 
 
Mather, J. C., Fixsen, D. J., & Shafer, R. A. 1993,
Proc. SPIE, 2019, Ed. M. S. Scholl, 168–179

 Murakami et al. (1996) 
 
Murakami, H. et al. 1996, PASJ, 48, L41–L46

 Murakami et al. (2007) 
 
Murakami, H. et al. 2007, PASJ, 59, 369–376

 Murakami et al. (2008) 
 
Murakami, N. et al. 2008, PASJ, XX, XXX–XXX

 Nagata et al. (2004) 
 
Nagata H., Shibai H., Hirao T., Watabe T., Noda M., Hibi Y.,
Kawada M., & Nakagawa T. 2004, IEEE Trans. Elec. Devices, 51, 270

 Nakagawa et al. (2007) 
 
Nakagawa, T., et al. 2007, PASJ, 59, 377–387

 Nakagawa & Murakami (2007) 
 
Nakagawa, T., & Murakami, H. 2007, Adv. Space Res., 40, 679–683

 Neugebauer et al. (1984) 
 Neugebauer, G. et al. 1984, ApJ, 278, L1–L6

 Ohyama et al. (2007) 
 
Ohyama, Y. et al. 2007, PASJ, 59, 411–422

 Okada et al. (2008) 
 
Okada, Y. et al. 2008, in preparation 

 Onaka et al. (1996) 
 
Onaka, T., Yamamura, I., Tanabe, T., Roellig, T. L., & Yuen, L. 1996,
PASJ, 48, L59–L63

 Onaka et al. (2007) 
 
Onaka, T. et al. 2007, PASJ, 59, 401–410

 Shibai et al. (1996) 
 
Shibai, H., Okuda, H., Nakagawa, T., Makiuti, S., Matsuhara, H.,
Hiromoto, N., & Okumura, K. 1996, PASJ, 48, L127–L131

 Shirahata et al. (2004) 
 
Shirahata, M. et al. 2004, Proc. SPIE, 5487, Ed. J. C. Mather, 369–380

 Takahashi et al. (2003) 
 
Takahashi, H., Kawada, M., Murakami, N., Ozawa, K.,
Shibai, H., & Nakagawa, T. 2003,
Proc. SPIE, 4850, Ed. J. C. Mather, 191–201

 Takahashi et al. (2008) 
 
Takahashi, H. et al. 2008, in preparation 

 Tanaka et al. (1996) 
 
Tanaka, M., Matsumoto, T., Murakami, H., Kawada, M.,
Noda, M., & Matsuura, S. 1996, PASJ, 48, L53–L57

 Werner et al. (2004) 
 
Werner, M. W. et al. 2004, ApJS, 154, 1–9

 Yasuda et al. (2008) 
 
Yasuda, A. et al. 2008, in preparation 

 ◄ 
 
 Feeling
lucky? 
 
 Conversion
report 
 Report
an issue 
 View original
on arXiv ► 

 Copyright 
 Privacy Policy 

 Generated on Thu Feb 29 10:44:09 2024 by L a T e XML