IX.C. Data Processing 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

IX. The Low-Resolution Spectra

C. Data Processing

 Chapter Contents 
 | Authors 
| References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous Section 
| Next Section 

 The Database 
 Processing the Individual Spectra 
 
 Despiking 
 Conversion to a Linear Scale 
 Interpolation to a Standard Wavelength Grid 
 Correction for Wavelength-Dependent Responsivity 
 Correction for Cross-Scan-Dependent Responsivity 
 Overall Responsivity 
 Joining of the Two Spectrum Halves 
 
 Averaging Spectra, Quality Checks 
 Final Selection of Spectra 

 C.1 The Database 

 The spectrometer data consist of three types of data: (i)
uncorrected spectra with header information, (ii) calibration
tables, and (iii) administrative files. The spectra were extracted
out of the data stream whenever an hours-confirmed source with
a signal-to-noise ratio greater than 25 or a source specified
as "known source" 
( Section V.D.4 ), crossed the spectrometer
aperture. Extractions were also made for designated calibration
sources. The spectra were linked to survey sources using index
association records produced by the hours-and weeks- confirmation
processors ( Section V.D.7 ).
 
 There were three types of calibration tables: (a) the responses
of the five detectors to the internal reference source flashes
and the intensities of the flashes as derived by the survey calibration
processor; (b) correction tables for the relative responsivity
as a function of position across the five detectors; (c) correction
tables for the relative responsivity as a function of wavelength.
The cross-scan and wavelength dependent responsivity tables were
derived from special observations (see Section IX.B ).

 C.2 Processing the Individual Spectra 

 Processing of the data always started with the raw data.
This allowed the correction procedures to be improved continuously
up to the time of production of the catalog. The major processing
steps are discussed below.

 C.2.a Despiking 

 Single sample spikes with an amplitude greater than 8% caused
by multiplexer errors ( Section IX.B ) were removed 
and replaced
by an interpolated value using a simple algorithm operating on
the raw data. Multiple-sample spikes were not removed but their
presence was noted so that the spectrum-half would be rejected
later (see Section IX.C.3 ).

 C.2.b Conversion to a Linear Scale 

 A lookup table of 256 entries was used to convert the raw
data to voltages on a linear scale. A standard reconstruction
of the input-voltage to the high-pass filter from the measured
output voltage was carried out. An offset correction was reset
to zero whenever the sample voltage dropped below a specified
threshold because of the effects of the zero clamping 
( Section IX.A.4 ).

 C.2.c Interpolation to a Standard Wavelength Grid 

 For ease of processing, an interpolation was carried out
to a standard regular grid of angular positions in the dispersion
direction. Because the dispersion of the spectrograph changed
rapidly as a function of the angular position 
( Fig. IX.A.1 ), the
wavelength values corresponding to the standard sample values
were not equidistant. Before the interpolation, allowance was
made for variations in the scan speed of the telescope. For the
spectra of the brighter sources (signal-to-noise ratio greater
than 10) the well-defined in-scan detector edges were in-scan
to center the spectrum. The centering correction reduced in-scan
errors to approximately 2", corresponding to approximately
0.03 um in wavelength.

 C.2.d Correction for Wavelength-Dependent Responsivity 

 The interpolated samples were multiplied by a responsivity
table sampled at the same standard grid. There was a table for
each of the five detectors derived from observations of 
 -Tau 
( Fig. IX.B.2 ). 
Although the software allowed selecting a different
table for each of 16 regularly spaced cross-scan positions on
the detector, the evidence for a cross-scan variation of the 
wavelength-dependent
gain was too weak to justify using this option.

 C.2.e Correction for Cross-Scan-Dependent Responsivity 

 Depending on the nominal cross-scan position of the source,
a correction ( Fig. IX.B.1 ) was applied for 
the decrease of responsivity
towards the edges of the detectors. This correction was the weakest
link in the calibration process because of the relatively large
uncertainty in the cross-scan position. The correction applied
is uncertain by up to 20%, although this uncertainty was decreased
by the process of joining the two spectrum-halves together (see
 Section IX.C.2.g ).

 C.2.f Overall Responsivity 

 The overall responsivity depended on the individual detector,
on the time and/or on the sky position. To account for these
variations a correction was derived from the voltage responses
to the two internal reference source flashes bracketing the time
of observation. After applying the responsivity
correction to a large sample of spectra the integrated fluxes
in the spectra were compared to the fluxes measured by the survey
array. Systematic factors of 0.75 and 1.00 were applied to the
integrated spectrometer fluxes to bring them in line with the
survey observations.

 C.2.g Joining of the Two Spectrum Halves 

 The two spectrum-halves (8-12 um and 11-25 um) were treated
independently until this point. Because of uncertainties in the
cross-scan position of the scan path over the detectors and therefore
in the nominal cross-scan responsivity correction, the two spectrum-halves
often differed by up to 15 or 20% after subtraction of a linear
baseline. The overlapping portion of the spectrum-halves was
used to determine another correction factor. In doing so, the
nominal relative cross-scan positions were used to determine which
half of the spectrum to change by the largest amount. If either
half had been observed by the central part of a detector, it was
considered reliably calibrated, and that portion was not changed
by the joining process, and the half of the spectrum observed
near the edge of a detector was shifted up or down towards the
other half. If both halves were considered equally reliable, then
each was scaled by the square root of the ratio between the overlapping
sections. This joining process reduced the overall error in the
responsivity correction to less than 10%.

 C.3 Averaging Spectral Quality Checks 

 Before spectra were averaged, a number of quality checks
were performed on the individual measurements of the two halves
of a source's spectrum. First, all measurements made within 18"
of the edge of any detector were flagged. Measurements were rejected:

 if they contained multiple-sample spikes ( Section IX.C.2 );
 if the join-factor obtained before ( Section IX.C.2 )
 was outside the range 0.30 to 3.3;
 if the measurement was confused by neighboring sources;
 this was considered to occur when the measurement met one of two
 criteria: (i) the central portion was below the baseline determined
 from signal-free parts of the spectrum-half; (ii) the baseline
 at the low wavelength end of the spectrum-half differed from that
 at the high wavelength end by more than 20% of the signal in the
 8-12 um band or by 10% in the 11-25 um band. 
 The lower limit of these thresholds was 2.5 times the sample noise.
 if the measurement did not correlate with the "reference
 measurement", defined as the measurement with the smallest
 number of check-flags. This choice gave preference to measurements
 passing over the central part of the detector. Any 8-12 um measurement
 for which the correlation coefficient with the reference was below
 60% or any 11-25 um measurement for which it was below 50% was
 rejected. For line spectra without a continuum in the 8-12 um
 region the first criterion was waived.

 At least 80% of the spectra in the catalog had correlation
coefficients above 70 and 60% in the short and long wavelength
halves, respectively. Some 40% correlated internally with coefficients
better than 80% in both spectrum-halves (see Section IX.C.4 ).
 
 The spectrum-halves passing through all of the above tests
were averaged using the inverse of the square of the noise as
a weighting factor. At least two measurements in each of the two
spectrum-halves (8-13 and 11-25 um) had to be accepted 
before the spectrum could
be averaged and included in the spectral catalog.
 
 After averaging the two spectrum-halves were rejoined, giving
both halves equal weight (see Section IX.C.1 ). Generally the
join factors differed from 1.00 by only a few percent.
 
 The averaged spectrum was convolved with the 12 um survey
passband. The integrated flux thus obtained, was compared to the
average 12 um survey flux of the source. The ratio between the
two fluxes is given in the low resolution spectrometer catalog
record and has a 1 dispersion around 
unity of about 15%. Exceptions to this rule will be spectra with sharp 
lines (classes 8 and 9; see Section IX.D.2 ) or 
small 12 um fluxes.

 C.4 Final Selection of Spectra 

 Three selection criteria were applied for inclusion in the
Catalog of Low Resolution Spectra.

 The source is contained in the IRAS point source catalog.
 The entire spectrum must have been observed at least
 twice and the individual measurements should be mutually consistent.
 (individual spectra must pass all the checks mentioned in
 Section IX.C.3 and must have a minimum correlation 
 coefficient of 50% between any two measurements of the source. The 
 large majority of spectra had however, much higher correlation 
 coefficients (see below).
 The source must pass a subjective visual inspection.
 About 2.5% of all sources were rejected by this process, mostly
 because they showed non-point source characteristics or confusion
 with other sources.

 Four samples of sources were selected for inclusion in the
catalog.

 Sources whose 12 um survey flux density was larger than
 25 Jy or whose 25 um survey flux density was larger than 50 Jy.
 Individual spectrum-halves were required to correlate with each
 other with a correlation coefficient of 80% in either spectrum-half.
 This sample contains about 2150 sources.
 Sources with 12 um flux densities larger than 1 Jy or 25 
 um flux densities larger than 2 Jy but not contained in Sample
 a. The vast majority of these sources proved to be brighter than
 approximately 5 Jy at 12 um or 10 Jy at 25 um. The correlation
 coefficients were required to exceed 70% in the 8-12 um band and
 60% in the 11-25 um band. This sample contains about 2450 sources.
 Sources in the same flux density range as sample b but with
 lower correlation coefficients: between 60 and 70% in the 11-22 
 um spectrum-half or between 50 and 60% in the 11-25 um hall; 
 respectively. There are roughly 850 sources in this sample.
 Sources with minimum survey flux densities of 1 Jy at 12 
 um or 2 Jy at 25 um. Of these sources only the 11-25 um
 spectrum-half was required to have been measured consistently with a minimum
 correlation coefficient of 50% between individual measurements.
 Out of this sample only sources with specified spectral lines
 and not contained in sample a b, c were selected for the catalog.
 The selection was carried out by the classification program: only
 classes 8 and 9 (see Section IX.D.2 and 
 Table IX.D.1 ) were kept.
 There are approximately 40 spectra with lines in this sample.

 Samples a b, and c contain continuum sources and approximately
75% of the line sources of the catalog; sample d contains the
remainder of the line sources.

 Chapter Contents 
| Authors 
| References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous Section 
| Next Section