III.D. In-Flight Modifications 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 III. The IRAS Mission

 D. In-Flight Modifications

 Chapter Contents | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section 

 Introduction 
 Polar Horns 
 Operations Problems 
 Saturation 
 The 5deg Gap 
 Early Eclipse and Warm Up 

 D. 1 Introduction

 Although the implementation of the survey strategy was remarkably
effective, there daily arose regions of sky that should have been
covered but for one reason or another (to be discussed below)
were not. Attempts made to recover these scans were not always
successful with a resultant loss in depth of sky coverage and
data quality.

 Figure III.D.1 Lune coverage is given as a function of date. The grey
shaded regions are forbidden by the constraints indicated on the diagram.
The dashed lines running at about 45deg through the clear constraint
free zones is the 90deg cone angle line. The survey lune coverages
are indicated by the solid black lines. 

 larger 
 largest 

 These coverage gaps were not predictable and so recovery
scans had to be generated rapidly to allow the uplink of commands
during the next prime pass some 12 hours after the downlink of
the data that revealed the difficulty. Given the time needed
to process the data to reveal the problem, generate the recovery
observation and regenerate the SOP, this was a tight schedule
to maintain. The occasional failures are reflected in some of
the remaining coverage holes.
 
 The coverage obtained in each of the first two hour confirming
layers is summarized in Fig. III.C.6.1 ,
 2 , and Fig. III.D.1 .

 D.2 Polar Horns

 Figure III.D.2 The SAA (> 10 protons cm -2 
sec -1 with E>50 MeV and Polar Horns
(>10 5 electrons cm -2 sec -1 ) with
E>0.5 MeV at an altitude of 900 km
( Stassinopoulos 1978 ). 

 larger 
 largest 

 An unexpected source of noise was particle hits in the horns
of the Van Allen belts ( Fig. III.D.2 ). 
The effects of the horns
were variable and often negligible. However, observations affected
by increased noise were rescanned. The criterion used to require
recovery scans for trapped particle radiation (usually in the
polar horns) was that the on-board nuclear particle circumvention
electronics ( Section II.C.5 ) be activated 
during more than an
average of about 0.7% of the time in 48 sec. This duration was
determined empirically to correspond to roughly a doubling of
the noise at 60 and 100 um. In fact, because of the high
of redundancy inherent in the data processing. the point source
results were not noticeably affected by the level of radiation
hits in the polar horns. The point source processing used both
the data suffering from high radiation hit rates and the rescans.
The extended emission maps 
( Section V.G ) do not use data affected
by radiation hits. In many cases the recovery scans were themselves
affected by high radiation as the location of the satellite relative
to the horns was often similar to that in the original scan. 
Losses due to the horns were greatest at the start of the mission
because of a period of intense solar activity, which reduced considerably
later on. The radiation recovery is discussed in greater detail
by Wolff (1984) .

 D.3 Operations Problems

 Scans lost because of occasional problems with the satellite
or ground station (see e.g. Holdaway 1984, and 
MacDougall et al. 
1984 ) were recovered as soon as possible after the events. Occasionally
the outage was so great that it would have been impractical, within
the geometrical constraints and operational timescales, to recover
the gaps with individual recovery scans and it became necessary
to reset the survey parameters in the scheduling program 
( Section
III.C.7 ) and restart the survey from where it had left off.

 D.4 Saturation

 Some saturation of the electronics by bright sources occurred
as had been expected. Recovery on low gain was initially attempted
in a systematic way and was successful for regions including the
Galactic Center, the Orion Nebula M17, W43, NGC 6334, NGC 6357,
and IRC+10216. It was later decided that tracking and recovering
saturated portions of scans was too time consuming and that it
would be more fruitful to concentrate on filling missing sky coverage
due to other causes. Recovery of saturated scans was commanded
only if the bright object was not one that was, from prior knowledge,
expected to be very bright. Most of these sources were well known
HII regions which are so bright that the saturated parts can be
measured from ground or airborne telescopes.

 D.5 The 5deg Gap

 The scan generation software required that each of the two
lunes under observation should contain an ecliptic meridian 90deg 
away from the Sun. Otherwise the coverage of the ecliptic
polar caps could not be part of the regular survey planning. Progress
in completing the survey was slow enough that these 90deg
meridians slowly drifted toward the edge of the lunes. By mid
May 1983 only 1deg of slack was left and, once the lune boundary
was reached, either a gap in the coverage would be required or
the more efficient lune method would have to be replaced with
the half circle method. A related problem was that it was becoming
necessary to make survey scans at large solar offset angles (90deg 
- ). Such scans were particularly 
vulnerable to interruptions
due to the SAA, station passage, Earth infrared constraint, etc.
 Consequently, a large number of small holes occurred in the sky
coverage. As an important part of the sky, the North Galactic
Pole, was approaching the observation window it was decided to
avoid falling off the = 90deg 
line in an uncontrolled
way determined by the accumulation of the inevitable, small losses
of coverage. A topologically simple gap was chosen that would be
accessible in the second six months of the mission (in early December).
 The survey was therefore advanced by 5deg, giving a 6deg
pad. This decision was based on the prediction that the liquid
helium supply would last until January 1984. Unfortunately, the
last of the liquid helium boiled away in late November, leaving
the 5deg gap almost completely unobserved except for a few
scans around its periphery.

 D.6 Early Eclipse and Warm Up

 Figure III.D.3 A diagram of the survey coverage indicates approximately
the number of hours-confirming coverages over the entire sky. 

 larger 
 largest 

 The first eclipse of the satellite occurred 4 days earlier
than expected due to an incorrect modeling of the effects of atmospheric
refraction. The satellite fell into its safety mode during which
no observations were made and the pattern of the third set of
hours-confirming scans was interrupted. The coverage obtained
before this event is shown in Fig. III.D.3 . 
A correction to the
eclipse prediction program was derived and survey operations resumed
after three days. Unfortunately, on the day that the survey was
resumed the liquid helium boil-off rate dropped to zero as the
last of the cryogen was expended. The telescope and focal plane
began to warm up. By 09h 30m on November 23, 1983, 300 days after
launch, the baselines of the 12 um detectors saturated and the
flight part of the mission was officially terminated.
 
 The final depth of coverage by hours-confirming pairs of
survey scans that was obtained is shown approximately in 
 Fig. III.D.3 and, in more detail in 
 Chapter XIII .

 Chapter Contents | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section