II.C.5 Electronics 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 II. Satellite Description

 C. Telescope System Overview

 C.5 Electronics

 Chapter Contents |
 Authors 
 | References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section 
 | Next Section 

 Figure II.C.10 Preamp and bias supply schematic. The JFET module
is indicated by the dashed line, the dewar boundary by the dash-dot
line. 

 larger 
 largest 

The photoconductive detector elements responded to infrared radiation
by altering their electrical resistance.
 Figure II.C.10.a shows schematically
the nominal preamplifier and bias voltage design. A matched pair of junction
field effect transistors (JFETs) for each detector acted as a unity-gain
source-follower amplifier, converting the high impedance output of the
photodetectors to low impedance for transmission to the warm electronics
outside the dewar. The JFET pairs were each suspended by Dacron threads
inside a small 2 K light-tight box such that electrical dissipation in
the JFETs themselves (about 200 microwatts) maintained the JFETs at
temperatures of 60 to 70 K. A 3
M metal-film resistor
cemented to the JFET
acted as a heater for cold starting the amplifier during ground testing
and several hours after launch. The JFETs formed a differential input stage
of the trans-impedance amplifier. At low frequencies the output voltage
of the trans-impedance amplifier was equal to the voltage difference between
the gates of the JFET pair plus any offset voltage at the input of the
operational amplifier plus the voltage drop across the feedback resistor
due to the photocurrent from the detector.
 
The detector bias was applied to one detector contact and the trans-impedance
amplifier maintained the other contact at a constant DC voltage very near
signal ground independent of photocurrent until the trans-impedance amplifier
output saturated at about 11 volts. All detectors in a module had a common
bias voltage, applied through the module frame, which are listed in
 Table II.C.6 . An exception to this biasing scheme was
module A in the 25 um band. During testing, the frame of this module
became shorted
to signal ground rendering the entire module inoperative. The alternative
biasing approach used for this module only (suggested by Dr. J. Houck)
is shown in Fig. II.C.10.b . The bias voltage, with
reversed polarity, was applied to the gate of the reference JFET. This
voltage also appeared at the operational amplifier input so the output
of the trans-impedance amplifier was compensated by the same amount. The
net effect of this modification was to increase the gain of the
trans-impedance amplifier by a factor of 1.2.
 
During laboratory testing the responsivity and noise of the detectors
were found to depend on their history of exposure to energetic radiation,
such as gamma-rays, and energetic electrons and protons.
The observed sensitivity
change resulting from an exposure of 0.6 Rads of Co60, roughly equivalent
in dosage to a passage through a deep portion of the South Atlantic Anomaly
(SAA), was about a factor of 1.2, 2, 6 and 10 for the 12, 25, 60 and 100
um detectors. Biasing the detectors into a "breakdown"
condition resulted in a large current flowing through the detector that
annealed the radiation effects. The hardware provided a second bias voltage
level, called the "bias boost" voltage, which effected this
annealing
process after exposure to SAA protons during the mission. The bias boost
voltages are listed in Table II.C.6 and the effects
of the bias boost are discussed in
 Section IV.A.7 .
Because the 12 um detectors did not require annealing, the
second bias voltage provided an alternative operating bias.

 Figure II.C.11 Resistance vs. voltage characteristics of feedback
resistor for detector 29. Measurements were made at 2 K.
Solid line shows the shape of resistance vs. voltage relation adopted
for processing. 

 larger 
 largest 

The rolloff frequency of the trans-impedance amplifier was set to
approximately 80 Hz by a 0.1 pf shunt capacitor across the feedback resistor.
The feedback resistors, Eltec model 102 metal film resistors, were selected
from 1 x 10 10 
room temperature elements. At 2 K their impedance
was 2.05 +/- 0.1 x 10 10 
 and varied slightly with
voltage. Figure II.C.11 shows a sample resistance
vs. voltage curve as measured at 2 K. A combination of three straight lines
fitted to the measured points defined the shape of the non-linear resistance
versus voltage relationship used for data reduction
(see Section VI.A.5 ).

Electrical Characteristics of Survey Arrays

Table II.C.6

 Effective Wavelength (um) 
 12 
 25 
 60 
 100 

 Nominal bias (volts) 
 3.27(A)
2.50(B) 
 1.50 
 0.160 
 0.185 

 Boosted bias (volts) 
 2.50(A)

2.00(B) 
 11.00(A)

7.00(B) 
 1.00 
 1.00 

 Nominal/Low Gain 
 7.18 
 5.98 
 10.8 
 13.4 

 Nominal/High Gain 
 0.107 
 0.109 
 0.102 
 0.100 

The rest of the telescope electronics processed the signals from the
visible and infrared preamplifiers, transferred data to the spacecraft
onboard computer for storage and subsequent transmission to the ground
station, and received commands from the spacecraft and distributed them
to the telescope systems. This data-processing was split into two major
elements: the analog electronics and the digital electronics. More details
are contained in Langford et al. (1983) 
and Long and Langford (1983) .

 Figure II.C.12 Focal plane array infrared channel data flow. 

 larger 
 largest 

The analog signal path for the infrared detectors was entirely DC-coupled.
 Figure II.C.12 shows a functional diagram of the
components of the analog electronics for one infrared detector channel.
In order to maintain a negative voltage at the output of the analog
electronics,
the DC offset voltage at the output of the trans-impedance amplifier could
be changed by 17.8 mV steps using an 8 level commandable offset with level
4 corresponding to no change. The commandable offset levels utilized during
the mission are listed in Table II.C.3 .
 
Nuclear pulse circumvention circuitry prevented sharp pulses from cosmic
rays and charged particle hits on the detectors in the SAA and in the polar
horns from contaminating the infrared data stream. The output of the
trans-impedance amplifier was fed to an integrator and to a pole-zero
amplifier which flattened
the frequency response to 450 Hz to improve the operation of the circumvention
circult. The output of the pole-zero amplifier went to a differentiator
and to a Bessel filter which delayed the signal by about 150 us. The
differentiated
and integrated signals led to a comparator which opened a switch to prevent
the unwanted, fast rise-time pulses from passing through the system. The
integrator raised the minimum threshold to blank the unwanted spike as
the DC voltage from the trans-impedance amplifier increased. The track/hold
capacitor clamped the input to the gain amplifier to a fixed level while
the switch was open. Further details of the design and performance of the
pulse circumvention circuitry can be found in Emming
 et al. (1983) and
 Long and Langford (1983) .
 
The Bessel filter boosted the trans-impedance amplifier output by a
factor of two. An additional amplifier could increase the system gain by
software commandable factors of unity (low gain), of 5 to 12 depending
on the wavelenght band (nominal gain), and of ten times nominal gain (high
gain). All survey scans were made using the nominal gain except in those
areas, typically close to the Galactic plane. Some of these areas were
rescanned using low gain ( Section III.D ). The
overtall nominal gain for each infrared channel and the ratios of the nominal
to low and high gains for the different detector modules are listed in
 Table II.C.3 . Finally. 12 dB/octave
low-pass filters
with cutoff frequencies of 6, 6, 3, 1.5 Hz for the 12, 25, 60 and 100 um
bands, respectively, limited the frequency response and reduced high frequency
noise. The outputs of the low-pass filters were fed into multiplexers and
then to a 16-bit analog-to-digital converter operating at 125 uV
per data number for subsequent processing by the digital electronics.
 
The visible detector data flow was similar to the infrared data flow,
except that the trans-impedance amplifier was AC-coupled to a MOSFET
preamplifier.
For both infrared and visible channels, the pole zero amplifier, integrator,
differentiator, comparator, track/hold calacitor, switch, gain amplifier
and low-pass filter were contained in a single miniature hybrid circuit.
 
Under low background conditions the limiting noise in the analog
electronics
chain was the Johnson noise of the 2 x 10 10 
 feedback
resistor. At a temperature of 2 K this noise level was roughly 1.6 uV
Hz -&frac12; .
 
The digital electronics processed the digitized infrared and visible
detector data, collected telemetry information from various sensors located
on the telescope, received and executed commands issued from the onboard
computer and transmitted the formatted telemetry, infrared and visble detector
data to the onboard computer. The infrared detectors were sampled at 16,
16, 8 and 4 Hz at 12, 25, 60 and 100 um, respectively. To minimize
spacecraft data storage requirements, the digital electronics compressed
each 16-bit infrared detector value to an 8-bit value representing the
difference between the successive 16-bit numbers. For details of compression
scheme, see Appendix II. 1 .
 
During star crossings, two of the eight visual detectors were sampled
at a 500 Hz rate. The onboard digital electronics determined the visual
magnitude of the star and its crossing time, passed this information to
the spacecraft attitude control software to update the satellite pointing
and recorded the data for subsequent use in the attitude reconstruction.
The digital electronics also measured 108 temperatures, voltages and pressures
to monitor the health of the telescope. These and other housekeeping data
were multiplexed, digitized and formatted for transferral to the onboard
computer.

 Chapter Contents 
 | Authors 
 | References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section 
 | Next Section