VII.G. Associations 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

VII. Analysis of Processing

G. Associations

 Chapter Contents |
 Authors |
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section 

 As described in Section V.H.9 , 
the associations of cataloged
sources with IRAS sources were done purely on a positional basis,
except that no association was allowed between a star and an IRAS
source detected only at 100 um. For the catalogs with
small position
errors, the search box was 45" x 8" (half-width), and
the probability of a chance association with an IRAS source was
less than 0.1%. For those catalogs where the search radius was
significantly larger, e.g., galaxy catalogs and catalogs of diffuse
objects, the probability of random associations was significantly
greater. For the majority of the galaxy catalogs, where the
search radius was 90", the probability of chance associations
with IRAS sources was about 0.3% at high galactic latitude ( | b |
> 45deg ) and increased with increasing IRAS source surface
density. A particular concern is the association of galaxies
with infrared cirrus. The far infrared properties of an external
galaxy can be very similar to those of cirrus. The user is urged
to examine the cirrus flags before attaching significance to such
associations.
 
 It must be emphasized that the associations are not identifications.
 To be certain of any specific identification of an IRAS source
with a cataloged source, the user must investigate the IRAS source
in some detail.
 
 About 28% of IRAS sources were associated with cataloged
objects. Approximately 46,000 IRAS sources were; associated with
cataloged stars and approximately 10,000 IRAS sources were associated
with cataloged galaxies. Other classes of objects accounted for
15,000 associations. The vast majority of these were galactic
nebulae and galaxies in the ESO (B) atlas. A measure of the fraction
of spurious associations can be found in the number of IRAS sources
associated with both stellar and galaxy-type objects. At high
galactic latitudes ~ 0.6% of the IRAS sources had both galaxy
and stellar associations.

 Chapter Contents |
 Authors |
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section