I.A. General Overview 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 I. Introduction

 A. General Overview

 Chapter Contents 
 | Authors 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Next Section 

 The IRAS Mission 
 The Explanatory Supplement 
 Cautionary Notes 

 A.1 The IRAS Mission

The primary mission of the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) was
to conduct a sensitive and unbiased survey of the sky in four wavelength
bands centered at 12, 25, 60, and 100 um. The project was initiated
in 1975 as a joint program of the United States, the Netherlands, and the
United Kingdom. Launched in January 1983, IRAS ceased operations in November
1983 after having successfully surveyed more than 96% of the sky.
 
The results of several portions of the IRAS mission are given in a catalog
of infrared point sources, in a catalog of extended sources smaller than
8', in a catalog of low-resolution spectra, and in an atlas of absolute
surface brightness images of the entire infrared sky. These catalogs give
the characteristics of some 250,000 point sources and 20,000 small extended
sources down to a limiting flux density, away from confused regions of
the sky, of about 0.5 Jy at 12, 25 and 60 um and about 1.5 Jy
at 100 um for point sources, and about a factor of three brighter
than this for small extended sources. The angular resolution of the instrument
varied between about 0.5' at 12 um to about 2' at 100 um.
The positional accuracy of sources detected by IRAS depends on their size,
brightness and spectral energy distribution but is usually better than
20". Approximately 5000 8-22 um spectra of survey sources
brighter than 10 Jy at 12 and 25 um are available.

 A.2 The Explanatory Supplement

This Explanatory Supplement is intended to be a complete and self-contained
description of the IRAS mission in relation to the products of the survey.
In Chapter II , the IRAS satellite, telescope
and focal plane instrumentation are reviewed. The elements of the mission
profile--the constraints, the design features, and the in-flight modifications
to that design--are described in Chapter III 
and are accompanied by a chronology of the events of the mission. In-flight
tests of those aspects of the performance of the instrument directly
associated with the survey are presented in
 Chapter IV .
 Chapters V and
 VI 
describe the processing performed on the data; the summaries that precede
the detailed discussions should be sufficient to acquaint the user with
the contents of the catalogs. Since the flux reconstruction and calibration
of the instrument probably hold intrinsic interest for many readers, these
are described separately in Chapter VI .
 
A preliminary analysis of some of the statistical properties of the
catalogs is given in Chapter VII . Emphasis
is placed on general statistics, such as positional and photometric accuracy
and on easily derived number counts. A preliminary analysis of the sky
coverage and of the completeness and reliability of the catalog is given
in Chapter VIII . The low-resolution
spectrometer and the analysis of its measurements are described in
 Chapter IX .
 Chapter X explains the format and meaning of
each of the entries in the catalogs. Each printed volume of the catalogs
repeats the description of the formats of that catalog.
 
In order to produce the catalogs in a timely fashion, some processing
errors and anomalies could not be fixed; those which were discovered before
the release of the data in November 1984 are described in
 Chapter XI .
 Chapter XII gives the errata and
revisions as of 1987, including the important flux overestimation correction
used for version 2.0 of the Point Source Catalog. A compilation of the
names of people who worked on the IRAS project comprises
 Chapter XIII . The
 last chapter provides a series of plots
giving the details of the coverage of the sky by the IRAS survey.
 
Each chapter of the Supplement was written by those members of the IRAS
team whose names are appended to that chapter. The work described was
obviously the result of efforts by many individuals and should not be
ascribed to the authors alone.

 A.3 Cautionary Notes

While it is unlikely that all aspects of the instrumental performance
or the data processing will be of interest to all readers, even casual
users should familiarize themselves with the various caveats described
in the chapters appropriate to the type of data in question. All users
of IRAS data should be cognizant of the following crucial facts:
 
 The sky at 100 um is dominated by filaments termed " infrared
cirrus " which, although concentrated near the Galactic plane,
can be found almost all the way up to the Galactic poles
( Fig. I.C.4 ). The primary, deleterious
effects of the cirrus are that it can generate well-confirmed point and small
extended sources that are actually pieces of degree-sized structures rather
than isolated, discrete objects and that it can corrupt 100 um, and
occasionally 60 um, measurements of true point sources
(Sections V.H.4 ,
 VIII.D.2 ). 

 The spectral bandwidths of the detectors were sufficiently wide that
the quoted flux densities depend on the assumed energy distribution of
the source. For the catalogs, the energy distribution was taken to be constant
in the flux per logarithmic frequency interval. If the source has a different
energy distribution than this, a color conection , as large as 50%
in extreme cases, must be applied to the quoted flux densities
( Section VI.C.3 ).

 The survey is clearly confusion limited within about 10deg
of the Galactic plane and in several areas of the sky such as the Ophiuchus
and Orion-Taurus regions. Considerable effort has been made to select only
highly reliable sources in such areas, at the expense of completeness.
The flags associated with sources with possible confusion-related problems
should be examined very carefully (Sections
 V.D.8 , V.H.6 ,
 VIII.C , VIII.D 
 and X.B ).

 The algorithm used to estimate the detector noise suffered from a
signifficant lag. This caused an under-estimate of the true noise when
approaching regions of rapidiy changing noise and an over-estimate of the
noise when leaving such areas. Regions with large and rapidiy varying numbers
of sources, such as the Galactic plane, also produced this effect. Since
the source detection algorithm ( Section V.C )
thresholded on signal to noise ratio, the overestimated noise level resulted
in a dearth of sources, or a shadow , in the areas observed just
after passage across the Galactic plane. At 60 and 100 um, where
the effect is worst, a "coverage hole" can extend as far as
2deg from the plane. The density of detected sources can differ, totally
artificially, by as much as a factor of ten from one side of the plane
to the other due to this shadowing
( Section VIII.D ).

 While great pains were taken to confirm the reality of sources in
the point and small extended source catalogs, no such attempt was made
for the sky brightness images. Instead, separate images of the sky taken
at times differing from weeks to months are given. It is the responsibility
of the user to ensure that sources seen in the images are not due to transient
sources such as asteroids.

 Chapter Contents 
| Authors 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Next Section