V.D.2.b Position Reconstruction 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 D. Point Source Confirmation

 D.2 Overview of Seconds-Confirmation

 D.2.b Position Reconstruction

 Chapter Contents |
 Introduction |
 Authors |
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section 

 Detections in a single band were processed in time order.
 Each detection had its position in the Sun-referenced coordinate
system computed. At the same time the photometric uncertainties,
modeled as a white-noise Gaussian random variable in the logarithm
of the flux and a constant but unknown calibration scale factor
error in the flux, were obtained from lookup tables as functions
of signal-to-noise ratio and correlation coefficient.
 
 The position reconstruction was performed by searching the
pointing history for records with time tags bracketing that of
the detection. The matrices for transforming from the focal plane
coordinates to the Sun-referenced system and to the 1950.0 mean
ecliptic system were obtained by cubic spline interpolation.
Each detector was characterized by a unique unit vector in the
focal plane coordinate system. The transformation matrices yielded
the polar, azimuthal, and twist angles defining the position of
the detector slot on the sky in the Sun-referenced and 1950.0
mean ecliptic systems. The cross-scan half-width of the slot
defined the uniform error component, denoted L z ,
in that direction.
 The cross-scan limit cycle reconstruction uncertainty was modeled
as a Gaussian random error,
 z . These and
the in-scan errors
discussed below were the only significant uncertainties involved
in the confirmation decision process. After all confirmation and
refinement processing was completed the absolute position angle
errors, which were estimated by the pointing reconstruction program
but which cancel out of the confirmation decision, were taken
into account.
 
 The uncertainties in the scan direction which affected the
confirmation decision were a time-interpolation error and the
detection timing uncertainty. The latter yielded an angular uncertainty
when
multiplied by the scan rate. These were taken to be independent
Gaussian errors with a combined effect of a zero-mean Gaussian
random error, denoted (X)y , with a variance equal to to the sum
of the two error variances.

 Input Data for In-Band Seconds Confirmation

 Table V.D.2

 Detections: 
 Flux and uncertainty, time and uncertainty, signal-to-noise
 ratio, detection correlation coefficient, and detector number. 

 Pointing: 
 Telescope boresight angles in the Sun-referenced
 system and uncertainties, scan rate, time tag, sines and cosines
 of the angles in both the Sun-referenced and 1950.0 mean ecliptic
 systems, and rates of these angles, all sampled at one-second
 intervals. 

 Detectors: 
 Status (on/off) and geometrical models in image space. 

 Optics: 
 Point-spread function model. 

 Error Tables: 
 Model of pointing reconstruction error due to time
 interpolations; photometric error as a function of signal-to-noise
 ratio and correlation coefficient for each band. 

 Thresholds: 
 Confirmation acceptance, search windows, etc. 

 Chapter Contents |
 Introduction |
 Authors |
 References 
 
 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section