II.C. Telescope System Overview 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 II. Satellite Description

 C. Telescope System Overview

 Chapter Contents 
 | Authors 
 | References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | 
 Previous Section 
 | Next Section 

 Cryogenics 
 Thermal Control 
 Optics 
 Focal Plane Assembly 
 Electronics 

 Figure II.C.1 Telescope system configuration. 

 larger 
 largest 

The IRAS telescope system configuration is shown in 
 Fig. II.C.1 . 
The telescope system comprised the upper part of the satellite
and was composed of a two mirror, Ritchey-Chretien telescope mounted within
a toroidal superfluid helium tank, which in turn was mounted within the
evacuated main shell. The optical system was protected from contamimation
before launch and during the first week of the mission by an aperture cover
cooled with supercritical helium. After the cover was ejected, the sunshade
limited heat flow to the aperture by blocking direct solar radiation and
reflecting away terrestrial infrared radiation. The telescope orientation
was constrained to prevent sunlight from striking the inner surface of
the sunshade and radiation from the Earth from illuminating the radiators
around the telescope aperture. The telescope was cooled by contact with
the superfluid helium tank to temperatures ranging from 2 to 5K. The surfaces
of the sunshade which could be viewed by the telescope aperture were cooled
by a three-stage radiator to about 95K.
 
The telescope system consisted of the cryogenics 
( Section II.C.1 ), 
the thermal control system 
( Section II.C.2 ), 
the optics ( Section II.C.3 ), the focal
plane assembly ( Section II.C.4 ) 
and the electronics ( Section II.C.5 ). 
The telescope system also provided interfaces at and behind
the image plane for the low resolution spectrometer 
( Chapter IX ) and the chopped photometric 
channel; the latter was not used for the survey. Key physical 
characteristics of the telescope system are listed in 
 Table II.C.1 .

 Chapter Contents 
 | Authors 
 | References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | 
 Previous Section 
 | Next Section