V.D.2.i In-Band Seconds-Confirmation Photometric Refinement 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 D. Point Source Confirmation

 D.2 Overview of Seconds-Confirmation

 D.2.i In-Band Seconds-Confirmation Photometric Refinement

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section 

 Photometric refinement was performed for pairs of detections
which passed several qualification rules. When performed Gaussian
estimation was used, where the Gaussian error was assumed to be
in the logarithm of the flux. The estimates for the a priori errors
were derived from analysis of a posteriori discrepancy dispersions
as functions of signal-to-noise ratio in each band and the combination
of the Gaussian assumption with well-modeled variances was found
to be quite good in subsequent 2 .
 
 To be eligible for flux refinement processing, the ratio
of the fainter detection to the brighter one had to be greater
than 0.67; otherwise the brighter detection alone was used. In
cases of confusion (except detections discarded in a previously
processed case), only candidate fluxes were used because confusion
was detected only when it was the drop-dead detection that was
composed of more than one source image. When the detections were
unconfused and met the flux ratio requirement, they were still
required not to show saturation of the analog-to-digital converter
if both detections were saturated then the brighter flux was used.
If one and only one was saturated then the unsaturated detection
alone was used. Finally, if the detections were on edge-overlap
slots opposite a dead redundant detector (or a significantly noisy
one which produced no detection conformable with the pair being
processed), then only the brighter detection was used for flux
information, unless it was saturated in which case the fainter
detection alone was used.
 
 The drop-dead detection always provided the source name
(time tag and detector number). The numbers of all detectors
involved were always recorded in the arrays set up for this purpose
(see Table X.B.6 ). When only one 
detection was used for flux
information, it also supplied the signal-to-noise ratio, detection
correlation coefficient, and baseline value. When refinement
was done, the maximum signal-to-noise ratio and detection correlation
coefficient were retained and the unweighted average of the two
baselines was kept.
 
 The order of the detector numbers in the array was determined
as follows. In the double-detection mode, the first number is
the candidate, and the second one is the drop-dead unless one
and only one detection was saturated in which case the first number
is that of the saturated detector. There is no way to tell the
difference between both detections being saturated and only the
candidate being saturated without recourse to additional data.
In the triple-detection mode, the detector numbers are in decreasing
detection time order if there was no analog-to-digital converter
saturation involved. Otherwise the first number is the fainter
edge-overlap detector, and the other two follow the rules for
double-detection mode number order.

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section