V.D.2.g In-Band Seconds-Confirmation Confusion Processing 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 D. Point Source Confirmation

 D.2 Overview of Seconds-Confirmation

 D.2.g In-Band Seconds-Confirmation Confusion Processing

 Chapter Contents |
 Introduction |
 Authors |
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section 

 The drop-dead detection and all candidates which had passed
the fine position test were immediately marked as confused upon
initiation of confusion processing. Status bits set here and
in corresponding subsequent analyses were carried in a status
word, hereafter denoted CSTAT, throughout all remaining processing
stages (see Table V.D.3 a , b ).
 
 Several attempts were made to unravel confused situations.
The first stage involved discarding any detections with signal-to-noise
ratios below 5 or detection correlation coefficients below 0.92.
 Such detections were never used in any future confirmation processing.
If this dropped the number of candidates to
zero or one, then the drop-dead was processed for rejection or
for the double-detection mode, respectively. Otherwise confusion
processing continued by attempting to identify pairs of candidates
which would confirm each other without the help of the drop-dead
detection and without confusion from other detections in the buffer.
 Any such detection pairs were set aside from the current situation
and left for the time when one of them would become a drop-dead.
Finding such pairs reduced the number of candidates involved in
the confused situation being processed, and after all such possible
reduction had been achieved, the number of remaining candidates
was checked as described above.
 
 If the situation remained confused then processing continued
by casting aside the detections whose slots had an edge-overlap
relationship with the drop-dead's slot; if any, unless the detector
status information indicated that these were allowable for pairwise
confirmation with the drop-dead. Again the branching possibilities
were checked. In this case, and in all remaining cases in this
section, discarded candidates remained eligible for future confirmations
on subsequent processing.

Confusion Status (CSTAT) Bit Assignments

Table V.D.3a

 Bit No. Meaning (Applies if Bit = 1) 

 0 Either triple-detection mode or possible

 confusion in seconds-confirmation 

 1 Triple-detection mode accepted 

 2 Confusion diagnosed and cleanup attempted

 in seconds-confirmation 

 3 Confusion diagnosed in band-merging, only

 best match retained 

 4 Confusion diagnosed in hours-confirmation,

 only best match retained 

 5 In 12 um Band Byte: Not Used

 In 25 um Band Byte: Not Used

 In 60 um Band Byte: Detector number
 arrays

 (all bands) are out time order

 In 100 um Band Byte: More then 3 sightings
 were hours-confirmed 

 6 ADC saturation occurred for at least one
 detection in this band 

 7 Not used

 Common CSTAT Values (Decimal)

Table V.D.3b.

 CSTAT Meaning 

 3 Triple-detection mode 

 5 Possibly confused 

 7 Triple-detection mode after confusion
 cleanup; usually not reliable 

 8 Possibly confused in band-merging 

 13 Possibly confused in both seconds-confirmation
 and band-merging 

 16 Possibly confused in hours-confirmation

 If further candidate reduction was needed, the candidates
were required to pass a stricter position test, similar to the
one discussed above, but with a threshold value such that one
real detection pair out of one hundred would be expected to fail
this test. Again the branches considered above were checked except
this time the case of two remaining candidates was included, with
a branch to the triple-detection mode processing if applicable,
provided that a branch from that mode to confusion processing
had not already been executed.
 
 If more than two candidates remained at this point (or two
which had been found unacceptable for the triple-detection mode),
then that combination whose summed fluxes came closest to those
of the drop-dead were retained and the others were discarded.
 If this left no candidates, the drop-dead was rejected; if only
one candidate remained the double-detection mode processing was
performed. Otherwise, a flux test between the summed candidate
fluxes and the drop-dead flux was performed which was similar
to the triple-detection mode flux test, except that the threshold
value used was chosen so that one real case out of a million would
be rejected. If this test was passed then all remaining candidates
were confirmed with the drop-dead which was considered to be a
simultaneous confused observation of all of them. This type of
salvaging was possible only when the drop-dead was the confused
sighting (rather than one of the candidates). In this case, no
flux refinement was performed; the individual candidate fluxes
were retained, but position refinement was performed as described
below.

 Chapter Contents |
 Introduction |
 Authors |
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section