IX.A. Instrumentation 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

IX. The Low-Resolution Spectra

A. Instrumentation

 Chapter Contents 
 | Authors 
| References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous Section 
| Next Section 

 Introduction 
 Optical Properties 
 Electronics 
 Effects of the Zero-Clamp 
 Summary of Instrumental Characteristics 

 Figure IX.A.1 Relative location and width of the image of the
exit slit in the field-of-view of the telescope, and the resulting
spectral resolution are given as functions of wavelength. The
width and resolution have been calculated taking into account
the diffraction by the telescope and the electronic filtering. 

 larger 
 largest 

 A.1 Introduction 

 The IRAS survey instrumentation included a low-resolution
spectrometer which covered the wavelengths between 8 and 25 um.
The spectrometer operated during the entire survey, providing
spectra of the brighter point sources. This section briefly describes
the instrument, dealing primarily with those aspects of its optics
and its signal-handling electronics that have a direct bearing
on the interpretation of the spectra. The spectra are presented
in two forms -- a tape version, henceforth called "The Catalog
of Low Resolution IRAS Spectra", or simply "The Catalog",
and a hard-copy version, designated as "The Atlas of Low
Resolution IRAS Spectra", containing graphical representations
of the spectra.
 
 Because the survey function required a passive instrument,
a slitless design was selected. This design is equivalent to
an objective prism spectrograph, oriented in such a way that the
dispersion was aligned with the scan direction. Obvious penalties
of this design are a degraded resolution for extended objects,
sensitivity to spatial confusion, and short integration times.
 
 The detectors were sampled continually during the mission,
and the data were received on the ground together with the other
survey data. The spectra were extracted during data processing
on the basis of point source detections from the survey array.
 
 A.2 Optical Properties 

 Figure IX.A.2 The optical layout of the spectrometer is shown
schematically. SO is the entrance aperture of the spectrometer
in the focal plane of the telescope. The field mirror M1, and
curved prism P1 and the exit slit S1 comprise the primary spectrometer.
M2, P2 and S2 from a secondary system that provides most of the
dispersion at the short wavelengths. 

 larger 
 largest 

 The spectrometer had a rectangular aperture mask in the focal
plane that measured 6' in the dispersion direction and 15' across.
 Although the cross-scan width of the focal plane aperture was
only half that of the survey array width, the overlap between
adjacent scans in the survey strategy ensured full sky coverage.
 
 Two overlapping wavelength ranges were scanned simultaneously,
one extending from 7.7 to 13.4 um and the other from 11.0 to 22.6
um. The scan length was nominally 6' internal alignment obscured
the extreme low end of the short wavelength range. The resolution
was primarily determined by the exit slit width of 15", although
diffraction at the telescope aperture and electronic filtering
caused significant smoothing. Figure IX.A.1 
shows, respectively,
the aperture location of a source, the effective monochromatic
image size, and the resulting spectral resolution as functions
of wavelength.
 
 Several detectors were used in each of the two wavelength
ranges to reduce confusion problems. Three short wavelength detectors
each covered 5' of the aperture width. At the longer wavelengths
two detectors each covered 7.5'.
 
 The optical layout of the spectrometer is shown in 
 Fig. IX.A.2 .
A back-reflecting KBr prism with curved surfaces served the three
functions of culmination, dispersion and refocusing in the long
wavelength spectrometer. A field mirror imaged the telescope
pupil onto the prism. The short wavelengths also passed through
this system, but were given additional dispersion in a second
spectrometer section with a curved NaCl prism, using a field mirror
adjacent to the first exit slit. field optics immediately behind
the exit slits refocused the telescope pupil on each of the detectors.

 A.3 Electronics 

 Figure IX.A.3 The AC-coupling and zero clamping circuit. Zero
clamping occurred when the input signal was decreasing, resulting
in an output signal of zero. 

 larger 
 largest 

 Si:Ga photoconductive detectors for the short wavelengths
and Si:As photoconductors for the long wavelengths were used in
conjunction with trans-impedance pre-amplifiers. The electronics
included spike suppression circuitry. The electronic bandwidth
was 12 Hz and the sampling frequency was 32 Hz, corresponding
to a sampling interval of 7.2".
 
 An important aspect of the data handling was the encoding
of signals with a large dynamic range into an 8-bit format. The
output voltages were digitally encoded on a logarithmic scale
with increments of 3.5% limiting the signal-to-noise ratio for
single samples to less than 100. To avoid loss of precision, the
baselines were kept at low positive levels by AC-coupling and
"zero-clamping". Occasionally, the zero-clamping affected
estimates of the baseline, as discussed in the next section. 
Fortunately, the occurrence of zero-clamping was rare among the
spectra selected for the catalog, since the rejection of confused
spectra tended to eliminate those with zero-clamps.
 
 Further detail on the spectrometer electronics is contained
in the instrument description by Wildeman, 
Beintema and Wesselius (1983) .

 A.4 Effects of the Zero-Clamp 

 Figure IX.A.4 
The effects of AC-coupling and zero clamping on flat spectral scans
with sloping backgrounds. From top to bottom: input signals, output
signals and reconstructed input signals. Absolute levels are relevant
only for the output signals. During reconstruction, the possibility
of zero-clamping is ignored. Within a spectral scan, wavelength
decreased with time. 

 larger 
 largest 

 Figure IX.A.3 shows a schematic representation 
of the circuit
usedfor the AC-coupling and zero clamping. The voltage across
the coupling capacitor equaled the difference between output and
input signals and thus constituted an error signal. As long as
the output signal remained positive, the circuit 
behaved like a high-pass R-C filter with a time constant of 10
seconds (a spectral scan lasts 1.5 seconds). The fact that the
error signal changed at a rate proportional to the output signal
was easy to correct. However, as soon as the output tried to drop
below zero, the capacitor was instantaneously recharged to prevent
any further drop; the output signal was clamped to the zero level.
The error signal was now the inverse of the input and could rise
rapidly, while the output indicated no rate of change. The clamp
remained active as long as the input signal continued to decrease.
As soon as the input signal rose again, the clamping ended and
linear behavior was restored. The output signal again tracked
the rate at which the error signal changed.

 Normally, zero clamps occurred just after spectral scans
or during negative noise excursions on "empty sky."
However, a steeply decreasing background could continually clamp
the output at zero, except during a spectral scan. In such a
case, the presence of a sloping baseline would go unnoticed. Because
of the direction in which the spectra were scanned the result
is then an underestimate of the signal at the shorter wavelengths
of both spectral ranges. A rising background would only raise
the baseline in the output signal with no worse effect than a 
reduced precision of digitization. Figure IX.A.4 
illustrates the effects of background slopes.

 A.5 Summary of Instrumental Characteristics 

 The design of the instrument and the planning of the IRAS
mission resulted in the following global characteristics of the
spectra:

 spectral coverage from 8 to 25 um in two overlapping
 ranges;
 a spectral resolution for unresolved sources varying
 from 20 to 60;
 a sky coverage identical to the coverage of the IRAS survey;
 typically 2 or 3 observations per spectrum, together
 providing about 0.15 seconds of integration time per spectral
 element per source;
 slit widths corresponding to 15" and instantaneous
 fields of view of 30 square (short wavelengths) and 45' square
 (long wavelengths);
 quantizationsteps of 3.5%, resulting in an rms digitizationerrors
 of 1%;
 potential problems from negative backgrounds gradients.

 Chapter Contents 
| Authors 
| References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous Section 
| Next Section