D.9 Conversion of Position Uncertainties to Gaussian Approximation 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 D. Point Source Confirmation

 D.9 Conversion of Position Uncertainties to Gaussian Approximation

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section 

 Throughout the processing, the position error model was
based on the non-Gaussian formalism mentioned in 
 Section V.D.1 .
 Because most of the point source position probability density
functions evolve toward Gaussian shapes at each stage of refinement,
the catalog description was designed to approximate the more familiar
error eclipses of two-dimensional Gaussians, while retaining most
of the accuracy of the non-Gaussian model. This involved bracketing
the nominal positions on each coordinate axis with a single number
to be interpreted as a confidence interval on that axis. This
is a simplification of the optimal cross-scan description, which
requires two numbers to define the distribution about the mean.
 
 For sources with strongly non-Gaussian position uncertainties,
there is no way to escape the fact that some aspects of the error
behavior will not generally be Gaussian. An important specific
example is the relation between error in sigma units and the fraction
of all cases exceeding that error. Because of the decision to
quote the axes of the two-dimensional contour enclosing 95% of
the probability mass, the error bars given were selected to match
the corresponding deviations on the axes of the random variables
used in the error model. Thus the expected frequency at which
the true source position lies outside of the quoted contour is
5%. The contour is not generally elliptical, however, as this
is a Gaussian feature not necessarily shared by the actual distributions.
The error incurred by assuming that the contours are all elliptical,
on the other hand should not be extreme, and in fact this approximation
played a role in mapping the two-dimensional 95% confidence into
one-dimensional confidences on each axis.
 
 The error bars were obtained as follows. For Gaussian errors,
the two-dimensional 95% confidence would correspond to a 
 2 probability of 0.95 with two 
degrees of freedom. 
This implies a value of 5.99 for the 
 2 random 
variable, so that the eclipse crosses each axis at 
2.45- , 
corresponding to a confidence of 98.6%. This was used for the 
confidence level for both axes. On the Gaussian axis of the 
error model, the interval used was 
2.45- y . On 
the non-Gaussian axis, a lookup table was used to obtain the 
98.6% confidence deviation as a function of the ratio of the 
uniform half-width, L z , to the Gaussian 
 z . This table was 
computed by numerical 
quadrature for a grid of these ratios ranging from 0.1 to 30. 
Below 0.1, the probability density was considered Gaussian, 
and above 30 it was taken as purely uniform.

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section