IX.E. Some Characteristics of the Catalog 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

IX. The Low-Resolution Spectra

E. Some Characteristics of the Catalog

 Chapter Contents 
 | Authors 
| References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous Section 
| Next Section 

 Completeness 
 Checks on the Shape of the Spectra 

 E.1 Completeness

 Figure IX.E.1 Plot of log (number) versus 
log f v for sources
seen with the spectrometer. The number plotted in the ordinate
is the integrated number of sources with flux densities less than
the designated flux density. The flux densities plotted in the
absissca have been obtained from the main point source catalog.
The bottom three curves correspond to individual spectral classes
defined in Section IX.D .

 larger 
 largest 

 No sharp flux density limit can be specified above which
completeness is strongly guaranteed, because of the stringent
rejection criteria (see Section IX.C.3 ). In general, 
completeness
is much better at high than at low galactic latitudes since most
of its selection criteria were meant to discriminate against confused
sources. Figure IX.E.1 shows plots of log (number) versus 
log ( f v ) where f v , is the flux density at 
12 um. The three most populated main classes have been plotted as well 
as the total sample. The total number follows a power law with a slope of
~ -1.3, while for sources with flux densities between 15 and 100
Jy the slope of the power law is closer to -1.0. These slopes
are consistent with a population of galactic sources. The catalog
is obviously incomplete below ~15 Jy. The variation of slope with
 f v , is rather large for classes 4 and 
2, while the slope of the class 1 curve is steeper than any of the others and 
much more constant. These differences can be understood if the spectral
features characterizing classes 2 to 4 become unrecognizable to
the classification program for fainter sources. Consequently,
the fainter class 2-4 sources tend to migrate into class 1 at
lower flux densities, thus causing an over-population of class
1 and an under-population of classes 2-4.
 
 E.2 Checks on the Shape of the Spectra 

 The general shape of the spectra is largely determined by
the wavelength- dependent responsivity correction, the deviation
of which has been discussed in Section IX.B.2 . 
If a considerable error were made in assuming that the infrared spectrum of 
 -Tau
was consistent with that of a 10,000 K black body, this would show
up as a systematic variation of the ratio of integrated spectral
flux over 12 um survey flux with spectral index. Some individual
spectra observed from the ground have been compared with the IRAS
spectra. The comparison showed satisfactory results.
 
 A word of caution is due with respect to line spectra. Relative
line strength observed in different spectrum-halves (8-13 and
11-25 um) of spectra with little or no continuum, may not be reliably
calibrated. This uncertainty is because of the uncertainty in
the cross-scan dependent responsivity correction (see Sections
 IX.B.3 and C.2.e ). 
Without the presence of a continuum in the
overlap region of the two spectrum-halves, joining the spectrum-halves
is uncertain and has generally not been done. Each spectrum-half
may therefore have an uncertainty of up to 20%.

 Chapter Contents 
| Authors 
| References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous Section 
| Next Section