V.D.1 Processing Overview 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 D. Point Source Confirmation

 D.1 Processing Overview

 Chapter Contents |
 Introduction |
 Authors |
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section 

 The arrangement of the detectors in the focal plane of the
telescope and the survey strategy permitted reobservation of inertially
fixed point sources after time intervals of several seconds, several
hours, and several weeks. The confirmation process consisted
of examining those multiple observations and identifying which
plausibly belonged to the same object. Once this identification
was made for a given source, refinement of the parameters describing
that source was performed by combining the observations into a
single improved description.
 
 When comparing two sightings, positional agreement was always
a part of the decision whether to accept them as the same object.
 Over the seconds and hours intervals, photometric agreement was
required as well. Because the cross-scan position was tested only
by requiring that a real object be sighted by a compatible pair
(or triplet) of detectors, the decision problem at the seconds-confirmation
level involved only in-scan position agreement, and the tests
could be based on Gaussian error models.
 
At the hours and weeks level, the position error had to be modeled
as a non-Gaussian random variable because of the uniform uncertainty
due to the cross-scan extents of the detector slots.
 
 The hours-and weeks-confirmation decision was based on the
correlation of the probability density functions which describe
the two-dimensional position information. The parameter which
was required to be above a certain threshold to confirm two sightings
was the cross-covariance of these density functions, evaluated
at the separation of the nominal positions. The formalism is
discussed and derived by
 Fowler and Rolfe (1982) . There were
several virtues in this approach, among which the most important
was its freedom from the Gaussian approximation. The position
error due to the detector slots was uniformly distributed,
making any Gaussian algorithm unacceptable.
 Another aspect of the decision algorithm was that the fraction
of true cases accepted increased as the size of the position uncertainties
decreased. Because the threshold could not easily be set to accept
a specific fraction of all cases, it was set during simulation
tests by opening up the the threshold until just before the acceptance
of false events became significant.

 Figure V.D.1 a) As described in the text, the position and associated
uncertainty of each source is represented by a probability distribution
function consisting of Gaussian and uniform components. Shown
here (left) are the distribution functions for two sightings of
a single source. b) The position of the source resulting from
the merging of the two sightings shown in V.D.1.a is described
by the new probability distribution function shown here (right). 

 larger 
 largest 

 Figure V.D.1 a depicts two position probability density functions
in a typical case. Each density function has a broad, flat ridge
which shows the uniform contribution of the net intersection of
the seconds-confirmed detector slots' cross-scan domains. The
orthogonal direction is that of the scanning motion, and the corresponding
position errors were found to be well modeled as Gaussian. In
the figure, the agreement between the two position estimates is
about as good as it could be. The large difference shown between
the scan directions occurred only at the weeks-confirmation level.
 At hours-confirmation, the major axes of the density functions
were approximately parallel. Refinement of position leads to
a new probability density function which is more centrally concentrated
as shown ia Fig. V.D.1 b for the current example.
 
 The confirmation decisions are summarized in
 Table V.D.1 
which gives, for each step in the confirmation process, the type
of position test (Gaussian or two-dimensional), the threshold
used the flux agreement required and the net effect of these criteria
on real sources.
 
 Although the confirmation decision and parameter refinement
lay at the core of the point source confirmation processing, many
peripheral issues also had to handled. These aspects are discussed
at a level of detail which attempts to be concise while not leaving
an inordinate number of questions unanswered.

 Confirmation Summary

 Table V.D.1

 Confirmation
Level 
 In-Scan
Limit 
 X-Scan
Limit 
 2-D
Limit 
 Flux Ratio
Limit 
 Comment 

 Seconds 
 4.4 Sigma 
 Compat. Det. 
 - 2 
 1 Real per 50,000 Rejected

 Band Merge 
 4.2 Sigma 
 Compat. Det. 
 - 
 - 
 1 Real Match per 40,000 Rejected

 Hours 
 - 
 - 
 1x10 -4 sr -1 
 2 
 1 Real Match per 20,000 Rejected

 Months 
 - 
 - 
 1x10 -4 sr -1 
 - 
 1 Real Match per 20,000 Rejected

 Chapter Contents |
 Introduction |
 Authors |
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section