V.D.2.f Triple-Detection Mode (Edge Detections) 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 D. Point Source Confirmation

 D.2 Overview of Seconds-Confirmation

 D.2.f Triple-Detection Mode (Edge Detections)

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section 

 Figure V.D.2 The confusion processing described in the text
attempted to deal with the various combinations of possibly multiple
sources seen on more than one detector. 

 larger 
 largest 

 Some scan paths available to inertially fixed point source
images traversed three detector slots in the same wavelength band
as portrayed in Fig. V.D.2 a. Only some 
combinations of detector
slots were consistent with this possibility. When three detections
were found to be confirmable on the basis of position, the slots
involved were tested for compatibility with this triple-detection
mode. If they were consistent, then the source position could
be localized to within the small region of cross-scan overlap,
and a small uniform uncertainty in the cross-scan position of
the source resulted. Many sources in the catalog have at least
one edge detection, resulting in correspondingly small cross-scan
uncertainties.

 If the slots were not consistent with an edge detection,
then the situation was diagnosed as confused (see below). An example
of three detections which were not consistent with the triple-detection
mode is shown in Fig. V.D.2 b. 
Whenever a legitimate triple-detection
pattern occurred the possibility that two or more point source
images were confused on the central detector had to be considered.
 Figure V.D.2 c shows two point-source 
image paths which are close
together in the scan direction but separated in the cross-scan
direction, so that the central detection is a confused response
to the two. The additional cross-scan coverage of the triple-detection
mode increased the probability that such confusion would occur.
 The only thing that could be done to avoid accepting this case
as a single point source was to require the edge-overlap detections
to be of roughly comparable brightness, so that if they were actually
two different sources, one would expect the central detector to
see about twice as much flux. This would tend to cause the flux
test to be failed, so that the triple-detection mode would be
rejected, and confusion processing would be invoked. A faint confused
source might not upset the flux test, and so relative faintness
on an edge-overlap detector itself was made to be a reason for
disqualification of the triple-detection mode. On the other hand
if only one source were involved but it barely grazed one of the
edge-overlap slots, there would be no great loss in disallowing
it, as it contained little information anyway, although the detection
could cause confusion again at hours-confirmation.
 
 These considerations led to requiring the ratio of fainter
to brighter edge-overlap detection to be greater than 0.01 in
order to continue to entertain the possibility of a triple detection
mode. Failure to pass this test caused the situation to be processed
for confusion processing.

 Next a flux test was applied to the brighter of the two
edge-overlap detections and the full-hit detection. This was
an n test on the log-flux discrepancy and 
had a threshold of 4.4 (i.e., reject one 
real source per hundred thousand). If
this test failed, confusion processing was applied; otherwise
parameter refinement was performed for position and flux. The
fainter edge-overlap detection was not used for flux refinement,
and the brighter was used only if the ratio of the fainter flux
to the full-hit flux was less than 0.1, as this indicated that
the brighter edge-overlap detection's slot should have intercepted
essentially all of the flux. To reduce the effects of spurious
weak detections, the fainter edge-overlap detection could contribute
to the position refinement only by having a signal-to-noise ratio
above 5 and a detection correlation coefficient above 0.96. If
it qualified then the pairwise position refinement described below
was performed first for pair consisting of it and the full-hit
detection, so that the slot-extension logic (see below) could
be activated for this pair. The brighter edge-overlap detection
contributed position and flux information according to the same
rules as the double-detection mode; these are discussed in the
parameter refinement sections below.

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section