III.A. Requirements 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 III. The IRAS Mission

 A. Requirements 

 Chapter Contents | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section 

 The IRAS mission was designed to observe the entire sky
in the infrared and to insure that the resultant survey was reliable
and complete down to a specifiable flux level. This requirement
was specified numerically as a catalog of point sources over 95%
of the sky, that was 98% complete in unconfused regions and 99.8%
reliable. To create accurate maps of the total sky brightness,
observations of diffuse emission also needed to be free of significant
background variations due to local effects such as Sun and Earth
shine. It was desirable to observe the same distant sky through
different regions of the solar system so that the effects of solar
system backgrounds could be separated from Galactic and other
backgrounds.
 
 Many non-astronomical sources of infrared radiation were
 detected by IRAS, including contaminants released by IRAS itself,
Earth orbiting dust particles, Earth orbiting satellites and other
space debris. Asteroids and comets were also detected. The difficulties
caused by dust particles and debris can be highlighted by noting
that a dust particle of diameter 100 um radiating as a blackbody
at a temperature of 200 K could be seen by the 12, 25 and 60 um
detectors with a signal to noise ratio of >3 for distances
closer than about 18 km. The infrared detectors were also sensitive
to impacts by cosmic rays and charged particles from the Earth's
trapped radiation belts. The residual effects of these impacts
could not be entirely removed by the on-board nuclear pulse circumvention
electronics ( Section II.C.5 ) and so were a 
potential source of
difficulty.
 
 The requirement for a reliable survey, along with the above
considerations, necessitated multiple observations of the sky
to discriminate between the fixed (distant) astronomical objects
and the moving (nearby) objects in the solar system, and against
noise sources such as particle radiation effects on the detectors.
 By reobserving the sky on a time scale of seconds the residual
effects of the radiation hits and the fastest moving local material
were recognized and rejected (seconds-confirmation); by reobserving
on a time scale of hours slower moving but still relatively local
sources were recognized (hours-confirmation); and by reobserving
on a time scale of weeks and months, slowly moving solar system
objects such as asteroids were recognized (weeks-confirmation).
 
 It should be borne in mind that the purpose of multiple
coverage was to enhance the reliability of the point source detections,
not to coadd data to enhance sensitivity.
 
 The demand that a source should be seen twice within seconds
was fulfilled by the design of the focal plane. A mission design
plan ( McLaughlin 1984 ) and a survey strategy 
plan ( Lundy 1984 )
to achieve the required, homogeneous, multiply-confirmed coverage
of the whole sky were evolved subject to the instrumental and
observational constraints. It is necessary to explain the observational
constraints that had to be met as these are important for understanding
the strategy and the reasons that, in practice, the sky coverage
was neither completely uniform nor homogeneous.

 Chapter Contents | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section