VII.H. Meaning of Point Source Flags 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

VII. Analysis of Processing

H. Meaning of Point Source Flags

 Chapter Contents |
 Authors |
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section 

 Confusion Flags 
 
 Point Source Neighbors 
 Small Extended Source Neighbors 
 Confuse Flag 
 Summary 

 Cirrus Flags 

 H.1 Confusion Flags

 Confusion flags are essential in assessing the quality of
a point source. Sources with all flags equal to zero can be accepted
without question. Sources with non-zero flags may have some problems
as discussed below.
 
 The confusion flags include a count of neighbors around
a given source that were found in either the point or small extended
source WSDBs, as well as a flag which was set by the processors
during seconds-confirmation, band-merging and hours-confirmations.
 This relatively large number of flags was required by the complexities
of the processing and of the infrared sky.

 H.1.a Point Source Neighbors

 Point source neighbor flags warn of problems in the immediate
vicinity of the source. The point source neighbors come from
the cleaned-up WSDB. The number of neighbors is counted in a
rectangle oriented along the largest position uncertainty direction.
That rectangle usually reflects the original scan direction used
to observe that source. The large dimension of the box is a half-width
of 6' along the smallest position uncertainty axis, which corresponds
to the maximum distance in which another source may have shadowed
or stolen any detections of the source in question

( Section V.C.7 ).
The half-width is 4.5' along the orthogonal axis, corresponding
to a full detector width. Neighboring sources within this distance
produced at least one detection that was the sum of the two sources.
 
 Weeks-confirmed and single hours-confirmed point source
neighbors are counted separately in that box. Non-zero values
for either count, but especially for PNEARW, the count of weeks-confirmed
sources, should caution the user that one or more bands of the
source may be reported incorrectly and to look in a small region
around the source for confusing neighbors. Most sources with
neighbors are found in regions of high source density.

 H.1.b Small Extended Source Neighbors

 Two types of small extended source counts are given. The
SES1 flag counts separately in each band the total number of hours-confirmed
small extended sources. Note that a weeks-confirmed small extended
source containing three hours-confirmations would contribute three
to this count, and a small extended source containing only one
hour-confirmation would contribute one to this count. The SES2
flag counts separately in each band only the number of weeks-confirmed
small extended sources. Both flags use the box described above
for point source neighbor counting.
 
 Both flags warn of the presence of structures larger than
point sources, and hence cast doubt on whether the reported source
is truly point-like or is only part of a larger complex. Two
separate flags exist for1 the following reason. In cold regions
containing only a single small extended source, SES1 would equal
the number of hours-confirmations times SES2, and thus the flags
would be redundant. However, in complex regions SES1 may be unrelated
to SES2. That is, because of the effects of cluster analysis
( Section V.E ) there may have been no

acceptable small extended
source, even though many small extended source detections occurred.
The distribution of sources with high values of SES1 and
with non-zero values of SES2 is shown in Figs.VII.Ap.21 and Figs.VII.Ap.22 .

 H.1.c Confuse Flag

 A final flag related to near neighbor confusion is derived
from the repeated occurrence of confusion during the processing
of a source. In a given band, if more than one candidate per
scan could confirm with the source at either seconds-confirmation
(excluding edge detections), band-merging, or hours-confirmation,
the processor set a flag. If any such flag was set in two separate
hours-confirmations of a source, then the confuse flag was also
set in that band. Thus if the confuse flag is set, something
other than an isolated point source was present at or near the
position of the source in question, and the user should again
be cautious. The distribution of sources with the confuse flag
set correlates well with high source density areas.

 H.1.d Summary

 The user examining an (IRAS source can immediately rule
out almost any problem if all of its neighbor flags are zero,
and SESl is 0 or l. Sources that have all those flags set to
zero are almost always completely clean point sources. There
are about 63,000 such sources in the entire catalog, 25% of all
sources. Above a Galactic latitude of 20deg, the fraction
is much higher, 30,000 out of 60,000 sources. Including sources
with SES1 less than 2, which are still almost always clean sources,
increases the percen- tage of clean sources to 38% in the entire
sky, and to 70% in the sky above Galactic latitude 20deg.
 
 Sources with non-zero flags may be confused with point source
neighbors or may only be part of an extended complex, and unfortunately
must be examined in more detail.

 H.2 Cirrus Flags

 Cirrus flags are set to warn the user that a catalog source
may be adversely affected by infrared cirrus or may even be no
more than a bump in the infrared cirrus. These flags and the
2' sky brightness images are the best possible substitutes for
examining the raw detector data. If all cirrus flags are smaller
than the limits discussed below, then one can infer that the source
is unlikely to have been affected by cirrus.

 CIRR1 

 CIRR1 gives an estimate of the existence of cirrus on the
point source scale. CIRRl is total number of sources detected
only at 100 um , including sources with single and
multiple hours-confirmations, in a 1 sq. deg box centered on
the source. The sky distribution of sources with CIRR1 greater
than three is displayed in Fig. VII.Ap.23 ,
and shows the areas where cirrus is a problem. This figure is
similar to the map of sources detected only at 100 um 
shown earlier ( Fig. VII.Ap.10 ).

 CIRR2 

 CIRR2 is a logarithmic function of the ratio of the 100 um
point source flux to an estimate of the 100 um flux produced
by cirrus, derived from the filtered 0.5' 100 um data
( Section V.H.4 ).
 Figure VII.Ap.24 shows that the distribution
of sources with CIRR2 greater than 4 correlates well with other
cirrus maps.

 CIRR3 

 Another estimate of the importance of cirrus comes directly
from the total 100 um emission is a 0.5' beam data.
CIRR3 is equal to the intensity of the 100 um
emission in MJy sr -1 .

 SES1 

 The SES1 flag at 100 um , discussed earlier, is a good
cirrus indicator. See the earlier discussion.
 
 Summary

 No clear-cut prescription can be given to a user to guarantee
that cirrus has not adversely affected a given source. If the
source has a strong 100 um flux, no missing bands, and
all cirrus
flags are well below the cutoff values discussed above, then it
is likely that few problems exist. If any of the above conditions
are violated a closer examination of nearby sources will usually
indicate the importance of cirrus. However, in some cases, only
an examination of images or, finally, the detector data will resolve
all doubts.

 Chapter Contents |
 Authors |
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section