V.D.4 Known Source Correlation 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 D. Point Source Confirmation

 D.4 Known Source Correlation

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section 

 Known Source Prediction 
 Correlation of Observations With Predictions 
 Known Source Flux and Position Discrepancy Analysis 

 A measure of processing quality was obtained by tracking
the progress of certain known sources of infrared emission through
the various stages of the data reduction. These included most
of the IRC and AFGL objects, along with about 25,000 K Stars and
2500 numbered asteroids. A dozen comets and the major planets
within the viewing constraints were also included as well as about
200 objects which were selected on the basis of potential interest
to users of the low-resolution spectrometer.

 D.4.a Known Source Prediction

 The a priori fluxes in the IRAS bands for the IRC, AFGL,
and K stars were estimated by blackbody curves run through measured
flux points. The K star estimates were adjusted by global rescaling
after a month's accumulation of data. The fluxes for the solar
system objects were obtained via standard thermal models. The
low-resolution spectrometer objects had no flux estimates.
 
 For each survey scan, the known objects which were to be
covered were predicted. The predictions involved the detectors
which would be crossed by each source image, the times of these
crossings, the flux that should be observed, and a measure of
the probability that a detection would result. The scan parameters
and the known positions of the sources were used with the detailed
boresight pointing history to calculate the geometrical predictions,
and once the detectors were identified, their sensitivities and
the intersections of their slots with the image blur were used
to obtain the expected flux values. The probability of detection
was based on the expected signal-to-noise ratio and photometric
error, along with the uncertainty in the reconstructed solar aspect angle, 
the clearance
in the slot of the image center, and the width of the image blur.
 The probability increased with higher signal-to-noise ratio,
as photometric error became less likely to thwart the detection
process, and it decreased with smaller slot clearance, as cross-scan
limit cycling and image blur width became more likely to prevent
the necessary amount of flux from arriving at the detector. For
the solar system objects, orbital position calculations were necessary.
 These were computed in heliocentric ecliptic coordinates at the
time corresponding to the middle of the observation period and
transformed to spacecraft-centered position angles. The remainder
of the task was the same as for inertially fixed sources.
 
 After each anticipated known source image had been mapped
through the focal plane, the number of detections predicted for
it was checked to determine whether the source could reasonably
be expected to be detected. The flux predicted for each detector
was required to be above a certain level corresponding to the
detection threshold on that detector. At least one SC or NSCF
prediction was required before any prediction at all was generated.
 If any prediction was issued, then the estimated fluxes in all
bands, even those below threshold, were passed on to the correlation
analysis, although no detectors were associated with any band
for which the fluxes were expected to be below the detection threshold.

 D.4.b Correlation of Observations With Predictions

 Association of an observed source with a predicted known
source was done strictly on the basis of position agreement using
the non-Gaussian statistics described at the beginning of 
 Section V.D.1 
( Fowler and Rolfe 1982 ). 
After an identification was made,
a subsequent identification of the same prediction with another
observation could still occur and have a chance to replace the
earlier association if appropriate. In such a case, the two associations
were compared and only the better match was kept. Similarly, if
one observed source was found to pass the tests for association
with more than one prediction, only the best match was kept.
 
 If a predicted source was never matched to an observation,
then the predicted probabilities of detection were checked to
see whether any were above 0.99 and if so, a warning message issued.
 A given prediction was considered unable to acquire further matches
if the latest observation processed was more than 41' past it
in the scan direction, or if another prediction at least five
positions further downstream was matched.

 D.4.c Known Source Flux and Position Discrepancy Analysis

 When final match decisions had been made for each predicted
known source, those which were identified with observations were
investigated for discrepancies in the flux and position. The
various types of known sources mentioned above were all kept separated
in the statistical analysis of the discrepancies.
 
 In-scan position discrepancies were used to compute the
mean, variance, and statistical significance of this error. The
information was used in the focal plane geometrical calibration.
Only very small mean errors were found and the variances indicated
that the a priori errors were slightly conservative. In addition,
data were grouped in cross-scan cells in order to determine whether
the mean in-scan error was a function of the cross-scan location
of the detectors involved. This would reveal any significant rotational
misalignment of the focal plane about the optical axis; an upper
limit of less than half a second of arc was found for the impact
of this effect on source position reconstruction.
 
 Cross-scan position discrepancies were studied in three
groups: sources observed only in one band, sources observed in
more than one band and sources containing any triple detections.
 These groups have distinctive ranges of cross-scan errors, and
are listed above in order of decreasing uncertainty. For each
group, the mean and variance of the cross-scan position discrepancies
were computed. General agreement with a priori values was found.

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section