V.D.2.c Optical Crosstalk Removal 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 D. Point Source Confirmation

 D.2 Overview of Seconds-Confirmation

 D.2.c Optical Crosstalk Removal

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section 

 Each detection was checked to see whether it was bright
enough to cause spurious sources due to optical crosstalk on adjacent
detectors (see Section VII.E.5 ). 
This decision was made on the
basis of the bright source's signal-to-noise ratio, since the
detection process triggered on that parameter, not flux level.
For example, a source which might elicit optical crosstalk detections
in quiet sky might not do so in the Galactic plane, where the
higher noise level could mask the crosstalk.
 
 A lookup table for each band was used to determine the cross-scan
distance over which a source might cause optical crosstalk detections.
 This was a function of the signal-to-noise ratio of the source,
and was based on the prelaunch evaluation of the optical point-spread
function. The signal-to-noise ratio thresholds for closer examination
were 5000, 1200, 300, and 200 in the 12, 25, 60, and 100 um bands,
respectively. When a detection was above this threshold the cross-scan
distance to search for other detections caused by crosstalk was
obtained from the lookup table. The in-scan search distance was
constant, with values of 14", 14", 29", and 58"
in the 12, 25, 60, and 100 um bands, respectively. Any detections
in the window which were fainter than the one being processed
were deleted from further consideration. The deletions were performed
only for the module containing the detector which yielded the
bright source, in order not to eliminate its confirmation partner.
 
 No attempt was made to identify crosstalk caused by the
secondary mirror support spider. The characteristics of the bright
source and those deleted were subsequently used in the small extended
source processing. An analysis of the effects of bright sources
is given in Section VII.E.5 .

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section