V.D.5 Overview of Hours-Confirmation 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 D. Point Source Confirmation

 D.5 Overview of Hours-Confirmation

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section 

 Hours-Confirmation Decision 
 Position Agreement 
 Photometric Agreement 
 Hours-Confirmation Confusion Processing 
 Hours-Confirmation Position and Photometric Refinement 
 Hours-Confirmation Statistical Processing 
 Special Considerations Regarding Hours-Confirmation 
 
 The next level of source confirmation involved observations
with time separations from 100 minutes up to 36 hours. Most objects
were observed on consecutive orbits, but the upper limit was chosen
to accommodate recovery scans for areas of sky not covered satisfactorily
on the first attempt for a variety of reasons 
(see Section III.D ).
Generally, hours-confirmation was run on groups of three successive
SOPs, although this rule was violated during the minisurvey (SOPs
29-44) and in two cases of survey restarts (SOPs 57-61, 256-257,
and 265).
 
 The "drop-dead" approach was used again to select
a source for processing. When the oldest source became 36 hours
older than the most recently acquired source, then the oldest
source became eligible for hours-confirmation processing. A maximum
of four scans were allowed to participate in one hours-confirmation
of one source. Match candidates were selected by taking all subsequent
unconfirmed observations within a coarse window centered on the
drop-dead source. This window was 27.5' across in ecliptic longitude
and 10.3' high in latitude. When the drop-dead source was within
30' of an ecliptic pole, all unconfirmed sources within 30' of
that pole were included in the candidate set.
 
 Both seconds-confirmed/band-merged and non-seconds-confirmed
(NSC) sources were included in the processing. but drop-dead sources
were taken only from the seconds-confirmed set until all eligible
ones had been processed after which all eligible NSC sources were
used in time order as drop-deads.

 D.5.a Hours-Confirmation Decision

 The candidates were required to come from orbits other than
that of the drop-dead source, or else they were discarded from
the processing of the drop-dead. They were also required to have
detected fluxes (i.e., not band-filled fluxes) in at least one
band in common with the drop-dead. Those remaining were then tested
pairwise with the drop-dead for position agreement, and any which
were not acceptable on this basis were discarded. Those that
passed were grouped into sets belonging to individual orbits and
checked for confusion. If no two remaining candidates were from
the same orbit, then processing proceeded to flux tests and combined
flux/position tests. If two or more candidates from the same orbit
had detected fluxes in at least one common band, then confusion
was diagnosed and status bits were set which would identify this
condition to all downstream processing 
( Section V.D.8 ). If more
than one candidate remained from a given orbit, but no common
bands were found then the situation was not labeled as confusion,
but only one candidate was retained; this was the one which passed
the combined flux/position test with the highest score.
 
 If no candidates were found to be acceptable, the drop-dead
source was rejected. Otherwise parameter refinement was performed
for the flux and position information. Tracking of known sources
was performed and various statistical computations were carried
out. Candidates which were not confirmed
with the drop-dead source remained for subsequent use, but confirmed
candidates were not available for further hours-confirmation.

 D.5.b Position Agreement

 Each pairing of the drop-dead source with a candidate was
tested for position agreement with the method mentioned at the
beginning of this section. The position of the candidate was transformed
to the local in-scan/cross-scan coordinates of the drop-dead and
the two-dimensional cross-covariance of the two position probability
density functions was evaluated for the separation observed. If
the result was below the threshold 
( Table V.D.1 ), the candidate
was not considered further for confirmation with the drop-dead.
Otherwise the result was stored for use later, and the candidate
remained viable.
 
 The threshold was set during simulation tests, and it was
verified as acceptable during the processing of early survey data.
As in the known source correlation processing, it was easier to
arrive at a threshold experimentally than to attempt to accept
a specific fraction of ail true cases. This follows from the fact
that the algorithm's acceptance fraction of true cases increases
as the position uncertainties decrease.

 D.5.c Photometric Agreement

 Each candidate which survived the position test was examined
for photometric agreement with the drop-dead in all bands in which
both sources had detected fluxes. A 
 2 test was used 
which was based on the logarithmic discrepancies of the fluxes 
and the corresponding variances. The number of degrees of freedom 
was the number of common bands. The parameter tested was the 
complement of the cumulative probability; this was required to 
be above 1 x 10 -4 , or else the
candidate was discarded. No more than one true case out of every
ten thousand should be rejected by this test. If the requirement
was met, then a combined flux/position test was performed which
required the product of the flux test score and the position test
score to be above ten. Again the candidate was discarded or retained
based on the outcome of this test, which also served as the tie
breaker when more than one candidate from the same orbit passed
all the tests.

 D.5.d Hours-Confirmation Confusion Processing

 When more than one candidate was confirmed with the drop-dead
source, a series of pairings of each candidate with each other
was performed and the requirements placed on each pairing were
to have at least one band with detected fluxes in common, to pass
the position test, the flux test, and the combined flux/position
test. When one of these requirements was not met, the candidate
with the higher combined flux/position test score with respect
to the drop-dead source was retained and the other was discarded.

 D.5.e Hours-Confirmation Position and Photometric Refinement

 Position refinement was performed for the drop-dead source
and all confirmed candidates by applying the technique discussed
by Fowler and Rolfe (1982) in 
pairwise fashion to the drop-dead
source and the first candidate, then to the result of this process
and the next candidate, and so on until all source observations
involved had been processed. The method essentially computes the
renormalized product of all of the position probability density
functions and calculates the parameters which describe this product
in terms an approximation to the original form of the density
function. In this way, the near-optimal treatment of the non-Gaussian
errors was maintained.
 
 Pairwise photometric refinement was performed in a manner
analogous to the position refinement. Bands in which the paired
observations had equal flux status were refined otherwise the
flux with the higher status was retained alone. Fluxes obtained
by detection with the point-source template were taken as having
the highest status; seconds-confirmed and non-seconds-confirmed
both qualified. These were refined with Gaussian estimation applied
to the logarithms of the fluxes, and so seconds-confirmed fluxes
were usually weighted more heavily because of their smaller uncertainties.
Low signal-to-noise ratio fluxes were refined by simple weighted
averaging of the fluxes, with the signal-to-noise ratio values
used as the weights. Upper limits based on noise were refined
by retaining the lower value. All detector numbers involved were
stored in arrays (see Section V.D.1 ) and kept 
with the confirmed
source with the following exceptions. Detectors supplying noise
fills which were not used were discarded. When four source observations
were confirmed, only the first, second and last set of detector
number arrays were kept; this was done for purposes of space conservation,
and a flag was set to indicate this condition.

 D.5.f Hours-Confirmation Statistical Processing 

 Confirmed source positions were written to an output file
for downstream tracking of confirmation frequency as a function
of sky position, and histogram data were maintained to display
confirmation frequency as a function of signal-to-noise ratio.
A histogram counter corresponding to the highest signal to-noise
ratio in, any rejected source was also maintained.
 
 Flux discrepancies in each band were processed to obtain
the mean and the standard deviation as functions of signal-to-noise
ratio; this was done in a format similar to that of seconds-confirmation,
and was used in the photometric uncertainty analysis to feed back
a posteriori dispersions for use as subsequent a priori errors.
 2 tests on the fidelity of the 
photometric error modeling showed
that this process was working as expected. Only confirmed sources
devoid of confusion, outer-slot confinement, and other questionable
symptoms were used to generate the photometric dispersion data.
 The standard deviations were similar to those of seconds-confirmation
but slightly larger, indicating more power in the photometric
error spectrum at orbital frequencies.
 
 Position discrepancies were examined for in-scan mean error,
variance, and statistical significance, and the cross-scan discrepancies
were studied as functions of latitude. The solar motion caused
the scan overlap from one orbit to the next to be a function of
latitude, and the overlap was designed to minimize the total cross-scan
error of single-band sources. This anticipated effect was confirmed,
and this strengthened confidence in the fidelity of the error
modeling. Slightly larger discrepancies were found very near
the ecliptic, and these were probably due to the confirmation
of asteroids which moved slightly between observations but not
enough to preclude confirmation. This effect was not included
in the pre-launch estimation of position errors at hours-confirmation.
 The primary effect, larger cross-scan errors for single-band
sources at latitudes between 40 degrees and 50 degrees from the
ecliptic, was clearly present.
 
 Histograms of the threshold parameters were generated to
show their distributions. The main concern was for the cutoffs
to lie in regions where variations in value did not cause significant
variations in the number of confirmations and rejections. This
would be possible if the noise processes were not saturating the
decision process, and if the cutoffs were placed well above the
values produced by most correct matches and well below the values
produced by most false matches. This appeared to be the case.
 
 Confirmation and rejection of numbered asteroids were tracked
and printed in the summary. The fraction of these which survived
hours-confirmation was about half, as predicted before launch.

 D.5.g Special Considerations Regarding 
Hours-Confirmation 

 Some complications to the hours-confirmation processing
were omitted from the discussion above in order to limit its intricacy.
These provisos will be described briefly in this section.
 
 As mentioned in the discussion of seconds-confirmation,
sometimes a source was observed only on detectors which lay at
the cross-scan boundary of the survey array. It was not possible
on a single pass to determine whether the source actually missed
the detector slots, so that both its flux and position information
would be incorrect. The position uncertainties were expanded as
described above, as this could be done in a way which virtually
guaranteed bracketing the true position; there could be no such
guarantee for the flux. As a result, the flux test was not performed
when at least one of the sightings involved only outer-slot detectors
in all bands containing detected fluxes. Flux refinement was
also bypassed in these cases unless both sightings being processed
were exclusively on outer slots; when this happened, the refined
flux kept the status of being outer-slot only. If a subsequent
pairing involved a sighting with detections inside the survey
array cross-scan boundaries, its fluxes were retained without
any averaging, and the outer-slot status was removed.
 
 When any source was processed which was detected but not
seconds-confirmed in the 25 um band next to the gap 
left by the demise of detectors 17 and 20, special checking was 
performed. If detections in other bands were present, the detector 
geometry was examined to determine whether actual image center 
passage between the cross-scan limits of the 25 um 
band detector could be verified; if so, no further special action 
was taken. Otherwise the flux in the 25 um band-was 
treated as an outer-slot flux, since the image center may actually 
have missed the slot involved in the detection. This disqualified 
the source's 25 um flux from testing, inclusion in the 
photometric dispersion analysis, and contributing to refinement 
unless no better data were available.
 
 Particle radiation posed a significant threat to the photometric
accuracy, and sources observed in all four bands were more likely
to be affected by it. The error caused by this source of noise
produced a broad non-Gaussian component to the photometric dispersion
which highlighted the fact that it did not conform to the assumptions
underlying the 2 tests used for flux agreement. A 
rule was implemented, therefore, which was applied when the sources 
tested had at least three bands in common and failed the flux test. 
In such a case, the single most discrepant band was removed from
consideration, and the 2 test with one fewer degree 
of freedom was used. This exemption could be invoked only once per 
source pair.

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section