V.D.2.h In-Band Seconds-Confirmation Position Refinement 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 D. Point Source Confirmation

 D.2 Overview of Seconds-Confirmation

 D.2.h In-Band Seconds-Confirmation Position Refinement

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section 

 Position refinement was performed for detection pairs as
follows. The in-scan position angle and its uncertainty were obtained
from those of the two detections by applying Gaussian estimation.
 The cross-scan position angle and its uncertainty were obtained
by computing the nominal intersection of the slot extents as mapped
onto the sky (i.e., including spacecraft limit cycle motion),
and then including a "slot extension" safety term if
the ratio of the fainter detection to the brighter was below 0.8
in the 12, 25, and 60 um bands, and in all cases for the 
100 um
band. This slot extension was obtained from a lookup table for
each band which gave the amount of extension as a function of
the flux ratio. The edge of the fainter-detection slot defining
the net cross-scan range is the edge which was extended. For
flux ratios greater than about 0.6, this extension was negligible.
For a flux ratio of 0.4, the extensions in the 12, 25, 60, and
100 um bands were 13", 13", 28", and 34",
respectively. For a flux ratio of 0.2, the extensions are 20",
20", 43", and 65", respectively. In cases involving
only detectors at the cross-scan boundary of the entire survey
array, a slot extension to allow for the possible passage of the
image outside of the detector area was added; the values used
for this were 45", 89", 138", and 206" in
the 12, 25, 60, and 100 um bands, respectively.
 
 The error due to the net remaining slot overlap was modeled
as a uniformly distributed random variable from this point on.
 This completed the computation of the position angles and their
uncertainties in the uncorrelated-error frame of reference. The
correlated errors (i.e., the relatively slowly varying absolute
pointing errors) were taken to be those associated with the drop-dead
source. These were modeled as Gaussian random variables, but
were not yet convolved with the other uncertainties because they
did not enter the band-merging problem 
(see Section V.D.3 ). Instead they
were merely carried along so that they could be included after
the band-merging was completed.
 
 The twist angle for the refined position was simply interpolated
linearly in time from those of the two detections being processed.
No uncertainty was carried for the twist angle because the reconstruction
error could have been an order of magnitude larger than the requirement
without significantly affecting the position information; the
reconstruction appears to have been well within its requirements.

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section