IX.B. Performance and Calibration 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

IX. The Low-Resolution Spectra

B. Performance and Calibration

 Chapter Contents 
 | Authors 
| References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous Section 
| Next Section 

 Detectors 
 Wavelength Scale 
 Cross-Scan Responsivity 
 Wavelength-Dependent Responsivity 
 Radiation Effects 
 Multiplexer Glitches 
 Confusion 
 Photon Induced Responsivity Enhancement 
 Memory Effects 
 Linearity Checks 
 Overall Flux-Density Scale 

 B.1 Detectors 

 The global properties of the detectors in the spectrometer
are listed in Table IX.B.1 . The weekly averages
of the responses to flashes of the internal reference source
( Section II.C ) stayed
within 1% of the values given, although systematic variations
of up to 15% were found on shorter timescales. These were associated
with passages through the South Atlantic Anomaly (SAA) and across
the Galactic plane. The spectra were corrected for these effects
by using a flash response interpolated between the most recent
flash and the next one. As described below, other correction
factors (especially the cross-scan gain) introduced larger uncertainties
in the flux scale of the spectra.
 
 The noise estimates given in Table IX.B.1 are
based on baseline
readings, and refer to a single spectral resolution element. Estimates
for individual spectra deviate from the mean value by typically
20%.

Table IX.B.1 Detector Characteristics 

 Detector Number 
 Response to Internal Reference (mV) 
 Noise level (mV) 
 NEFD (Jy) 
 Wavelengths (um) 

 1 
 11.9 
 0.10 
 1.4 
 8 - 13 

 2 
 4.4 
 0.04 
 1.6 
 8 - 13 

 3 
 7.4 
 0.06 
 1.3 
 8 - 13 

 4 
 22.8 
 0.12 
 3.0 
 11 - 22 

 5 
 46.3 
 0.20 
 2.5 
 11 - 22 

 B.2 Wavelength Scale 

 The conversion from in-scan position to wavelength was adjusted
and monitored using the lines in the spectrum of the planetary
nebula NGC 6543. The wavelength scale is accurate within 0.1 um.
 
 The zero point of the wavelength scale could be determined
by the in-scan position of the source as determined by the survey
instrument during the same scan. The uncertainty in this position
caused a jitter in the zero point of up to 1 sample (corresponding
to 7" or one-half of a spectral resolution element). This
effect degraded the correction for wavelength-dependent gain and
the averaging of individual spectra. A better estimate of the
zero point was obtained using the four well-defined band edges
of the spectrometer. A signal-to-noise ratio of 10 measured at
one of the edges gave an accuracy of 0.3 sample (2").

 Figure IX.B.1 Cross-scan responsivity for each of the five spectrometer
detectors. Detectors 1, 2 and 3 cover the 8-12 um wavelength range,
and detectors 4 and 5 cover the 11-25 um wavelenght range. Open
circles indicate the R UMi results; the curves were used for the
correction (Section IX.C.2.e). 

 larger 
 largest 

 B.3 Cross-Scan Responsivity 

 The cross-scan responsivity of the detectors was determined
by finely spaced raster scans across the star R UMi (as shown
in Fig. IX.B.1 .) where the curves are
normalized over the central
half of the detectors. The sharp dip in response of detector 4
was also found in the laboratory tests. Although the curves are
accurate within a few percent, the derived value of the cross-scan
correction is much less accurate. Because the cross-scan position
determined by the survey instrument during a scan had a typical
uncertainty of 1'. Except for sources passing over the very center
of a detector this introduced an uncertainty in the cross-scan
correction factor of 10-20%.

 B.4 Wavelength-Dependent Responsivity 

 In order to determine the factor for conversion of sample
values into flux densities, the observed spectra of a Tau were
compared with a black body spectrum of 10,000 K. The resultant
responsivity curves ( Fig. IX.B.2 ) show the
ratios of flux density
to sample value as a function of wavelength. The curves have
been normalized in the overlap region from 11 to 12 um and are
and to 2% at the shortest and to 4% at the longest wavelengths.
 No significant differences were found between detectors 1, 2
and 3, or between detectors 4 and 5. All detectors had somewhat
better responsivity in the center of their wavelength range than
at the edges. Except near the very edges of the band, the responsivity
correction did not exceed 30%. The feature seen between 9 and
12 um in the short-wavelength band is a characteristic of the
instrument that is found in all raw spectra and was already known
from laboratory tests.

 B.5 Radiation Effects 

 Figure IX.B.2 Wavelength dependent responsivity for the 8-13
and the 11-25 um detectors, respectively, plotted on the standard
samples (Section IX.C.2.c). The responsivities are normalized
in the 11-12 um region. 

 larger 
 largest 

 Spikes caused by energetic particle radiation hits were
removed by the electronic deglitcher without significantly increasing
the noise. Only near the maximum of the SAA, where no regular
observations were taken, were residual glitches and increased
noise found. The polar horns appear to have had no effect on
the detectors. Outside the SAA, baseline drifts on a time scale
of 1.5 sec, roughly the dwell time of a point source on a detector
had an amplitude of less than twice the noise level. Inside the
SAA, the drifts increased by about a factor of ten.

 B.6 Multiplexer Glitches 

 Occasionally, the data streams of the detectors were scrambled
by the multiplexer. In most cases this was evident in the spectra
as single-sample spikes. The larger ones were easily recognized
and removed (see Section IX.C ). In some cases a
series of samples
was scrambled and the spectrum could not be repaired without running
the risk of erasing real features.

 B.7 Confusion 

 Since the slitless spectrometer had a field-of-view of 5'
by 6' (short wavelengths) or 7.5' by 6' (long wavelengths), regions
that were confused in the short wavelength survey bands were also
confused for the spectrometer. A spectrum could be confused by
a nearby point source, or by extended structure associated with
the source itself or in the background. In most cases such confusion
was recognizable as a difference in the baseline level between
the two sides of each spectrum-half. However, as discussed below,
if the test of baseline asymmetry was made too restrictive, otherwise
good spectra were lost.

 B.8 Photon Induced Responsivity Enhancement 

 No evidence was found for photon induced responsivity enhancement
( Section IV.A.8 and
 VI.B.4c ), although it would have been hard
to discover. In the first place, most spectrometer sources were
stars or star-like sources with flux densities gradually decreasing
towards longer wavelengths. Since the spectra were scanned starting
at the long wavelengths, and thus at the lowest flux density,
the deformation of the spectra was minimized. Secondly, close
to the Galactic plane, where the effects were greatest there were
very few clean, isolated point sources. Confusion probably masked
any effects of photon induced enhancement present.

 B.9 Memory Effects 

 Changes in the detector responsivity on a time scale of
minutes due to exposure to a bright source or to a prolonged exposure
to a medium bright source like the Galactic plane were found to
occur. The latter effect was compensated for to within 5% by using
interpolated internal reference flash responses to correct the
flux densities.
 
 Memory effects did not cause differences in response of
the system between spectral lines and continuous spectra. The
planetary nebula NGC 6543 was scanned at the nominal survey rate
and at &frac12; , &frac14; , and 1/8 of that speed. The line intensities did
not change noticeably as a function of the different scan speeds.

 B.10 Linearity Checks 

 It is expected that any non-linearity effects were small,
although no comprehensive linearity tests were made. This statement
is based on the agreement between two different determinations
of the wavelength dependent responsivity curves. One set of curves
was determined using -Tau, a star
with a spectrum that rises
steeply towards shorter wavelengths. The second set of curves
was determined using asteroids -- cool objects which are brightest
at the longer wavelengths. The differences between the two sets
were small, and the comparison was limited by the accuracy with
which the asteroid curves could be determined.

 B. 11 Overall Flux-Density Scale 

 After processing a large sample of spectra with the correction
techniques described in Section IX.C , the integrated
fluxes in
the spectra (after convolution with the survey pass-band) were
compared with the fluxes measured by the survey array at 12 um.
 Comparison with the 25 um survey fluxes was not attempted because
the spectrometer hardly overlaps the survey 25 um pass-band. Systematic
factors of 0.75 and 1.00, respectively, were applied to the data
to make the 8-13 and 11-25 um spectrometer fluxes were with the
survey fluxes. On the average the spectrometer flux densities
in the catalog are consistent with the survey flux densities to
within 10-15%.

 Chapter Contents 
| Authors 
| References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous Section 
| Next Section