IV.B. Spectral Passband Verification 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 IV. In-Flight Tests

 B. Spectral Passband Verification

 Chapter Contents |
 Introduction |
 Authors |
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section 

 Verification of the Relative Consistency 
 Verification of the Nominal Inband/Out-of-Band Transmission 

 The product of the transmission efficiency of the optical
filter stack and the detector efficiency defines the effective
wavelength passbands and the nominal out-of-band rejection performance
of the detectors. This is described in
 Section II.C.5 and Tables
 II.C.4 and
 II.C.5 . The detector passbands were verified
before launch at the component level, but not at the system level. In-flight
tests were performed to test the consistency of the passbands
and out-of-band rejection within each band and to verify the nominal
passbands. There was no direct in-orbit verification of the effective
transmission characteristics of the detector/filter combination.

 B. 1. Verification of the Relative Consistency

 The consistency of the transmission characteristics within
each band was checked by a two step procedure. First, all detectors
were carefully calibrated relative to NGC 6543, which, for the
purposes of this test, may be considered as a 150 K blackbody
with spectral lines. The second step was to measure with each
detector a number of sources with much hotter or colder spectral
flux density distributions than NGC 6543.
 
 Numerically, the approach was to measure, in each wavelength
band, the flux S i,j from test source
 i on detector j . The average of S i,j over
the detectors in the wavelength band, <S i > , then
gives the best estimate of the flux from the source in that wavelength
band. The statistical distribution of the ratio

 R i,j = S i,j /<S i >
 
 (IV.B.1)

has, by definition, a mean of one if all detectors respond equally
to the test source and NGC 6543. The test sources
( Table IV.B.1 ) were four stars and two cold sources,
Neptune and the galaxy UGC 11348.
 
 The stars probe the short wavelength rejection and the short
wavelength transmission cuton of the detectors in all bands. The
two 50 K sources probe the longwave cutoff and longwave rejection
in the 12 and 25 um bands and the inband transmission of the 60
and 100 um bands. Significant changes in the band pass characteristics
of an individual detector relative to the band average transmission
would be detectable as a statistically abnormal member of the
 R i,j data set.
 
 The results of this test indicate that deviations in the
flux estimates from the mean are typically less than 10%, with
a worst case value of 16%. Table IV.B.2 gives the
typical and worst case value of the absolute deviation of
 R ij from unity in each band for the stars and the cold
sources. In spite of their wide temperature range, there was no difference
between the hottest and the coolest star.

 B.2. Verification of the Nominal Inband/Out-of-band Transmission

 The nominal response of the filter/detector combination
and results of preflight tests at the component level are summarized
in Section II.C.4 . In-flight verification was
required for two reasons. First, it was not possible to test fully the
detector/filter combinations before the flight even at the component level.
This applies in particular to the spectral response of the 100 um
detectors. Furthermore, a number of problems could have resulted in a
degradation during system integration or during the flight.
 
 Potential problems with the spectral response can be divided
into two categories, those that represent systematic deviations
from the nominal characteristics of all detectors in a band and
those that result in a random scattering in one or several detectors
in a band from the band average. Problems likely to result in
random scattering are cracking or delamination of the filters,
photon leaks around filter mounts etc. Extensive in-flight tests,
described in the previous section, indicate that the detectors
had rather similar passbands, thus eliminating random, but not
necessarily systematic, effects.
 
 An attempt was made to address the problem of systematic
deviations of the nominal inband and out-of-band transmission
of the four bands in a semi-quantitative way, by using observations
of stars with widely different temperatures, asteroids and the
planet Uranus to probe different portions of the passband.

Out-of-Band Rejection Test Sources

Table IV.B.1

 Hot test source Cold test source 

 Vir, B1 IV Te=24000 K Neptune Te=55 K 

 CMa, A1 V Te=10000 K 

 Car, F2 II Te=6900 K UGC11348 Te=50 K 

 Peg, M2.5 Te=2800 K 

 Out-of-Band Rejection Test Results

 Table IV.B.2

 |( R i,j - 1)| 

 Band Stars Planet/Galaxy 

 um Typical Worst Case Typical Worst Case 

 12 0.02 0.09 * * 

 25 0.02 0.07 0.05 0.14 

 60 0.03 0.09 0.06 0.12 

 100 0.10 # 0.13 # 0.06 0.16 

 * not detected 
 # low signal-to-noise ratio 

 The following hardware related issues affect the various bands:
 
 12 um band: Rejection of 15-23 um depends on an interference
filter. A weak upper limit on the mean transmission in this region
is based on the non-detection of Uranus in the 12 um band.

 60 um band: Rejection shortward of 27 um depends on a
combination of blocking filters and the Ge:Ga detector response. Very high
short wave blocking is required in the case of stars. Based on
the semi-quantitative analysis of observations of hot stars, cool
stars and asteroids, the shortwave blocking is consistent with
the design specifications given in
 Section II.C.4 .
 100 um band: Rejection shortward of 50 um depends on a
combination
of blocking filters and the Ge:Ga detector response. The comments
in 'b' above apply. The longwave cutoff is determined by the
detector cutoff at approximately 120 um. The detector response,
including this cutoff was not measured on the actual flight detectors
and the cutoff may vary a few microns from one detector to another.

 Chapter Contents |
 Introduction |
 Authors |
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section