Search--IRAS Explanatory Supplement 

 Search IRAS and ISSA Documentation

 Search the IRAS and ISSA documentation, using IRSA's Google search bar, by in
cluding "IRASdocs" in the search phrase:

 WWW IRSA

 Credits | Changes 
| Table of Contents | Index 

 Search
for: 

 Search Rules 

 This search engine helps you find documents on this website. Here's how it works: you tell the search service what you're looking for by typing in keywords, phrases, or questions in the search box. The search service responds by giving you a list of all the Web pages in our index relating to those topics. The most relevant content will appear at the top of your results.

 How To Use: 

 Type your keywords in the search box.

 Press the Search button to start your search.

 Here's an example: 

 Type photometry in the search box.

 Press the Search button or press the Enter key.

 The Results page will show you sections pertaining to photometry.

 Tip: Don't worry if you find a large number of results. In fact, use more than a couple of words when searching. Even though the number of results will be large, the most relevant content will always appear at the top of the result pages.

 More Basics - An Overview 

 Here's a quick overview of the rest of our Basic Help. Just click on the links to jump to these sections.

 What is an 'Index'? 

 What is a Word? 

 What is a Phrase? 

 Simple Tips for More Exact Searches 

 Fancy Features for Typical Searches 

 What is an Index? 

 Webster's dictionary describes an "index" as a sequential arrangement of material. Our index is a large, growing, organized collection of Web pages and discussion group pages from around the world. The 'index' becomes larger every day as people send us the addresses for new Web pages. We also have technology that crawls the Web looking for links to new pages. When you use our search service, you search the entire collection using keywords or phrases.

 What is a Word? 

 When searching, think of a word as a combination of letters and numbers. The search service needs to know how to separate words and numbers to find exactly what you want on the Internet. You can separate words using white space and tabs.

 What is a Phrase? 

 You can link words and numbers together into phrases if you want specific words or numbers to appear together in your result pages. If you want to find an exact phrase, use "double quotation marks" around the phrase when you enter words in the search box.

 Example: To find documents on extended emission, type "extended emission" (with quotes) in the search box. You can also create phrases using punctuation or special characters such as dashes, underscore lines, commas, slashes, or dots.

 Simple Tips for More Exact Searches 

 Searches are case insensitive. Searching for "Photometry" will match the lowercase "photometry" and uppercase "photometry".

 By default, all searches are accent insensitive as well, but administrators can change this setting. Accent sensitivity relates to Latin characters like &#245;.

 Including or excluding words: 

 To make sure that a specific word is always included in your search topic, place the plus (+) symbol before the key word in the search box. To make sure that a specific word is always excluded from your search topic, place a minus (-) sign before the keyword in the search box.

 Example: To find recipes for cookies with oatmeal but without raisins, try "recipe cookie +oatmeal -raisin".

 Expand your search using wildcards (*): 

 By typing an * at the end of a keyword, you can search for the word with multiple endings.

 Example: Try wish*, to find wish, wishes, wishful, wishbone, and wishy-washy.

 Fancy Features for Typical Searches 

 You can search more than just text. Here are all of the other ways you can search on the net:

 link:address 

 Finds pages that link to the specified address, or a substring of it. Use link:microsoft.com to find all pages linking to Microsoft sites. Note: this feature is not implemented on all search engines.

 text:text 

 Finds pages that contain the specified text in any part of the page other than an image tag, link, or URL. The search text:cow9 would find all pages with the term cow9 in them.

 title:text 

 Finds pages that contain the specified word or phrase in the page title (which appears in the title bar of most browsers). The search title:Elvis would find pages with Elvis in the title.

 url:text 

 Finds pages with a specific word or phrase in the URL. Use url:altavista to find all pages on all servers that have the word altavista in the host name, path, or filename - the complete URL, in other words.

 Powered by the Fluid Dynamics Search Engine v2.0.0.0055 2002

-->
 
 Credits | Changes 
| Table of Contents | Index