VIII.B. Sky Coverage 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

VIII. Sky Coverage, Confusion, Completeness and Reliability

B. Sky Coverage

 Chapter Contents | Authors 
| References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous Section 
| Next Section 

The survey strategy was chosen to achieve a high degree of homogeneity
of coverage of the sky. One hours-confirming (HCON) coverage is defined
as the sky coverage obtained by two or more scans covering a given area
of the sky with a separation in time ranging from one orbit of the satellite,
103 minutes, up to a maximum of 36 hours. Figures 
 I.C.1 
and III.D.3 show the distribution of the
number of HCON coverages in equatorial and ecliptic coordinates. More detailed
plots of the sky coverage are shown in Chapter
XIII .
 
Ninety-six percent of the sky was covered with the two or more HCONs
required for sources to be considered for inclusion in the catalog. A three
HCON coverage was achieved over 72% of the sky. Roughly l5% of the sky
received more than three HCON coverages. Areas receiving more than three
HCON coverages arose mainly from the minisurvey (see below), from the overlap
between lunes used in the survey strategy, from rescans scheduled to fill
in coverage holes and from the tendency of scans to overlap at high ecliptic
latitudes.
 
From the standpoint of the IRAS survey itself the area of the 
"minisurvey"
was the most important area receiving extra coverage 
( Section III.C.11 ).
The particular area was selected because it was available immediately after
the telescope cover was ejected. The region was surveyed intensively to
check the source detection and confirmation algorithms and to verify that
the chosen survey strategy provided the desired completeness and reliability;
see Rowan-Robinson et al . (1984) . The
minisurvey consisted of two strips of the sky centered approximately at
ecliptic longitudes 60deg and 250deg and contained areas both of high
source density near the Galactic plane and of reasonably low source density.
Parts of the minisurvey received as many as four HCON coverages during
the minisurvey proper. The whole minisurvey area received three more HCON
coverages during the main survey. Thus some regions received as many as
seven HCONs.
 
The part of the sky with no HCON coverage is entirely contained within
two strips on opposite sides of the sky each roughly 5deg wide and
60deg long. This part of the sky was not observed because of the operational
difficulties explained in Section III.D.5 .
At the borders of the gap there are strips 0.5deg wide that received
only one HCON coverage. In addition, there are various small areas of the
sky which received only one HCON coverage. for the single HCON areas, 
comprising
in total some 500 sq. deg, there are no entries in the catalog. The main
cause of the small holes was the inability to take useful data when the
spacecraft passed through the South Atlantic Anomaly 
(the SAA, see Section
III.D.4 ). These areas are mainly concentrated in the south (see the
detailed area coverage plots in 
 Chapter XIII ).
Hours-confirmed detections made in the single HCON sky are contained in
the catalog of rejected point sources.

 Chapter Contents 
| Authors | References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous Section 
| Next Section