III.C. Design 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 III. The IRAS Mission

 C. Design

 Chapter Contents |
 Authors |
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section 

 Basic Strategy 
 The Second Six Months 
 Scan Rate 
 Strategy during South Atlantic Anomaly Passage 
 Moon and Jupiter Avoidance Strategy 
 Strategy of Attitude and Photometric Calibration 
 Realization of Survey Strategy 
 Half-Orbit Constraint 
 Lune Constant 
 Hole Recovery Strategy 
 Pre-Survey Observations 

 C.1 Basic Strategy

 The basic time interval of the operations and data acquisition
was the time between station passes, varying between seven or
eight orbits or 10 to 14 hours. During each such period, the survey
strategy discussed below was implemented in a series of commands
sent to the satellite called a Satellite Observation Plan, hereafter
denoted as SOP. There were two SOPs per day and 600 SOPs in the
entire mission.

 Figure III.C.1 Lunes are sketched on the celestial sphere. Shaded zone
is not allowed by Sun constraint. 

 larger 
 largest 

 The strategy developed to achieve the goals of multiple
survey coverage on various timescales divided the celestial sphere
into units of half overlapping "lunes" in the ecliptic
coordinate system ( Lundy 1984 ).
Lunes were defined as the area
between two ecliptic meridians 30deg apart
( Fig. III.C.1 ).
The lunes were "painted" by survey scans, one after
the other, as they passed through the viewing window of the telescope.
 Figure III.C.2 illustrates the shape of a lune
sketched onto
a plane and, with a very exaggerated focal plane width, how it
was covered by different survey scans each at a fixed cone angle
from the Sun. The first scan in a lune was placed so that it
crossed the ecliptic at the lower longitude boundary of the lune.

 Figure III.C.2 Half-overlapping scan swaths (highly exaggerated) fill
a lune with one hours-confirming layer. 

 larger 
 largest 

Successive scans were laid down at increasing ecliptic longitudes,
each one shifted over by 14.23', that is by half the width of
the focal plane minus a safety margin to account for the pointing
limit cycle of the telescope. The overlap ensured that measurements
of the same area of sky were repeated within a few orbits (for
hours-confirmation) and that the "banana effect"
( Section III.B.8 ) was not too severe.
The criterion for hours-confirmation
was that the hours-confirming scans had to be made within three
SOPs (34-38 hours) of each other.

 Figure III.C.3 A typical days survey coverage (clear regions at
approximately ecliptic longitudes 167deg and 347deg) is plotted
on a map of the sky in ecliptic coordinates. The two shaded regions
centered on ecliptic longitudes 90deg and 270deg are forbidden
by the Sun and Earth constraints. 

 larger 
 largest 

 Two lunes in opposite hemispheres were observed simultaneously,
one on the ascending side of the orbit and one on the descending
side. Figure III.C.3 shows a typical day's
survey coverage and
the regions forbidden by the constraints. After a lune was filled,
a second lune in the same hemisphere was started; it overlapped
half of the first lune, ensuring that another hour's-confirming
set of scans was repeated after about one to two weeks, thus providing
the required repetition on the time scale of weeks
( Fig. III.C.4 ).

 Figure III.C.4 The lune coverage scheme is shown for the first two sets
of hours-confirming scans. Each line represents a single hours-confirming
coverage of an entire 30deg lune (except short lines at beginning and
end which represent half-lune coverage). 

 larger 
 largest 

 The observing conditions were considerably worse during some
orbits than during others. Orbits that crossed the SAA or contained
a station prime pass were interrupted for significant amounts
of time. When a long interruption occurred, the continuation of
a survey scan was sometimes impossible and a small hole in the
coverage resulted. To minimize such events only the nine (out
of 14) orbits per day least affected by the SAA were used for
the survey scans

 Figure III.C.5 A zone of half-circle scans is drawn on the
celestial sphere. 

 larger 
 largest 

 The survey strategy aimed for four coverages (two sets of
hours-confirming coverages) in the first six months and two coverages
(a third set of hours-confirming coverages) in the second six
months. Any time left over was used to recover survey observations
lost because of the various constraints, to make the necessary
calibration observations and to carry out additional, non-survey,
pointed observations to attain higher sensitivity or spatial resolution.
 For the first two weeks of observations (February 10-23, 1983,
SOPs 31-57) half circle scans, which give redundant coverage in
the ecliptic polar areas ( Fig. III.C.5 ), were
used for increased
initial coverage as insurance against an early failure of the
satellite. Subsequently, the more efficient lune method was used
for the rest of the first six months of the survey.

 C.2 The Second Six Months

 The first sky survey was completed on August 26, l983, with
nearly a full second six months of operations expected. The survey
was continued, but aimed at a coverage by only one set of hours-confirmed
scans and using seven orbits per day. This plan covered many
of the large number of small regions that the survey had missed
for reasons explained elsewhere in this chapter, without the time
consuming necessity of covering each hole separately, and also
improved the survey's completeness for weaker sources (signal-to-noise
ratio 5-l0). Another important goal was the coverage of a 5deg
gap left in the first six months' survey
( Section III.D.5 ). This
latter goal was never achieved because the helium supply was exhausted
earlier than expected. Half circles rather than lunes were used
in the second six months because the additional coverage in the
ecliptic polar regions in August and September filled in regions
that would be inaccessible later due to eclipses and a severe
Earth infrared radiation constraint in December and January.

 C.3 Scan Rate

 Using two gyros, the spacecraft clock-angle (X) 0 
( Fig.
 III.B.7 ) was decreased at a rate of (3.85 / cos( 90 -
 ))' per second
(which resulted in scanning the sky at a rate of 3.85' per second
independent of ), i.e. 10% faster
than the orbital rate of the
satellite of 3.5' per second. This increased rate gave increased
pointing flexibility with respect to the constraints and, in particular,
helped to reduce the effects of the SAA.

 C.4 Strategy during South Atlantic Anomaly Passage

 Survey observations were interrupted for up to l4 minutes
during SAA passages even after selection of the least affected
orbits. When the telescope entered the SAA during a survey scan
its scanning motion was halted and it remained pointing at the
same point on the celestial sphere until it emerged from the SAA
when the scan was restarted with an overlap. During the SAA passage,
"bias boost" was applied to the 60 and 100 um detectors
until about three minutes before exit. The internal reference
sources were flashed just before entry and just after exit at
the end and beginning of survey scans
( Section III.B.3 ). Some
SAA passages required so much time that the telescope would have
violated the Earth infrared constraint
( Section III.B.4 ) after
SAA passage. In such cases it was necessary to leave a hole in
the sky coverage and try to recover it with specially prepared
short scans in the preceding or succeeding pair of SOPs. The failure
to recover all of these holes contributed to the variable depth
of sky coverage.

 C.5 Moon and Jupiter Avoidance Strategy

 Figure III.C.6.1 The first hours-confirmed coverage is overlaid on a
map of the sky in ecliptic coordinates. The scans converge at the ecliptic
poles. Small, equally spaced holes in the ecliptic plane are due to the lunar
avoidance stragegy and represent gaps in the sky coverage used to generate
the extended emission images. The point source survey was not affected by
these gaps. 

 larger 
 largest 

 Jupiter was avoided by stopping a scan when it reached within
1deg of the planet and side stepping by 1deg for 2deg
of scan before coming back to resume the original scan; hence
the Jupiter avoidance procedure left a 2deg square hole on
the sky which needed to be recovered later in the survey.
 Figure III.C.6.1-3 clearly show the three
square holes on the ecliptic
at longitude approximately 250deg (RA about 17 hrs). Each
was left by one of the three sets of hours-confirming coverages.
 There is no residual Jupiter hole when the effect of all the
coverage is added.

 Figure III.C.6.2 Same as Figure III.C.6.1 ,
except for the second hours-confirming coverage. 

 larger 
 largest 

 To avoid the moon in the same way as Jupiter would have
left extremely large holes which would have been difficult to
fill. The policy adopted, therefore, was to stop the survey on
the moon's side of the orbit for the approximately three days
needed for the moon to pass through this approximately 40deg
avoidance region.

 Figure III.C.6.3 Same as Figure III.C.6.1 ,
except for the third hours-confirming coverage. 

 larger 
 largest 

 C.6 Strategy of Attitude and Photometric Calibration

 To refine the pointing after the slew to the beginning point
of a scan, attitude calibrations were made using visual stars
at the beginning and end of each scan. Star sightings near the
middle of the scan, if possible, allowed any pointing drifts to
be detected and corrected ( Section V.B ).
Long scans proved most
suitable as they offered the greatest probability of finding these
calibration stars.
 
 To check the photometric calibration the internal reference
sources were flashed at the beginning and end of every scan, including
scans broken by the SAA. The internal reference sources were
themselves regularly checked against an astronomical reference
source ( Section VI.A ).

 C.7 Realization of Survey Strategy

 The survey scans resulting from this strategy and the constraints
were generated by a computerized scheduling program
( Oord et al. 1981 ). As well as
generating the survey scans, the program reported
which pieces of sky were not covered due to a combination of constraints,
so that scans could be generated separately for inclusion elsewhere
in the same or other SOPs
( MacDougall 1984 ). It was not always
possible to generate these scans within the constraints and so
holes were left.

 C.8 Half-Orbit Constraint

 The scheduling program constrained survey scans to stop
at the end of a half-orbit at one of the ecliptic poles. A side
effect of this half-orbit design was that on occasions when the
satellite had looked back in its orbit to cover a region of sky
whose observation had been interrupted by a long SAA passage
( Section III.C.4 ), the scan was cut short by reaching
the end of its half-orbit,
even though no other constraints had been violated.

 C.9 Lune Constraint

 Full coverage with the lune method required that while a
lune was being painted it had to contain the meridian at 90deg
from the Sun. Otherwise the ecliptic poles could not be reached
and holes would result. The scheduling program used to generate
the survey scans also required that 
= 90deg lie within
the lune. This geometry became a hard constraint on the lune strategy,
and became relevant to the decision that led to the 5deg gap
( III.D.5 ).

 C.10 Hole Recovery Strategy

 A record was maintained of those regions of the sky that
were not covered by the automatically generated scans due to constraint
violations and as suitable opportunities arose, attempts were
made to fill the holes ( Lau and Wolff 1984;
Lundy 1984 ).

 C. 11 Pre-Survey Observations

 Before commencing survey operations numerous checks were
required to verify the health and safety of the satellite and
to determine the best modes of operation. The cooled aperture
cover was kept on the telescope for the first six days to allow
sufficient time for contaminants carried up with the satellite
to outgas and disperse so that they would not freeze on the cold
optics when the cover was ejected. The eight days after cover
ejection were used to test those aspects of the instrument that
could not be tested with the cover on. This period was followed
by a period of repeated surveying on a limited region of sky to
verify the survey strategy and the data processing facilities
( Section VIII.D ;
 Rowan-Robinson et al. , 1984 ).
The scans of this "minisurvey" were hand-tailored
for maximum efficiency in coverage. After all these tests had
been completed and the problems they revealed had been resolved
( MacDougall et al. 1984 ), the
all-sky survey was started. The
dates of these and other important events are given in
 Table III.C.1 .

 Mission Chronology

Table III.C.1

 Date SOP Event 

 (All dates are 1983 and given in GMT) 

 26 Jan 
 1 
 Launch 02h 17m 

 26-31 Jan 
 1-12 
 In Orbit Checkout (Cover on)
Outgassing of satellite 

 31 Jan 
 12 
 Cover ejection 19h 37m

 31 Jan-8 Feb 
 12-28 
 In Orbit Checkout (Cover off)

 9 Feb 
 29 
 SAA contour A ( Fig. III.B.6 ) usage begins 

 9-10 Feb 
 29-30 
 Minisurvey layer 1 Hand made scans 

 10 Feb 
 31 
 Start first two hours-confirming
coverages using half circles. 

 11-12 Feb 
 33-34 
 Minisurvey layer 2 Hand made scans 

 13-14 Feb 
 37-38 
 Minisurvey layer 3 Hand made scans 

 15 Feb 
 41 
 Minisurvey layer 4a Hand made scans 

 16 Feb 
 43 
 Minisurvey layer 4b Hand made scans 

 23 Feb 
 57 
 Half circle method ended 

 23 Feb 
 58 
 Lune method started 

 3 Apr 
 135 
 Moon avoidance radius lowered
from 25deg to 20deg 

 9 May 
 207 
 SAA contour B ( Fig. III.B.6 ) usage begins 

 26 Aug 
 425 
 End of first two hours-confirming coverages 

 26 Aug 
 426 
 Start third hours-confirming coverage 

 26 Aug 
 426 
 Moon avoidance radius lowered from 20 to 13deg 

 9 Sep 
 454 
 Moon avoidance radius raised from 13 to 20deg 

 18 Nov 
 593 
 First eclipse. Fallback to safety mode 

 21 Nov 
 600 
 Survey operations resumed 19h 40m 

 22 Nov 
 600 
 Liquid helium ran out 00h 16m 

 22 Nov 
 600 
 Last survey scan started 03h 34m 

 23 Nov 
 603 
 12 um detector baselines saturated 09h 30m 

 Chapter Contents |
 Authors |
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section