V.A.3 Processing Summary 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 A. Overview

 A.3 Processing Summary

 Chapter Contents |
 Introduction |
 Authors |
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section 

 Processing Steps 

 Data Reconstruction 
 Pointing Reconstruction 
 Source Detection 
 Point Source Confirmation 
 Small Extended Source Confirmation 
 Asteroids and Comets 
 Extended Emission Processing 
 Final Processing Steps 

 Processing Steps

 The following processing steps were applied to the data:
 
 Data reconstruction ( Section V.A ),
 Pointing reconstruction ( Section V.B ),
 Calibration ( Chapter VI ),
 Source detection ( Section V.C ),
 Point source confirmation ( Section V.D ),
 Low-resolution spectra extraction
 ( Chapter IX ),
 Small extended source confirmation
 ( Section V.E ),
 Identification of possible asteroids and comets
 ( Section V.F ),
 Data compression for extended source images
 ( Section V.G ).

 The point source catalog was generated after all of the
data had been processed to create the intermediate Working Survey
Data Base (WSDB) which contained all sources that were hours-
or weeks-confirmed. The following steps were then applied to sources
in the WSDB ( Section V.H ):
 
 Final calibration,
 Source clean-up and neighbor tagging,
 Average flux computation, calculation of flux
 uncertainty and source variability analysis,
 High source density region clean-up,
 Source selection,
 Association and classification of low-resolution
 spectra ( Chapter IX ),
 Positional associations with other astronomical catalogs,
 Cirrus flagging,
 Transformation of coordinates, assignment of source
 names and calculation of positional uncertainty
 ellipses.

 To generate the small extended source catalog, the following
steps were applied to a file containing hours-confirmed small
extended sources ( Section V.E ):
 
 Cluster analysis processing,
 Weeks- and months-confirmation,
 Band-merging,
 Final calibration,
 Positional associations with other astronomical catalogs.

 To generate the atlas of all-sky images, the following
steps were applied to the compressed data
( Section V.G ):
 
 Quality checking and data selection,
 Regridding into images in equatorial coordinates,
 Final calibration.

 The remainder of this overview briefly describes these
basic processing steps, except for calibration which is discussed
in Chapter VI . A much more detailed
discussion of each topic is
given in the subsequent sections of this chapter.

 A.3.a. Data Reconstruction 

 The detector data were reconstructed from the telemetry
data as discussed in Appendix II.1 .
Any one-second frame of detector
data containing more than one parity error, indicative of a transmission
error from the satellite station to the ground, or from Chilton
to JPL, was discarded. Frames next to a data outage with even
one parity error were also discarded. The frequency of such errors
was quite low, with typically fewer than five seconds of data
being rejected from each SOP. Each second of data was tagged
with its time of observation in seconds since 1981, January 1.0
UT.

 A.3.b. Pointing Reconstruction 

 Data from Sun sensors, gyros, and observations of bright,
 M v < 7 visual stars were combined to determine a continuous
record of the position in the sky that a reference point in the
focal plane was observing. Infrared observations of stars were
not used in the reconstruction process, but were used to verify
the accuracy of the pointing. Most survey observations contained
two or more visual star observations, so that in-scan pointing
errors were typically less than 5" and cross-scan pointing
errors less than 10". However, a few survey observations
had none or only one visual star observation with resultant in-scan
errors as large as 1-2'.

 A.3.c. Source Detection 

 For point sources, a zero-sum square-wave filter was used
to search the calibrated data stream from each detector for peaks
larger than roughly 2.5 times the rms noise. The noise at a given
time was approximated by a filtered running average of the values
of all preceding square-wave peaks. The noise estimator was a
one-sided estimate of the noise which was in error when the noise
changed rapidly. For each candidate peak, an 11-point template
was fitted to the data, giving the amplitude and crossing time
of the peak and a correlation coefficient. Those peaks with an
amplitude above 3.0 times the noise and a correlation coefficient
greater than 0.87 were passed to the confirmation processor as
valid detections. Since the noise refers to a single data point
and a point source contributes to three successive data points
(with weights 0.5, 1.0 and 0.5), the true signal-to-noise threshold
of the detection process was roughly 3.7, which is significantly
below the local signal-to-noise cutoff of about 5.7, implied by
a correlation coefficient cutoff of 0.87. The noise on a single
data point was quoted throughout the processing.
 
 For small extended sources a simpler algorithm was used
to detect potential sources. Zero-sum square-wave filters of
various angular extents were applied to the data from each detector.
The filter sizes were 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16' at 12 and 25 um, 2,
4, 8 and 16' at 60 um, and 4, 8 and 16' at 100 um.
The data streams filtered with the smallest (1' at 12 and 25 um, 2' at
60 um and 4' at 100 um) and largest (16') spatial filters were
used to discriminate
against point sources and extended sources larger than 8'. Detections
with a larger flux in one of the extended source filters than
in the point source filter were considered as possible extended
sources and passed to the corresponding confirmation processor,
independently of whether a point source detection occurred.

 A.3.d. Point Source Confirmation 

 The aim of point source confirmation was to glean from the
hundreds of thousands of detections per day the properties of
those sources, and of only those sources, which appeared as inertially
fixed on the sky. Detections of dust, space debris and asteroids
had to be rigorously excluded, yet not at the
expense of celestial objects, if the complementary goals of completeness
and reliability were to be satisfied. The existence of a point
source had to be confirmed on timescales of seconds, hours and
weeks for the object to be included in the catalog.
 
 The layout of the focal plane ensured that any stationary
source of infrared radiation would cross at least two detectors
in each wavelength band as the satellite scanned the sky
( Fig. II.C.6 ).
The seconds-confirmation processor, which treated each
wavelength band independently, examined each detection in turn
in an attempt to find a detection on one of the other detectors
in the focal plane. The other detection had to occur on one of
the two detectors that could be hit by a true source traversing
the focal plane, at the correct displacement in time, and agree
in flux with the first detection to within roughly a factor of
two. Detections satisfying these criteria were merged to become
seconds-confirmed detections. A successful seconds-confirmation
resulted in a refinement of both the flux and position of the
object.
 
 After all of the detections in the four bands for a given
survey scan were examined, an attempt was made to combine observations
in the different bands to produce a seconds-confirmed band-merged
source. Detections in the different bands had to satisfy tests
based on in-scan timing and cross-scan position. The order in
which bands were taken in the search for merger candidates proved
to be important because of the effects of the 100 um "cirrus".
As discussed in Section V.D.3.b , a priority
was chosen to minimize
these deleterious effects. Bands that were not filled by successful
mergers were given upper limits by determining which detectors
in those bands were crossed by the source and then taking three
times the noise on the detector with the lowest noise. The source
position was refined during band-merging.
 
 A file containing roughly 32000 previously known sources
including SAO stars, asteroids with well determined orbits, and
objects from the Two Micron and AFGL Surveys
( Neugebauer and Leighton
1969; Price and Walker 1976 ) was used to predict positions and
fluxes for routine monitoring of the processing. The seconds-confirmed
band-merged sources were compared to the predictions, and identification
numbers were assigned to successful matches.
 
 The next level of confirmation, hours-confirmation, was
run on groups of three successive SOPs in at least one band. Every
source in the first SOP received its turn to find candidates from
successive scans in any of the three SOPs. Candidates had to
pass a position and flux test (again, roughly a factor of two)
in at least one band to become an hours-confirmed source. An
hours-confirmed source had to have either two seconds-confirmed
detections, one seconds-confirmed sighting plus one non-seconds-confirmed
sighting or two non-seconds-confirmed sightings, each with the
alibi of a failed detector. A successful hours-confirmation resulted
in a refined position and a refined flux for each band where possible.
If each candidate source had only upper limits in a given band,
the lowest upper limit was adopted.
 
 Finally, the third level of confirmation, weeks-confirmation,
was attempted for each hours-confirmed source prior to its entry
into the WSDB by examining the WSDB for any other hours or previously
weeks-confirmed sources that could pass a position test. Successful
matches resulted in a refined position for the source, but not
a refined flux; individual hours-confirmed fluxes were retained
for each source. It is important to note that weeks-confirmation
represents the first and only time interval for which at least
rough flux constancy was not required. Thus, the catalog is weakly
biased against celestial sources more variable than a factor of
two on time scales shorter than a few days.

 A.3.e. Small Extended Source Confirmation 

 The objective of the processing of small extended sources
was to detect stationary sources which were resolved by the telescope,
up to 8' in extent. Because of the simple detection algorithm
described above, it was not intended that the processing produce
intensity or flux measurements more accurate than about 50%.
Nor were stringent goals of either completeness or reliability
set.
 
 Potential small extended source detections were identified
in the raw data stream by their response to square-wave filters
( Section V.A.3.c ). Each detection was tested
to discriminate
against point sources and sources larger than 8'. After individual
source detections were identified, they were tested for seconds-confirmation;
those that failed were discarded. Detections which were seconds-confirmed,
which were from the same hours-confirming survey coverage, and
which were sufficiently close together on the sky, were combined
to produce a single source. These small extended sources became
the input for all subsequent processing. No attempt was made to
combine observations at different wavelengths until the last stages
of the processing.
 
 Structure on the scales of 2' to 10' within much larger
extended sources gave rise to clusters of small extended sources.
Such clusters were eliminated so that only those sources whose
sizes were compatible with the square-wave filter used for detection
were accepted. Sources were then tested for repeatability in
position and flux on time scales of weeks and months. Any source
which was not weeks-confirmed was discarded. The final stage
of the processing was to combine those weeks-confirmed sources
observed at different wavelengths which were sufficiently close
together on the sky, and to merge them into a multi-band source.

 A.3.f. Asteroids and Comets 

 Asteroids are a population of bright infrared sources, particularly
at 12 and 25 um. The hours-and weeks-confirmation strategy was
developed to discriminate against these moving sources. Positions
of known asteroids were calculated and associated with those of
hours-confirmed point sources. In this manner the known asteroids
were identified and used as tracers to evaluate the effectiveness
of the confirmation filters. No known asteroids satisfied the
stringent position coincidence requirements to become final catalog
sources. As discussed in Section VII.F ,
confusion with asteroids
(known and previously unknown) was the cause of about 100 unreliable
sources and fluxes within 25deg of the ecliptic plane.
 
 To provide data for the study of the properties of known
and newly discovered asteroids, all sources with infrared colors
typical of solar system objects were written to auxiliary files
at both seconds- and hours-confirmation. The emphasis was on
completeness. The results of analyzing these data are not included
in any of the IRAS catalogs released in 1984.

 A.3.g. Extended Emission Processing 

 The goal of the extended emission processing was to produce
moderate resolution maps of the total infrared emission over the
whole sky at 12, 25, 60 and 100 um. Special procedures
discussed in Chapter VI were used
to calibrate the absolute DC level of
the data from each detector. These data were smoothed and resampled
(compressed) in the time domain to produce two samples per second.
 At the nominal scan rate of 3.85' s -1 this sampling
closely matched
the 2' spacing of detectors across the focal plane. The focal
plane geometry and the reconstructed pointing information were
used to locate the
position on the sky of each data sample for projection into the
212 images, each 16.5 x 16.5deg that cover the whole sky
with 2' x 2' pixels.
 
 Data suspected of being either noisy due to particle radiation
events or contaminated by scattered light from bright celestial
sources were automatically discarded. Human inspection of each
image removed obviously bad data that occurred, for example, because
of the presence of near field objects which flooded the focal
plane with radiation. Otherwise, nothing was done to remove data
which were inconsistent from one measurement to the next. Thus,
many non-confirming sources appear in the maps. Each of the three
sky coverages of the survey was made into a separate set of images
so that spurious, moving or variable sources could be detected
by comparison or "blinking" of the coverages. A fourth
set of images was made of the limited region of sky known as the
mini-survey ( Section III.C ).
 
 Differences in the path length of the line of sight through
the interplanetary dust cloud caused significant variability of
the zodiacal emission background from one survey coverage to the
next. The Zodiacal History File consists of time ordered 0.5deg
x 0.5deg averages of the intensity data at each wavelength
and associated pointing information. This information was designed
to simplify modeling and removal of the zodiacal component.
 
 A set of maps with 2' pixels of the Galactic plane for latitudes
within 10deg of the plane and two maps of the full sky with
0.5deg resolution, one centered on the Galactic center and
one centered on the Galactic anti-center, were also produced.

 A.3.h. Final Processing Steps 

 After the data from the entire mission had been processed,
several programs operated on the WSDB to produce the final entries
for the point source catalog. For example, these programs applied
final calibration corrections, deleted unreliable sources in regions
of high source density, and searched for associations in other
astronomical catalogs.
 
 All of the objects found in the point source catalog were
selected from the WSDB according to criteria that depended on
the density of sources in a 1deg 2 area containing the source
(see V.H.6 for a detailed discussion).
Outside of high-density
areas sources were required to have at least one band that was
hours-confirmed at least twice and at least one of those sightings
had to have a valid seconds-confirmed detection without the alibi
of a failed detector. For objects detected in two or more bands,
this rule was relaxed somewhat. Inside high-density areas, sources
had to satisfy much more stringent criteria: they had to be perfectly
hours-confirmed in one band at least twice, have no brighter or
confusing close neighbors, have no fluxes more discrepant than
a factor of three and have satisfied a detection correlation coefficient
threshold greater than 0.97.

 Chapter Contents |
 Introduction |
 Authors |
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section