V.D.6 Overview of Weeks-Confirmation 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 D. Point Source Confirmation

 D.6 Overview of Weeks-Confirmation

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section 

 Weeks-Confirmation Decision 
 Weeks-Confirmation Position Refinement 
 Weeks-Confirmation Statistical Processing 

 The last stage in the confirmation chain searched for observations
of the same sources with time separations on the order of a week
to six months. All hours-confirmed sources became input to the
weeks-confirmation processor. Sources which were not confirmed
were placed in the WSDB along with those which were, and no rejections
were enforced until final catalog preparation. As each new region
of sky was processed, the new sources were put unconfirmed into
the WSDB, where they remained until that region was covered again,
at which time the sources from the earlier coverage served as
candidates to confirm the newer ones.
 
 As each hours-confirmed source arrived for processing, a
coarse window on the sky was used to select candidates from the
WSDB. These may or may not have been weeks-confirmed already.
The window was 10.3'.square, and the candidates were required
to be separated in time by at least 36 hours from the source being
processed. No flux tests were performed. Only a position test
was used and if more than one candidate passed this test, only
the candidate with the highest score was kept as a match. Because
of the sequential testing, valid multiple sightings should have
been confirmed pairwise as each new sighting entered the processing,
removing the need to identify more than one correct candidate
from the WSDB. When a choice had to be made, a counter was incremented
for possible confusion. Typically only about 3% of the confirmed
sources were diagnosed as potentially confused at weeks-confirmation.
 
 If there were no acceptable candidates, the new source was
placed in the WSDB. Otherwise position refinement and discrepancy
statistical computations were performed.

 D.6.a Weeks-Confirmation Decision 

 The confirmation decision algorithm was a position test
applied to each pairing of the new hours-confirmed source with
the candidates. The candidate position probability density function
was mapped into the in-scan/cross-scan coordinate system of the
new source. The test was based on the two-dimensional cross-covariance
of the position probability density functions, evaluated at the
observed nominal separation. The underlying principle was identical
to the position test used at hours confirmation, and for relative
twist angles of less than 4.6 degrees, the same algorithm was
employed. Otherwise, a generalized implementation was used which
was extensively complicated by the need to handle arbitrary relative
twist angles between the axes of symmetry of the density functions.
 The details of this generalized version are discussed by 
 Rolfe, Otake, and Fowler (1984) . 
When the value of the cross-covariance
fell below the threshold the candidate was released from consideration.

 D.6.b Weeks-Confirmation Position Refinement

 Confirmed source sightings were processed for refinement
of the position parameters by renormalizing the product of the
probability density functions. This procedure was similar in
concept to that of hours-confirmation, but was complicated by
the generalization to arbitrary relative twist angles. When the
relative twist angle was less than 4.6 degrees, the hours-confirmation
algorithm was used. For larger angles, the refined density function
was sufficiently Gaussian that it was satisfactory merely to assign
a value of one second of arc to the uniform-error component.

 D.6.c Weeks-Confirmation Statistical Processing

 As at hours-confirmation, histograms of the value of the
 threshold parameter for confined and non-confined sources were
separately accumulated position data for both types were output
for downstream analysis of the sky distribution of these events,
and known source tracking was performed.
 
 Statistical summations for computing the means and variances
of position discrepancies were maintained over the SOP period
and over periods of approximately 50 days. This was done for the
observed sightings relative to each other, and separately for
known sources relative to refined position parameters, where applicable.
Good agreement between a priori error modeling and the observed
dispersions was found.

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section