VI.C.1 General Philosophy 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

VI. Flux Reconstruction and Calibration

C. Absolute Calibration

C.1 General Philosophy

 Chapter Contents | Introduction 
| Authors | References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous Section 
| Next Section 

The absolute calibration of the IRAS point source observations is tied
directly to the absolute calibration by Rieke
 et al . (1984) of the ground based photometric system at 
12 um. Specifically, the 12 um IRAS band is calibrated via 
measurements of -Tau, with the assumption 
that its absolute flux density is as given
in Rieke et al . Extrapolation to the
25 and 60 um bands is achieved using models of stars, normalized
to observations of the Sun. In this latter respect, the IRAS calibration
differs in principle from the ground based calibrations of 
 Rieke
 et al . and of Tokunaga (1984) who
assumed that the flux density of -Lyr 
between 10 and 25 um
varied as that of a 10,000 K blackbody. The extrapolation of the absolute
calibration from 60 to 100 um is based on observations and model
calculations of asteroids whose absolute flux at 60 um was obtained 
using the stellar calibration.

 The spectral response of the bands is sufficiently broad 
( Section II.C.2 ) that it is necessary to specify 
the continuum energy distribution of the source being observed when defining 
flux densities at a given wavelength. The approach used for IRAS was to 
assign effective wavelengths of 12, 25, 60 and 100 um for the four 
bands. The effective bandwidth of each band was then calculated such that the 
quoted flux densities are correct if the source has an energy distribution 
with a flux per logarithmic frequency interval v x 
 f v = 
 
x
 f 
which is constant with frequency 
 .
Any other continuum distribution, and in particular that of hot stars,
requires a color correction. This color correction, which ranges up to
50% for astronomically interesting continua, is discussed in detail in
 Section VI.C.3 below.

 Chapter Contents | Introduction 
| Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous Section 
| Next Section