V.H. The Point Source Catalog 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

V. Data Reduction

H. The Point Source Catalog

 Chapter Contents 
| Introduction | Authors 
| References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous Section 
| Next Section 

 Processing Overview 
 Clean-Up Processing 
 Neighbor Tagging 
 Cirrus Flagging 
 Average Flux Computation and Variability Analysis 
 High Source Density Regions 
 
 Location of High Source Density Regions 
 Catalog Selection Criteria in High Source Density Regions 
 Weaker Neighbors 
 Confused Neighbors 
 Very Near Neighbors 
 Moderate Quality Fluxes 
 Low Quality Fluxes (Upper limits) 
 Flux Averaging and Uncertainties 
 
 Catalog Source Selection 
 Low-Resolution Spectral Associations 
 Associations 

 H. 1 Processing Overview

After the Working Survey Data Base (WSDB) was completed by the sequential
processing of every SOP, several programs processed that data base to create
the catalog.
 
The major steps were as follows:
 
 Final calibration corrections,
 Clean-up processing. which forced sources closer than 30" (in-scan) and 90" (cross-scan) to weeks-confirm,
 Point source and small extended source neighbor tagging,
 Cirrus (highly structured 100 um emission) flagging,
 High source density processing,
 Variability tagging and average flux computation,
 Association and classification of low-resolution spectra,
 Associations with previously known astronomical sources,
 Catalog source selections,
 Transformation of coordinates, assignment of position uncertainties
 and assignment of source names.

Each of these steps is discussed separately below except for step 1.
Step 1, incorporating the final calibration, is discussed in
 Section VI.B .

 H.2 Clean-Up Processing

An analysis of sources in the WSDB that were within several arc minutes
of each other showed that roughly 5% of all sources did not have every
possible hours-confirmed detection combined into one source. There were
three reasons for this. First, sources scanned more than five times within
one hours-confirming coverage were separated into two distinct
hours-confirming
detections due to an upper limit of four scans per hours-confirming detection
imposed by the processing. Only one of these two detections was allowed
to weeks-confirm with other hours-confirmed detections already present
in the WSDB. Second sources that suffered band merging difficulties
occasionally
produced two hours-confirmed detections out of one hours-confirming coverage.
Only one piece was allowed to weeks-confirm. Finally, due to the way the
minisurvey scans were scheduled the first survey coverage was not allowed
to weeks-confirm with some of the minisurvey sources. Each of these cases
was sufficiently well defined to allow a clean-up processor to give these
pieces a chance to weeks-confirm with each other. Additional problems were
caused by radiation hits, source confusion and by multiple scans inadverently
spaced too close together in time to allow weeks-confirmation. These sources
were cleaned up in a two-step process. First, all weeks-confirmed sources
were given the opportunity to confirm using the standard threshold with
any hours- or weeks-confirmed neighbors located within 30" in-scan
and 90" cross-scan. Most sources that confirmed at this stage were
ones that had earlier been denied the opportunity for purely technical
reasons. A single source with a refined position resulted.
 
The second stage of clean-up was to force all weeks-confirmed sources
to merge with any neighbors located within 30" in-scan and 90"
cross-scan, whether or not the sources were confirmable according to the
weeks-confirmation decision process. No position refinement attempt was
made. This step proved necessary because analysis of near neighbors showed
that most were caused by the incorrect splitting of single sources in confused
regions by the various confirmation processors.
 
A separate processing problem was partially solved by the clean-up processor
as well. Two normal survey scans were placed within one layer of the
minisurvey
( Section III.C.11 ,
 Table III.C.1 ). These scans were
inadverently processed twice; once as par
of the minisurvey and once as par of the regular survey. Thus some sources
(those missed by that layer of the minisurvey) had identical hours-confirming
detections present as two separate entries within the source. One of these
was deleted by the clean-up processor, although nothing could be done to
remove the double weight given to that sighting in the position refinement
process.

 H.3 Neighbor Tagging

The relative isolation of a source provides the user with an indication
of its quality. Associated with each source are the numbers of hours- and
weeks-confirmed point sources and small extended sources. The search area
used was a box 6' (half-width) in-scan, which was the largest detection
shadowing distance ( Section V.C.7 ), and 4.5
(half-width)
cross-scan, which was a detector length. Neighbors were tagged before the
clean-up processor was applied. However, neighbors that were confirmed
with the source during clean-up were not counted, nor, due to an error,
were any sources within a box that had been successfully cleaned up.
 
If no neighbors were found, it is unlikely that processing or confusion
problems exist. The presence of neighbors should make the user check those
neighbors to investigate the possibility that the source was extended,
was in a confused patch of sky, or suffered some other problem.

 H.4 Cirrus Flagging

At 100 um the infrared sky is characterized by emission from
interstellar dust on all spatial scales, known affectionately as
"infrared cirrus". A significant chance exists that ANY catalog
source has been
affected by components of this long-wavelength emission on the point source
scale. Four separate quantities were derived for each source to assess
the importance of contamination by cirrus. While these are imperfect flags
(a source may be affected by cirrus without any of these flags being set,
or may not be affected at all even at high values of the flags) they work
for the majority of sources and provide a simple description of the sky
at 100 um in the vicinity of each catalog object.
 
 Flag 1 (CIRR1) is the density of WSDB sources (hours and/or
weeks-confirmed)
detected only at 100 um within a +/- &frac12; deg ecliptic
coordinate
box of the source position. Cirrus typically produces strings of such sources,
giving rise to a high density. Weak cirrus, producing only a few 100 um
sources, may still affect the quality of catalog sources.
 
 Flags 2 (CIRR2) and 3 (CIRR3) come from the 100 um
extended
source data at a resolution of &frac12; deg (see Section
V.G.5 ). Although the angular resolution is a serious limitation for
these flags, since the angular scale of point sources is 10-30 times smaller,
cirrus on the point source scale usually shows structure on the &frac12; deg
scale as well.
 
CIRR2 was derived from a spatially filtered version of the &frac12; deg
averaged 100 um emission. The value of the filtered sky brightness
at a point, J i , is given by

J i = | (-&frac12; x I i-1 ) + (I i -&frac12; x I i+1 ) |
 
 (V.H.1)

where adjacent measurements, I i , of the total intensity
were separated by &frac12; deg in the in-scan direction. This filtered
surface brightness was converted into a "cirrus flux",
 F c ,
by multiplying J i by the solid angle of a typical 3' x
5' 100 um detector. The cirrus flux was then compared with the 100
um flux (or upper limit) of each catalog source, F s .
The value of CIRR2 was scaled logarithmically to fit in the range 1 to 9
according to

 CIRR2 = (8/3) x log (F c /F s ) + (19/3)
 
 (V.H.2)

A value of CIRR2=1 corresponds to the cirrus flux being less than or
equal to 0.01 of the source flux while CIRR2=9 corresponds to the cirrus
flux being 10 times the source flux. As described in
 Section VII.H , CIRR2 less than about 4 is
indicative of little or no cirrus contamination, while larger values probably
indicate significant contamination. A value of CIRR2=0 indicates that no 100
um extended emission data were available.
 
 Flag 3 (CIRR3) is the total intensity of the 100 um extended
emission in a &frac12; deg beam (MJy sr -1 ) High values are
indicative of a large column density of interstellar dust.
 
A fourth cirrus indicator is the presence of nearby small extended sources
at 100 um. Since the small extended sources have sizes much
closer to point sources than the &frac12; deg data, this flag (SESl), which
gives the number of hours-confirmed small extended sources, will normally
be an accurate cirrus indicator. However, because of the higher thresholds
used for this processing. weak cirrus may not be detected.
 
As discussed in more detail in Section VII.H ,
if any of these flags takes on a large value, one should be cautious. Cirrus
can affect the point source flux in any band by causing band-merging
difficulties and can certainly affect the quality of a quoted 100 um
flux.

 H.5 Average Flux Computation and Variability
Analysis

In the computation of an average flux for each source, three levels
of flux quality were recognized:
 
 High quality fluxes had no confirmation problems other than
missing detections due to failed detectors, with at least one hours-confirming
detection with no problems. For aficionados , at least two
hours-confirming sightings with flux status, FSTAT = 4 or 7, with at least
one 7, were required (see Section V.D.8 ).
 Moderate quality fluxes were believed to be reliable, but were
missing some detections, usually because the source was at the detection
threshold. Two hours-confirming sightings with FSTAT = 3 - 7 were required.
 Upper limits were given for bands lacking high or moderate
quality fluxes. Measurements in these bands had no more than one measurement
with FSTAT = 3 - 7. The upper limits were derived from all of the
measurements. An analysis showed that measurements in a given band with only
a single detection (FSTAT = 2) within an hours-confirming coverage were
severely
contaminated by radiation hits and were unreliable. These single
"detections" were used only as upper limits. Quoted upper limits
are nominally 3- 
values.

High and moderate quality fluxes were obtained by log-flux averaging
of individual acceptable hours-confined fluxes weighted by the inverse
of the log-flux variances. If the flux discrepancy flag was set (see below)
and the source had more than two hours-confirmed fluxes, then one flux
was removed from the averaging process. The rejected flux was the one farhest
from the median flux in units of the error. The median flux was arbitarily
picked to be the larger of the middle two fluxes when there was an even
number of fluxes present. The rational behind this was that discrepant
fluxes occasionally occurred because of radiation hits, a passing asteroid
a failed detector, or processing problems. With more than two measurements
it was possible to weed out the discrepant flux. For quoted fluxes, a 
 2 
test was applied to each band. If the value of the reduced 
 2 
was greater than 9, the flux discrepancy flag was set in that band.
 
Uncertainties quoted for high and moderate quality fluxes were the maximum
of a) the uncertianty of the mean derived from the accepted fluxes; or
b) the uncertainty of the mean derived by propagating the quoted uncertainties
of the individual, accepted flux measurements.
 
Fluxes quoted as upper limits were obtained from the the largest flux
(or limit) for sources with only two hours-confirmed sightings and from
the median flux for sources with more than two detections. The median was
taken as the largest of the two middle fluxes for sources with an even
number of observations. The flux discrepancy flag was set if the largest
and smallest flux from all the limits for low quality detections differed
by more than a factor of 3.
 
Sources with high or moderate quality fluxes at both 12 and 25 um
were examined for variability. A percentage probability of being variable
was quoted for sources whose fluxes at BOTH 12 and 25 um either
increased or decreased significantly from one hours-confirmed sighting
to another. In other words, the changes in flux at 12 and 25 um
had to be correlated. Although variability could have been detected in
other ways, this method led to a simple and reliable determination of
variability of a large number of sources. For sources with more than one pair
of sightings,
the value determined for the pair of sightings with the greatest likelihood
of variability was given.
 
The probability that a source brightness varied was calculated by comparing
the number of sources with correlated flux excursions exceeding
 m at 12 and 25
um,
 N corr (>/-m), with those sources showing anti-correlated 
flux excursions exceeding m
 in
both bands, N anti (>/-m). The probability that a source is
variable is given by

 (V.H.3)

This approach was adopted because there are many ways in addition to
true variability that a discrepant flux could be obtained, including radiation
hits, processing problems caused by failed detectors and confusion with
transient spurious sources which would increase the flux in one band at
one sighting. Thus, while Eq. (V.H.3) is not rigorous,
it gives a good measure of the significance of any flux excursion.
As discussed in Section VII.D.3 , the sources
deemed likely to be variable ( p > 0.9) represent approximately
20% of the 12 and 25 um objects in the catalog.

 H.6 High Source Density Regions

The density of sources in the WSDB exceeds the resolving capability
of the instrument over some parts of the sky. The nature of both the sky
and the instrument make this a wavelength-dependent effect; at 12 um
the instrumental resolution was less than 1' and the sky was dominated
by point sources, while at 100 um the resolution was about 4'
and much of the sky was dominated by highly structured diffuse emission.
 
The overriding concern in developing a strategy for regions of high
source density was to insure the reliability of the information presented
in the point source catalog. Reliability, in this context, has three meanings:
1) a point source must be an inertially fixed celestial source (the basic
meaning of reliability throughout the catalog); 2) a source must represent
a very compact structure that, to the extent possible, is not merely a
fragment of a complex background; and 3) the intensity measurements reported
in the catalog must repeatably represent the brightness of a source above
the local background.
 
The first step in processing high source density regions was to determine
whether the number of sources in a given wavelength band in a
1deg 2 
bin exceeded a "confusion limit". Sources in bins with more than
the threshold number of sources were subject to additional criteria for
inclusion in the catalog. The decision to apply the criteria was made independently
on a band-by-band basis. Thus, a multi-band source might have high source
density rules applied to its 100 um measurements, but not to
its 12 um measurements. Once the high source density rules were
invoked in a band, each source in that band in that bin was examined for
the quality and repeatability of its individual measurements and for its
isolation from other potentially confusing sources. The high source density
processor determined whether the measurement of the source in that band
was of high, medium or low (upper limit) quality, where these definitions
differ from those in lower density areas, and calculated an average flux
for the source in that band. Many sources were found wanting and were excluded
from the catalog.
 
The high source density selection criteria used only information contained
within the WSDB to judge the relative merits of a source. The confusion
processing algorithms were developed and tuned in two confused regions,
one in the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) and one near the Galactic Center.
Detector strip charts were examined for many of the sources to verify the
validity of the selection criteria.

 H.6.a Location of High Source Density
Regions

 Figure V.H.1.1 The parts of the 12 um sky processed according
to high source density rules are shown in an Aitoff projection in
Galactic coordinates. The black regions contain more than 45 sources per
sq. deg, the threshold for high source density processing; the
grey areas contain more than 25 sources per sq. deg, one-half
the confusion limit. 

 larger 
 largest 

The confusion-limited source density is determined by the instrumental
angular resolution and how many detector beam areas are, on average, required
per source for a reliable measurement. A conservative limit of 25 beams
per source leads to maximum source densities of 50, 50, 25 and 12 sources
per sq. deg at 12, 25, 60 and 100 um (assuming a detector area
of the nominal in-scan detector size times the detector cross-scan width).
Aitoff projection maps in Galactic coordinates showing the density of sources
with moderate or high quality fluxes (according to the basic rules described
in V.H.5 ) in a given wavelength band are shown in
 Figs. V.H.1a-d . At 12, 25 and 60 um the
region within 3 - 5deg
of the Galactic plane and within +/- 100deg of longitude of the
Galactic
center plus small regions in Orion, Ophiuchus and the LMC present the major
problem areas. The 100 um sky presents a more complicated picture
because the regions of high source density cover large parts of the sky
due to the infrared cirrus.

 Figure V.H.1.2 The parts of the 25 um sky processed according
to high source density rules are shown in an Aitoff projection in
Galactic coordinates. The black regions contain more than 45 sources per
sq. deg, the threshold for high source density processing; the
grey areas contain more than 25 sources per sq. deg, one-half
the confusion limit. 

 larger 
 largest 

To set the thresholds for high source density processing, the numbers
of sources in 1deg 2 and &frac14;deg 2 bins were
examined in the WSDB. It was determined that processing all
1deg 2 bins containing at least
45, 45, 16, and 6 sources (at 12, 25, 60 and 100 um) would clean
up 90% of all &frac14;deg 2 areas with confusion-limited source
densities. Thus, any 1deg 2 bin (defined in ecliptic coordinates,
cf. Appendix X.1 ) containing at least the
threshold number of sources in a particular
band was processed according to high source density rules in that band.
No attempt was made to join together high source density regions into a
few simply connected areas. A list of the high source density bins in each
band is available with the machine readable version of the catalog.

 Figure V.H.1.3 The parts of the 60 um sky processed according
to high source density rules are shown in an Aitoff projection in
Galactic coordinates. The black regions contain more than 16 sources per
sq. deg, the threshold for high source density processing; the
grey areas contain more than 12 sources per sq. deg, one-half
the confusion limit. 

 larger 
 largest 

High source density rules were occasionally invoked for wavelength bands
with fewer than the threshold number of sources in a bin if failure to
include that band would have resulted in a non-adjacent set of bands being
processed, i.e., a "spectral hole". Thus, for example, if the
number of sources at 25 and 100 um, but not at 60 um,
exceeded the thresholds, the decision was made to process 60 um
sources as well.

 Figure V.H.1.4 The parts of the 100 um sky processed according
to high source density rules are shown in an Aitoff projection in
Galactic coordinates. The black regions contain more than 12 sources per
sq. deg, the threshold for high source density processing; the
grey areas contain more than 6 sources per sq. deg, one-half
the confusion limit. 

 larger 
 largest 

 H.6.b Catalog Selection Criteria in High
Source Density Regions

In unconfused regions where the reliability of a single hours-confirmed
source is high, the criteria for including sources in the catalog emphasized
completeness. In high source density regions, however, the criteria emphasized
reliability. Thus, the first step toward weeding out unreliable point sources
was to stiffen the requirements for accepted detections and valid
weeks-confirmed sources in a given band.
 
The concept of high, medium and low quality fluxes is crucial to understanding
how sources were included in the catalog. High quality measurements were
those which passed through the entire data processing chain without blemishes
such as more than one missing detection (per hours-confirmed sightings),
even those missing due to failed detectors. Medium quality fluxes could
suffer from a variety of problems due either to the faintness of the source,
the presence of failed detectors, the complexity of the background or
peculiarities
of the data processing. Low quality fluxes were upper limits based on an
estimate of the local noise. The definition of the relative quality of
fluxes and the way that sources were selected for inclusion in the catalog
on the basis of their quality differs depending on whether a source was
found in a region of high or low source density.
 
In regions of high source density, tests were applied successively to
the measurements of a source to determine its quality. If all of the criteria
described below were satisfied, the source was deemed to have a high quality
measurement in that band. If only a subset of the criteria were satisfied,
then the source was considered to have a medium quality measurement in
that band. If none, or only a few, of the criteria were satisfied then
an upper limit was given for the flux of that source. To be included in
the catalog a source had to have a high quality measurement in at least
one band.
 
For high source density regions the requirements for a high quality
flux were stiffened by demanding that at least two hours-confirmed sightings
in one band each meet all of the following criteria: 1) seconds-confirmed
detections on at least two orbits; 2) a minimum correlation coefficient
of 0.97, corresponding to a local signal-to-noise ratio of about 12; and
3) fewer than four detections within the seconds-confirmation window on
a given scan. Simple edge detections (3 detections) were permitted.
 
A high quality measurement had to be repeatable. The ratio of brightness
to faintest high quality flux measurements in a band had to differ by less
than a factor of 3.0. If this repeatability requirement was not satisfied,
then the brightest measurement was taken as a medium quality
 
measurement. Although this requirement in principle biases the catalog
against variable sources in high source density regions, in practice,
relatively few sources were rejected for this reason.

 H.6.c Weaker Neighbors

The above rules all pertain to a single source, independent of its
environment. The weaker neighbor algorithm was designed to remove sources
adversely
affected by brighter, neighboring sources. The "neighbor" of
a source with a high quality flux in some band must itself have at least
two hours-confirmed measurements in that same band and lie within a wavelength
dependent position window. If the brightest flux of one source was a factor
of 1.2 weaker than the faintest flux of the other object in the same
 
band then the fainter object was marked as a "weaker neighbor" in
that band. The flux status of the weaker neighbor was demoted to low quality
and the upper limit assigned was that of the flux of the brighter object.
The half-widths of the weaker neighbor window at (12, 25, 60 and 100 um)
were (90", 90", 180" and 360") and the half-lengths
were (270", 272",286", 300"-a detector length).

 H.6.d Confused Neighbors

A good indicator that a source was part of a more extended structure
was to have two or more sources located very close together. A source with
a high quality measurement in one band was examined for neighbors in the
same window as described for weaker neighbors. If another source were located
sufficiently close to the first and if any confusion status flags other
than edge detection flags ( Section V. D.2 ) were set
in either source, then the fluxes of both were marked low quality and the
brightest of the two fluxes was assigned as an upper limit to each source.
If no confusion status flags were set, neither source was changed. The
definition of a neighbor and the size of the confused neighbor window were
as described above for the weaker neighbor test.

 H.6.e Very Near Neighbors

One of the original selection rules was to exclude from the catalog
all sources, in ail bands, with a neighbor closer than 30" in-scan
and 90" cross-scan. Because the clean-up processor described in Section
V.H.2 forced the weeks-confirmation of all sources within-n such a box,
there should have been no such sources remaining to delete. Due, however,
to slight differences in the way in which the neighbor boxes were calculated
by the two programs, about twenty sources at the periphery of the neighbor
box were deleted by the high source density processor.

 H.6.f Moderate Quality Fluxes

Measurements that failed one or another of the above rules could still
carry useful information about the strength of a source in a given band.
Moderate quality fluxes had to have at least two hours-confirmed measurements
with flux status, FSTAT = 3, 4, 5 or 7, and correlation coefficient > 0.95.
Fluxes of otherwise moderate quality could be demoted to low quality by
either the weaker or confused neighbor rules.

 H.6.g Low Quality Fluxes (Upper Limits)

Measurements in a given band that failed to meet either the high or
moderate quality criteria become upper limits for the source. If multiple
detections were available, the brightest one was given. As mentioned above,
confused or weaker neighbors were given the brightest flux of either of
the two sources as an upper limit. Sources of low quality were examined
for brighter neighbors and were assigned the brightest neighboring flux
(see above for neighbor rules). Sources with no detections on any sightings
(i.e., with only noise fills present) and no neighbors were given an upper
limit based on 12 times the
1- value
reported by the noise estimator. This value was chosen since the correlation
coefficient requirement of >/- 0.97 corresponds to roughly a local
signal-to-noise ratio of 12.

 H.6.h Flux Averaging and Uncertainties

In all cases, averages and uncertainties were computed using the logarithms
of the fluxes, not the fluxes themselves. However, the technique used to
obtain the average values for both high and moderate quality fluxes in
high source density regions was different from the one used outside of
dense regions. Rather than computing inverse-variance weighted averages
in regions where the noise estimator was suspect, simple averages of the
logarithms of the valid high (or moderate) quality fluxes were computed.
The uncertainty associated with the measurement was the greater of: 1)
the average of the N uncertainties quoted for the N valid hours-confirmed
measurements, divided by N &frac12;; or 2) the standard deviation of the mean
of the N values averaged together to obtain the flux average.

 H.7 Catalog Source Selection

Outside of regions of high source density, two rules were used to select
weeks-confirmed WSDB sources for inclusion in the catalog: sources had
to have either a high quality flux in at least one band or adjacent bands,
both of which have an HCON with FSTAT = 7 and another with FSTAT = 3 or 5
( Section V.H.5 ). The minimum time separation of 123,000 sec.
 required for two hours-confirmed sightings to weeks-confirm was found
to be long enough to reject even slow moving asteroids.
 
Within high source density regions, as described in
 V.H.6 , sources had
to have at least one high quality flux in one band and be relatively isolated
from other sources to be included in the catalog.

 H.8 Low-Resolution Spectral Associations

For each source in the WSDB, a check was made to see whether a low-resolution
spectrum was available. See Chapter IX 
for more details.

 H.9 Associations

Positional associations of IRAS sources are made with objects in other
astronomical catalogs. The associations in the IRAS catalog were based
purely on positional agreement, with no attempt made to distinguish between
multiple sources associated with a particular IRAS source. Any number of
sources from a variety of catalogs could be associated with a specific
IRAS object as long as the position test was met. No attempt was made to
"identify" an IRAS source with a source from another catalog,
by requiring the IRAS source to have a "reasonable" energy
distribution for the identification. The only attempt to preclude spurious
associations was to forbid a source with only a 100 um flux (i.e., a
source having a significant likehood of being Galactic "cirrus")
from being associated with stars.
 
Because the catalogs used for associations had a wide range of positional
accuracies, and the IRAS positions were intermediate between the very high
positional accuracy catalogs and the lower accuracy catalogs, the following
procedures were adopted to make the associations. For the
high-positional-accuracy catalogs, a window of half width 8" in-scan and
45" cross-scan was used. If the position of the IRAS source lay within
this distance of the cataloged source, then an association was made. For
those catalogs where the positional uncertainty was greater than that of the
IRAS source, an association was made if the source position and the IRAS
position agreed to within a fixed radius or to within the radius (see below)
of the cataloged source, if available.
 
In addition to the other catalogs, associations with IRAS small extended
sources have been included so that the user will know if a small extended
source is close to the point source.
 
 Table V.H.1 identifies the catalogs used and gives
the search radius for the association and an indication of whether a source
slae was used for the association radius. The information carried with
the association is described in detail in Section
X.B and includes such information as visible magnitude, size, spectral
type, and morphological type. In addition, the distance and position angle
from the IRAS position to the location of the cataloged source are given.

Catalogs Used for Associations with IRAS Sources

Table V.H.1 

 Catalog

No. 
 Catalog

Type 
 Catalog Name 
 Search

Radius 
 Source Size

Used in

Association 

 01 
 2 
 General Catalogue of Variable Stars Kukarkin, et al . 
 90" 

 02 
 2 
 Dearborn Observatory Catalogue of Faint Red Stars, Lee, et al . 
 90" 

 03 
 3 
 Air Force Geophysical Laboratory Four-Color Survey, Price & Murdock 
 90" 

 04 
 2 
 Two Micron Sky Survey Neugebauer and Leighton 
 90" 

 05 
 3 
 Globule List Wesselius 
 90" 
 X 

 06 
 1 
 Second Reference Catalogue of Bright Galaxies, de Vaucouleurs, et
al . 
 90" 

 07 
 2 
 Early Type Stars with Emission Lines Wackerling 
 90" 

 08 
 3 
 Equatorial Infrared Catalogue (Sweeney et al .) 
 90" 

 09 
 1 
 Uppsala General Catalogue of Galaxies Nilson 
 90" 

 10 
 1 
 Morphological Catalogof Galaxies Vorontsov-Velyaminov, et al. 
 180" 

 11 
 3 
 Strasbourg Planetary Nebulae 
 90" 

 12 
 1 
 Catalogue of Galaxies and Clusters of Galaxies, Zwicky, et al . 
 90" 

 13 
 2 
 Smithsonian Astronomical Observatory Star Catalog 
 45"(x-scan)

x8"(in-scan) 

 14 
 3 
 ESO/Uppsala Survey of the ESO (B) Atlas, Lauberts 
 90" 

 15 
 2 
 Bright Star Catalogue - 4th Edition Hoffieit 
 45"x8" 

 16 
 2 
 New Catalog of Suspected Variable Stars Kukarkin, et al. 
 90" 

 17 
 2 
 General Catalogue of Cool Carbon Stars 
 90" 

 18 
 2 
 Catalog of Nearby Stars Gliese 
 45"x30" 

 19 
 2 
 General Catalog of S Stars Stephenson 
 90" 

 20 
 3 
 Parkes HII Region Survey Haynes, et al . 
 120" 
 X 

 21 
 3 
 Bonn HII Region Survey Altenhoff et al. 
 80" 

 22 
 3 
 Catalog of CO Radial Velocities Toward Galactic HII Regions, Blitz
 et al . 
 80" 
 X 

 23 
 3 
 
 Catalogue of Dark Nebulae X Lynds

 Comparison Catalog of HII Regions Marsalkova

 Catalog of Star Clusters and Associations Alter, et al .

 Catalogue of Bright Diffuse Galactic Nebulae, Cederblad

 Untersuchungen ber Reflexionsnebel am Palomar Sky Survey, Dorschner
and G rtler

 A Study of Reflection Nebulae van den Bergh

 Catalog of Southern Stars Embedded in Nebulosity, van den Bergh and
Herbst

 X 

 24 
 2 
 Two Micron Sky Survey with Improved Positions, Kleinmann and Joyce 
 45"x8" 

 25 
 1 
 Catalog of Dwarf Galaxies van den Bergh 
 90" 

 26 
 1 
 Atlas of Peculiar Galaxies Arp 
 120" 

 27 
 1 
 Galaxies withanUltraviolet Continuum, Markarian, et al. 
 90" 

 28 
 1 
 Catalog of Extragalactic Radio Sources Having Flux Densities Greater
than 1 Jy at 5 GHz, Kuhr, et al . 
 60" 

 29 
 1 
 Catalogue of Quasars and Active Nuclei, Veron-Cetty and Veron 
 90" 

 30 
 1 
 Lists of Galaxies Zwicky 
 90" 

 31 
 1 
 Atlas and Catalog of Interacting Galaxies, Vorontsov-Velyaminov 
 120" 

 32 
 3 
 IRAS Small Scale Structure Catalog 
 min(120",

diameter/2) 
 X 

 39 
 3 
 Ohio State University Radio Catalog 
 120" 

 40 
 2 
 University of Michigan Spectral Atlas 
 60"

45" x 8" 
 (Vol. 1)

 (Vols. 2,3) 

 41 
 3 
 IRAS Serendipitous Survey Catalog 
 60" 

 Catalog types include (1) extragalactic,
(2) stellar or (3) other, e.g. dark clouds, HII regions, etc. 

 Catalog numbers 33-38 reserved
for internal use. 

 Chapter Contents 
| Introduction | Authors 
| References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous Section 
| Next Section