V.E.6 Band-Merging 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 E. Overview of Small Extended Source Data Processing

 E.6 Band-Merging

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section 

The weeks-confirmed, single-band sources were analyzed to see if they
could merge with weeks-confirmed sources in other bands to become multi-band
sources. Those sources in the four wavelength bands which positionally
confirmed were linked together. The sources were tested for positional
confirmation in the same way as in the cluster analysis processor, i.e.
two sources positionally confirmed if their link parameter,
 2 
as in Section V.E.5 , was less than a certain threshold.
If all the single-band sources contributing to a band-merged source confirmed
with one another, then the source was said to be a mutually confirmed merger.
 
The information describing each band-merged source became the basis
for the small extended source catalog. A full description of the contents
of the catalog is given in Section X.C . Where
two weeks-confirmed sources from one band competed to merge with a single
source in another band the band-merging attempt was abandoned and the various
single band components were listed separately in the catalog. A flag was
set to indicate that the sources could not be successfully band-merged.
 
As an additional check on previous processing steps, the band-merging
processor was allowed to look for possible band-mergers between 
weeks-confirmed
sources from the same band. About 166 cases were found mostly 60 um
and 100 um bands. Upon inspection, they were all found to occur
in areas with at least four hours-confirming coverages, each of which had
yielded an hours-confirmed detection. These four detections formed a pattern
that generated two weeks-confirmed sources; the failure of all four to
link together could be due to pointing errors, to scanning structures in
different directions, or to artifacts of the processing. The two weeks
confirmed sources obtained were naturally larger than the individual hours
confirmed sources by a sufficient amount that the band-merging processor
managed to link them.
 
All these cases of weeks-confirming candidates discovered too late were
treated just like cases where several sources from the same band competed
to band-merge with a single candidate from another band; the 
"band-merging"
attempt was abandoned and the various single band components were listed
in the catalog with the appropriate warning flag 
(see Section X.C ).

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section