V.E.5 Weeks-Confirmation 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 E. Overview of Small Extended Source Data Processing

 E.5 Weeks-Confirmation

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section 

After cluster analysis processing, the remaining small extended sources
were tested for repeatability on the weeks/months timescales of weeks to
months. Only those detections found on at least two hours-confirming coverages
were accepted as reliable sources. Two sources were regarded as being 
weeks-confirmed if,

 they were in the same wavelength band
 they had detection times which differed by at least 36 hours;
 they satisfied a position confirmation criterion detailed below;

and
 the ratio of the flux of the brighter detection to that of the fainter
was less than 3.

The link parameter for weeks-confirmation was taken to be the 
 2 statistic
of the two-dimensional position-match confidence of the two detections;
in computing 2 , each detection
 was modeled as a two-dimensional Gaussian
distribution characterized by the extent matrix. Two detections positionally
confirmed if their link parameter was less than 1.4 
(see Section V.E.7.b ).
 
When a group of two or more weeks-confirming sources was identified,
it was merged into a single weeks-confirmed source. The flux was taken
to be the average of the fluxes of the two sources. The centroid and extent
matrix of the weeks-confirmed source were calculated and the extent matrix
was diagonalized to yield semi-major and semi-minor axes and the twist
angle between the semi-major axis and the ecliptic meridian. The number
of hours-confirmed sightings that make up the weeks-confirmed source is
called NCOVR in Section X.C .
 
If all the hours-confirmed sources contributing to a weeks-confirmed
source positionally confirmed each other, then the source was said to be
mutually confirmed. If an hours-confirmed source (denoted by A ) 
weeks-confirmed
with two or more other sources (denoted by B1 , B2 , etc.) which
did not
mutually confirm, the following was done to extract the best weeks-confirmed
source. First, a decision function, D , was evaluated for each of 
sources B1 , B2 , etc., where

D =( 2 ) x (1 + 2 ) + (R - 1) x R
 
 (V.E.6)

and 2 is
the link parameter between sources A and B and R is
the ratio of the brighter flux to that of the fainter.
 
The source for which D was the smallest was found and the ratio
 D / D min was found for each of the sources B1 , 
 B2 ,
etc. All sources for which D / D min was above a
threshold of 2 were discarded. If only one source remained then this was
chosen as the weeks-confirming partner of source A . Otherwise, the source
was considered confused and the candidates were rejected.

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section