VI.A. Processing - Removal of Telescope Transfer Function 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

VI. Flux Reconstruction and Calibration

A. Processing - Removal of Telescope Transfer Function

 Chapter Contents 
| Introduction | Authors 
| References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous
Section | Next Section 

 Digital Electronics 
 Analog Electronics Amplifiers 
 Trans-impedance Amplifier 
 Removal of Coherent Detector Noise 
 Feedback Resistor 
 Summary 

The electronic chain by which the current caused by photons incident
onto the detector is transferred to the signal received at the ground station
is described in Section II.C.5 . Briefly,
the detector acted as a current source as a result of the incident photons.
This current was input to a trans-impedance amplifier which transformed
the signal into a voltage equaling the total current times the feedback
resistor plus a small offset voltage due primarily to the imbalance in
the cold JFETs at the inputs to the operational amplifiers. The output
voltage from the trans-impedance amplifier was amplified and shaped by
analog electronics, fast rise time nuclear particle spikes were removed
and the analog voltage was converted into a digital signal for transmission
in a compressed format to the Earth. In the processing, the route was 
reversed.
As described below, the received signal, in data numbers, was retraced
to the current at the detector.

 A.1 Digital Electronics

Pre-launch ground tests determined that there were no significant errors
or non-linearities introduced by the digital electronics or by the analog
to digital conversion. Any errors introduced by the compression of digital
data on board the telescope and reconstruction at the processing center
were assumed to be random and to be in the least significant bit and were
ignored. The raw input was therefore assumed to correspond exactly to the
output of the analog to digital converter. Since a linear analog to digital
converter was assumed, the voltage into the analog to digital converter,
i.e., the voltage at the output of the analog chain was given by:

V anlg = C 0 + C 1 x DN

where

V anlg 

= 
 voltage at output of the analog amplifier = voltage at the analog digital
converter 

C 0 

 = 

 inherent voltage offset of the analog digital converter 

 DN 

 = 

 observed signal in data numbers. 

 C 1 

 = 

 data number voltage conversion factor (volts/DN) 

Preflight measurements showed that any adverse effect on the data due
to the multiplexer should be negligible and it was therefore assumed to
be linear.

 A.2 Analog Electronics Amplifiers

The analog electronics contained the commandable gains and offsets.
The input voltage to this part of the electronics can be recovered by

 (VI.A.2)

where,

V tia 

 = 
 voltage at trans-impedance amplifier output 

 G i 
 
 = 

 commandable gain, i = 1, 2, 3. 

S j 

 = 

 commandable offset, j = 1, 2,..., 8 . 

The effects on the flux calibration due to the pole zero amplifier and
the pulse circumvention circuit (deglitcher), which also lie in the analog
electronics board between the output of the preamplifier electronics and
the commandable offset electronics, were ignored. The analog electronics
also contained a filter to remove high frequencies in the signal. Adverse
effects due to the filter were considered to be small at the frequencies
of interest and were therefore ignored.

 A.3 Trans-impedance Amplifier

In order to recover the extended component of the incident flux, it
was necessary to determine, and remove, any electronic baseline offset.
The voltage at the output of the trans-impedance amplifier was taken to
be of the form:

V tia [observed] =
I d x R f + V tia [off]

where I d is the current through the detector and 
 R f is the feedback resistor.
 
The offset voltage, V tia [ off ] represents a
sum of terms due to (a) offsets in the trans-impedance amplifier, including
the cold JFETs, and (b) offsets in the analog electronic boards. Since
the effects are indistinguishable at the output, both have been lumped
into one equivalent offset voltage at the output of the trans-impedance
amplifier. Although these offsets were in principle temperature dependent,
it was concluded from pre-flight tests of the relevant temperature 
coefficient, and the relative stability of the electronics boxes in flight, 
that this
effect was small enough that it was not necessary to model the temperature
dependent aspects of V tia [ off ]. A single fixed
value for the electronic baseline was therefore used for each SOP. The
detaiIs of the determination of V tia [ off ] are
given in Section VI.B.3 .
 
After launch, the electronic baselines at 60 and 100 um were
found to be affected by the bias boosts induced during crossings of the
South Atlantic Anomaly (SAA). The effect is thought to be due to the \
differential
heating of the JFETs because of the large current passing through the JFET
connected to the detector. This effect was modeled by adding a time dependent
exponential function to V tia [ off ]

Corr = (a + b x T) x 
exp(- /
 )
 
 (V.A.4)

where:

 T 
 = 
 duration of the most recent bias boost 

 a,b 
 = 
 constants 

 = 
 time interval between time of interest and end of most recent bias
boost 

 = 
 characteristic decay time of the baseline shift 

This correction was added to the electronic baseline value before removing
the electronic baseline from the data. For a typical passage through the
SAA, the magnitude of this baseline shift was about 2O% and 8O% of the
signal from the TFPR at 60 um and 100 um. The time
constant was typically 52 minutes
at 60 um and 42 minutes at 100 um.
 
 A.4 Removal of Coherent Detector Noise

Detector 5 (100 um) exhibited a stable, coherent 0.25 Hz
waveform. By adding successive 4-second intervals of data coherently, it
was possible to determine the shape of the waveform to better than l% of
the remaining rms noise. This wave form was then subtracted from the detector
5 data stream. This resulted in an order of magnitude improvement in the
rms noise and greatly reduced the number of spurious point source detections
for detector 5. After removal of the wave form, the character of the resulting
detector 5 data stream was typical of 100 um detectors.
 
Detector 19 (25 um) exhibited a spike, of randomly varying
amplitude, every second at sample #9 of the 16 Hz sampled data stream.
The typical amplitude was approximately 6-8 times the cleaned rms noise
for detector 19. The amplitude was measured by subtracting the average
of the neighboring samples, which showed no evidence of electronic cross-talk
from the value of the spike sample. If the spike amplitude was less than
a maximum allowable amplitude (approximately 10 times the rms noise of
the cleaned detector 19 data), then the spiked sample was replaced by the
average of its neighboring samples. If the spike amplitude was greater
than the maximum allowable amplitude, then the maximum allowable amplitude
was subtracted from the spike sample. The latter case can occur in the
6% of detector 19 detections for which the spike appears on top of a point
source. If the signal to noise ratio of such a point source after the spike
was removed is less than 20, the result will be a "topped" source.
This process can lower the correlation coefficient below threshold for
some of the weaker sources. Sources brighter than signal to noise ratio
~ 2O will have progressively higher correlation coefficients. After removing
the spikes, the overall rms noise for detector 19 was reduced by a factor
~3.
 
Detector 43 exhibited a 1 Hz waveform that consisted of a positive spike
with signal to noise ratio ~2 at sample #9 of the 16 Hz sampled output,
followed by a small negative spike, with signal to noise ratio ~&frac12;, at
sample #10. The amplitude varied randomly, but remained small, with a signal
to noise ratio < 3. In this case a constant waveform of the above shape
was subtracted, resulting in a reduction of the detector 43 rms noise by
a factor of ~1.3. All subtractions were effectively done at the output
of the trans-impedance amplifier.

 A.5. Feedback Resistor

 Figure VI.A.1 The fit used to represent the feedback resistor is shown
in the four wavelength bands. The flux densities corresponding
to the appropriate voltages across the resistor are shown.
The same fit, that shown in Fig. II.C.11 ,
was used for all the detectors. 

 larger 
 largest 

The feedback resistors had a nominal resistance of 2 x 10 10 
 , but in fact the resistance
of the feedback resistor was dependent on the voltage across the resistor.
The fit to the feedback resistor used in the data reduction is a three-piece
curve shown in Fig. VI.A.1 a-d. It is the same fit
as shown in Fig. II.C.11 . This was the
only nonlinearity assumed in the processing.

 A.6 Summary

The processing to remove the instrumental transfer functions can be
summarized by the following equation for the current in the detector.

 (V.A.5)

 Chapter Contents 
| Introduction | Authors 
| References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous
Section | Next Section