V.E.4 Cluster Analysis Processing 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 E. Overview of Small Extended Source Data Processing

 E.4 Cluster Analysis Processing

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section 

Before weeks-confirmation was attempted, it proved necessary to verify
that the candidates were well-defined and relatively isolated.
 
When the focal plane passed over an object more extended than 10', structures
within the object often gave rise to many detections whose properties depended
on the scan direction. The simple detection algorithm grossly misrepresented
such large sources, since only the flux at the spatial frequencies of the
square-wave filters was detected. This value could be far less than the
true total flux. Large extended objects were characterized by strings and
clusters of sources. This behavior was found particularly pronounced at
100 um.
 
A somewhat similar situation arose in regions with a high density of
sources, or equavlently, because of complex backgrounds, such as the Galactic
plane. The results from such regions were particularly sensitive to scan
direction. Fluxes quoted in regions of complex structure should NEVER be
taken at face value.
 
Before weeks-confirmation was attempted the sources were first analyzed
by the cluster analysis processor, which looked for clusters of detections
at the same wavelength and from the same hours-confirming coverage. If
the cluster was below a certain critical size then its constituent detections
were merged into a single source which was then ready for weeks-confirmation.
If, however, the cluster was larger than the threshold size, then it was
deemed part of a large extended object. In this case the detections 
contributing
to the cluster were rejected from any future processing. All detections
which were not found to be members of large clusters were kept for subsequent
processing.
 
Clusters were identified by finding sources observed within 36 hours
and which could be linked together spatially. A detection was considered
to be linked to a cluster if it was a close neighbor to at least one other
source in the cluster. Two detections were considered to be close neighbors
if their link parameter, L , was less than a certain threshold. The link
parameter, L , is given by,

L = D/(r 1 + r 2 )
 
 (V.E.4)

where D is the distance between the centroids of the two sources and
 r 1 and 
 r 2 are the radii of their equivalent-area circles, i.e. 
if a and b are the semi-major and semi-minor axes of the source, then the 
equivalent-area
circle has a radius given by

r = (a x b)
 
 (V.E.5)

The value of the threshold on the link parameter was taken to be 3.5
for reasons discussed in Section V.E.7.a .
 
When the detections in a cluster were merged, the flux of the merged
object was taken to be the sum of the fluxes of the constituent sources.
The position was the flux-weighted centroid from all the constituent 
detections
in the cluster. The extent of the source was obtained by combining the
covariance matrices about the new centroid; the new matrix was then 
diagonalized
to yield new estimates of the semi-major and semi-minor axes and twist
angle. Relatively bright sources were not greatly altered when merged with
fainter detections.
 
The maximum semi-major axis that a merged cluster could have before
being rejected was set at 5', since extended source processing was not
intended for larger sources and could not accurately estimate fluxes on
size scales greater than about 8'.

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section