V.D.8 Flux and Confusion Status Words 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 D. Point Source Confirmation

 D.8 Flux and Confusion Status Words

 Chapter Contents |
 Introduction |
 Authors |
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section 

 Two status words were used to track the progress of a source
through all levels of the confirmation processing. Each wavelength
band of each hours-confirmed sighting has associated with it a
flux status (FSTAT) and a confusion status (CSTAT) word which
describe the quality of the quoted flux and whether the processor
detected any possibly confusing neighbor sources nearby. Both
of these status words were used in deciding which sources were
to be included in the final catalog
(see Section V.H ). FSTAT ( Table
V.D.5 ) tells whether in a given band the quoted flux is an upper
limit, an unconfirmed detection(s) or a well-confirmed measurement.
CSTAT tells whether a sighting was potentially confused by other
detections at the times of seconds- or hours-confirmation or during
band-merging. Tables V.D.3 a ,
 b lists values of CSTAT.

 Flux Status (FSTAT) Values

 Table V.D.5

 Status Meaning 

 7 Hours-confirmed; detector number array
 reveals number of detections. 

 6 One seconds-confirmed detection that was
 never hours-confirmed but was associated
 with at least one low-signal-to-noise
 detection. 

 5 One seconds-confirmed detection that was
 never hours-confirmed or associated with
 any other detection. 

 4 Two or more NSCF detections hours-confirmed
 and possibly including NSC detections. 

 3 At least one NSC detection associated with
 no more than one NSCF detection. 

 2 One NSC or NSCF detection and possibly any
 number of low-signal-to-noise detections
 (S/N > 2.9)oratleastonelow-signal-
 to-noise detection (S/N < 3) 

 1 Lowest three-sigma noise value found 

 Chapter Contents |
 Introduction |
 Authors |
 References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index |
 Previous Section |
 Next Section