VIII.A. Introduction 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

VIII. Sky Coverage, Confusion, Completeness and Reliability

A. Introduction

 Chapter Contents | Authors 
| References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous
Section | Next Section 

The main results concerning the sky coverage, completeness and reliability
of the IRAS survey can be summarized by noting that: 1) 96% of the celestial
sphere was covered sufficiently to appear in the catalog; 2) at Galactic
latitudes | b | > 20deg and at wavelengths of 12, 25 and 60 um
the catalog is essentially complete for sources brighter than about 1.5
Jy; and 3) fewer than one source in 1000 having two hours-confirmed sightings
is a spurious object.

 At 100 um the situation is more complicated due to the effects
of "cirrus"-like emission ( cf. Low et
al. 1984 ) that often affects point source fluxes and completeness
and reliability even at high Galactic latitudes. Whether a particular point
source is an independent entity such as a galaxy or a dense condensation
in a cirrus wisp has to be carefully considered. It is advisable to check
the values of the cirrus and confusion flags for 100 um flux
densities because these may indicate extended emission at the point source
position (see Sections V.H.4 , VII.H.2 and X.B.l ).
 
In regions of high point source density such as the inner parts of the
Galactic plane and the Magellanic Clouds, the completeness of the catalog
is likely to be poor. More stringent criteria for the selection of catalog
sources were applied in these regions to ensure a high reliability of the
sources. It is hard to arrive at good estimates of the completeness and
reliability, particularly since these are also regions of strong extended
emission. The completeness is very low in regions affected by the Galactic
plane "shadow" caused by the lagging of the noise estimator.
 
The catalog of small extended sources is considerably less complete
and reliable than the point source catalog due to the cruder algorithms
used and to the effects of confusion from larger extended structures. These
results are discussed in Section VIII.E .

 Chapter Contents | Authors 
| References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous
Section | Next Section