V.E.3 Source Construction and Hours-Confirmation 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 E. Overview of Small Extended Source Data Processing

 E.3 Source Construction and Hours-Confirmation

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section 

 In point source processing each pair of seconds-confirming
detections was merged into a single detection. This was not the
case for extended sources, nor was there any explicit check analogous
to the point source hours-confirmation processing. Each individual
seconds-confirmed detection was passed to a processor which attempted
to piece together detections from the same band and the same hours-confirming
coverage into a single source. Sources were considered to be from
the same hours-confirming coverage if they were observed within
36 hours of each other. In most cases this process resulted in
an hours-confirmed source in the point source processing sense,
i.e., the resultant source was made up of two or more pairs of
seconds-confirming detections whose detection times differed by
a few hours. However, it was also possible for two or more seconds-confirming
detections without a subsequent hours-confirming sighting to result
in an acceptable source.
 
 The piecing together of sources involved several stages.
First, seconds-confirmed detections which lay sufficiently close
to one another on the sky and which had detection times within
36 hours were linked together. If a detection failed to link with
any other detection, it was rejected and not used in subsequent
processing. Each group of linked detections was mapped onto a
rectangular grid representing their distribution on the sky. 
Each pixel in the grid was a 1' square. The size of each detection
was just the detector size in the cross-scan direction, and 
 W ( k )
in the in-scan direction ( Eq. (V.E.2) ). 
This grid consisted of
a number of cells which may be referred to by the coordinates
( K , L ). The number of detections, 
 N ( K , L ), which overlapped each
grid cell was found and each cell was assigned a weight, 
 W ( K , L ),
which was proportional to the sum of the intensities in each of
the detections overlapping the cell. The intensity in a detection
was taken to be the amplitude of the square-wave peak divided
by the detector aperture area. The flux from the source seen
by each of the detectors was calculated. This flux was then distributed
among the grid cells overlapped by the detector according to the
weights W ( K , L ). The total intensity associated with 
each grid
cell was then the sum of the contributions from each overlapping
detector, divided by the number of such detectors.
 
 Having assigned an intensity to each grid cell, the cells
which were regarded as contributing to the source were identified.
 The cell with the maximum intensity was located. If this lay
close to the boundary of the grid then no source was identified.
Otherwise all the cells near to the maximum intensity cell which
had an intensity above 1% of the maximum were linked into a single
source; if the intensity distribution had a minimum boundary and 
then a rise beyond the minimum,
 the linking process was stopped at this minimum.
 
 After all the cells within the source were identified, a
check was made to see if most of the source lay on the grid. 
This was done by requiring the intensity on all four boundaries
of the grid to be less than 10% of the maximum intensity on the
grid. If this was not the case then "source run-off"
was said to have occurred. If, in addition to source run-off,
the maximum intensities on either pair of opposite grid boundaries
were sufficiently different, indicating the presence of a strong
flux gradient, then the source was likely to be a relatively small
bump on the side of a larger source, and no source was returned.
If source run-off occurred, but there was no evidence of a strong
flux gradient across the grid then the source was accepted but
a flag was set to indicate that it was possibly a fragment of
a larger source.
 
 The flux of the source was taken to be the sum of the intensities
of all the grid cells which were linked into the source, multiplied
by the grid cell area. The intensity-weighted sum of the number
of detections contributing to each grid cell in the source was
found. This was called the confirmation level of the source, and
gives an indication of how well the various detections contributing
to the source were put together to form a single source. Only
those sources whose confirmation level was above a threshold of
2 were passed on for further processing. In addition, a source
was required to have at least one detection with a signal-to-noise
ratio greater than 3.
 
 Sources which passed the confirmation level and signal-to-noise
thresholds became the input for subsequent confirmation processing,
they were referred to as intermediate small extended sources,
and were treated as hours-confirmed sources. The centroid and
extent of each of those sources was computed the extent being
characterized by the matrix of the second moments of the flux
distribution. This matrix was diagonalized to yield the semi-major
and semi-minor axes of the source, together with the angle between
the semi-major axis and the ecliptic meridian. The number of detections
in the source was also carried. A detection was counted if it
contributed more than half its own flux to the source.

 Chapter Contents | 
 Introduction | 
 Authors | 
 References 

 Table of Contents | 
 Index | 
 Previous Section | 
 Next Section