V.E.7 Optimizing the Processor 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

 V. Data Reduction

 E. Overview of Small Extended Source Data Processing

 E.7 Optimizing the Processor

 Chapter Contents 
| Introduction 
 | Authors 
| References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | 
 Previous Section 
| Next Section 

 Choosing the Clustering Threshold 
 Choosing the Weeks-Confirmation Threshold 
 Choosing the Band-Merging Threshold 
 Summary and Discussion 

The intermediate file of hours-confirmed sources (in the restricted
sense of Section V.E.3 above) accumulated as the
satellite data were processed. Cluster analysis, weeks-confirmation, and
band-merging were run repeatedly on this intermediate file to optimize
the the thresholds in these processors. This section describes how the
thresholds were arrived at and discusses the implications of the choices.
 
It was determined from preliminary analysis that the threshold on the
link parameter used in the cluster analysis processor would have to be
larger than 2, and that the weeks-confirmation threshold would have to
be in the vicinity of 1. It also became clear that in the range of interest,
the clustering threshold had the greatest influence on the output. This
threshold was therefore optimized with the weeks-confirmation threshold
held at 0.8; then the weeks-confirmation threshold was chosen. The final
changes in confirmation did not affect the clustering enough to require
more tuning.
 
The goal in optimizing the processor was enhanced reliability; completeness
was only a secondary concern. Reliability included the requirement that
the source be free of potentially confusing neighbors. Regions of low source
density (such as high Galactic latitudes) were the prime areas where the
processor was expected to perform well.

 E.7.a Choosing the Clustering Threshold

As stated earlier ( Section V.E.4 ), cluster analysis
was meant to filter out fragments of sources that were larger than 8' and
sources that were confused.

 Figure V.E.1 This shows that cluster analysis processing does not
greatly affect the number of small extended sources that are
weeks-confirmed at high galactic latitudes. Only at 100 um
is there a substantial dependence, because of the cirrus. 

 larger 
 largest 

Neither problem was common at high Galactic latitudes, and while it
was necessary to apply cluster processing in these areas, it was not possible
to select an optimal threshold by studying these areas alone. 
 Figure V.E.1 illustrates this point clearly by showing 
that the number of
weeks-confirmed sources at high Galactic latitudes was essentially independent
of the clustering threshold at 12 um and 25 um; and
at 60 um and 100 um the number of sources dropped
as the clustering threshold increased indicating the presence of complex
structure at these wavelengths. Figure V.E.1 displays
the results of processing in a region (henceforth Region A) at high Galactic
latitudes, defined in ecliptic coordinates by 0deg < 
 <
90deg and 135deg < <
205deg; its total area was about 4010deg 2 , about 10% of the 
sky. The source density was on the order of 0.02 to 0.05 per sq. deg. too low
for confusion to be a problem.

 Figure V.E.2 In contrast with Figure V.E.1, regions of high source
density are heavily affected by cluster analysis. 

 larger 
 largest 

 Figure V.E.2 displays the number of weeks-confirmed
sources as a function of clustering threshold for Region B, which includes
a crowded portion of the Galactic plane. It was defined in ecliptic 
coordinates
by 25deg < <
45deg, and 280deg < 
 <
300deg; its total areawas about 326 sq. deg, which implies a source
density of about 0.3 to 6.0 per sq. deg. Both figures were obtained with
a weeks-confirmation threshold of 0.8.
 
The shape of the curves in Figure V.E.2 suggested
that a natural choice of clustering threshold could be based on keeping
the final source density near the confusion limit. The confusion limit
was obtained by requiring a minimum number of 25 beams per source (as in -
 Section V.H.6 ), which corresponds to a probability 
less than 0.1% that two
sources will be found in the same beam, and a probability of about 1% that
two adjacent beams will both have sources in them, assuming Poisson 
statistics.
To use this criterion, an estimate was needed for beam size. A close upper
limit was simply the in-scan width of the largest detector template (about
10') times twice the cross-scan width of a detector (about 10'), leading
to an effective "beam size" of 1/36 sq. deg.
 
In practice, however, and especially at 12 and 25 um, detections
on smaller templates were common, and the effective beam size was found
to be smaller than the upper limit by a factor two or more. To estimate
the effective beam size, the average density of small extended source detections
per survey coverage per band was found in the five most crowded bins on
the sky. Each bin was approximately a sq. deg in size. This density was
the same at 12 and 25 um, namely 77 sources per sq. deg. with
a population dispersion of 4; at 100 um, the density was 40
+/- 5 per sq. deg At 60 um, the average density in the five
most crowded bins was 78 +/- 20; if the highest density bin was thrown
out, the average in the next five was 68 +/- 10. The result at 
100 um
was quite close to the upper limit estimate above, as expected since only
the largest template was available at 100 um.
 
Adopting as effective beam sizes 1/40, 1/68, 1/77 and 1/77 sq. deg.
respectively in the 100 um, 60 um, 25 um
and 12 um, the critical densities are 1.6, 2.7, 3.1 and 3.1
sources per sq. deg. To find the corresponding critical clustering threshold,
small heavily populated windows within Region B, with a total area of 9.8
sq. deg were used. The average density of weeks-confirmed sources dropped
quickly as the clustering threshold increased from 2 to 3, and then leveled
off in a way similar to, but steeper than, what was seen in 
 Fig. V.E.2 . The critical source density was reached in 
all bands for thresholds
between 3 and 4. A value of 3.5 was chosen for all four bands. 

 E.7.b Choosing the Weeks-Confirmation Threshold

 Figure V.E.3 Effect of weeks-confirmation threshold on the number of
sources. The chosen threshold is indicated by the vertical
broken line. 

 larger 
 largest 

 Figure V.E.3 shows the number of
weeks-confirmed sources as a function
of the weeks-confirmation threshold for Region A. Clearly, almost all 
confirmations
were acquired by a threshold of 2; the slow rise beyond that point was
roughly linear, as expected for false confirmations. The linear rise with
threshold was expected because the search area (rather than the search
radius) scales linearly with the confirmation threshold. Reliability dictated
dictates these false confirmations, while completeness demanded keeping
as many of the better positional matches as possible. A value of 1.4 for
weeks-confirmation threshold was selected because it marked the boundary
between the steep climb due to true confirmations and the gradual climb
due to the false confirmations. 

 E.7.c Choosing the Band-Merging Threshold

 Figure V.E.4 The optimal threshold for band-merging is indicated by the
vertical broken line. It is the same as for weeks-confirmation. 

 larger 
 largest 

Because both spatial resolution and source properties changed with wavelength,
an astronomical object could appear extended in one band and point-like
in others. In view of that, band-merging was carried out after confirmation,
in contrast to point source processing.
 
 Figure V.E.4 shows the output of the band-merge
processor as a function of the band-merging link parameter threshold in
Region B how Galactic latitudes). As anticipated most sources turned out
to be single-band sources. Past a threshold of 1.4 very little new 
band-merging took place. A threshold of 1.4, the same as for 
weeks-confirmation, was adopted. 

 E.7.d Summary and Discussion

It was evident that the performance of the small extended source processor
at high Galactic latitudes varied slowly as a function of the cluster 
processing
threshold. In contrast, crowded regions provided the testing ground for
selecting an optimal clustering threshold. With a first determination of
3.5 as the clustering threshold high Galactic latitudes provided the optimal
choice of 1.4 as the weeks-confirmation threshold ( Fig.
V.E.2 ). A value of 1.4 was also chosen as the optimal threshold for
band-merging.

 Figure V.E.5 A final check on the optimal thresholds: the
weeks-confirmation threshold used here is the final one (1.4);
the effects of cluster analysis are quite drastic, as expected.
The tick mark on each curve indicates the critical source density;
in all cases this density is obtained at thresholds greater than
the optimal choice of 3.5. 

 larger 
 largest 

The final iteration was to repeat clustering optimization using the
final choice for confirmation threshold. This was done using 
 Fig. V.E.5 , where the density of weeks-confirmed 
sources is shown as a function of the clustering threshold in the three 
crowded regions mentioned in Section V.E.7.a . The confusion
limits were 3.1, 3.1, 2.7, and 1.6 sources per sq. deg in the 12, 25, 60, and
 100 um bands, respectively. This critical density was reached for all 
bands between clustering thresholds of 3 and 4; as expected a value of 3.5 
was still the optimal common choice for all
bands.
 
To assess the significance of this choice, one can estimate the size
of the area searched for close neighbors by the cluster analysis processor
both in relative and absolute terms.
 
If an extended source is thought of as a square-wave in one dimension
with total width W , then its corresponding rms size is W /(2 x 3 &frac12; ).
The template used for detecting this source would have been itself square-wave
shaped with a width W , and baseline segments W /2 on each side. 
A clustering
threshold of 3.5 implies that 2 sources are considered close neighbors
as soon as the baseline segments of their respective detection templates
star to overlap. This was clearly a reasonable, though somewhat conservative,
way of guarding against confusion.
 
To estimate the angular distances involved in cluster analysis, the
mean size of a sample of 111 sources in each band was calculated after
clustering and weeks-confirmation; these mean sizes (always close to the
medians as well) were 1.5', 1.5', 1.8', and 2.2' at 12, 25, 60, and 100 
um.
The largest size in any band was 3'. On average, therefore, cluster analysis
treated as "close neighbors" two sources within 10' of each other
at 12 and 25 um, 12' at 60 um, and 15' at 100 um.
 
Cluster analysis fulfilled its objective in recognizing and setting
aside large structures that were fragmented into small extended sources;
this was the reason for the decrease in 100 um and 60 um source
counts with increasing clustering threshold in Region A ( Fig.
V.E.1 ): cirrus was integrated into larger structures and dropped from
further processing. It should be stressed, however, that cirrus is not
absent from the small extended source catalog.
 
Cluster processing also fulfilled its objective as a confusion processor,
as shown by the reduction by an order of magnitude of the source density
in crowded areas ( Fig. V.E.4 ) as the clustering
threshold was varied from 1 to greater than 3.5. The sources that survived
in densely populated areas were either very isolated or locally dominant.
isolated sources had no neighbors within the search window. Dominant sources
were so much brighter than their neighbors that when the latter were combined
with them the source parameters were barely altered so that the size in
particular did not grow beyond the maximum cutoff value. In confused areas
most sources were dropped because they combined with a neighbor within
the search radius, but far enough away that the combined structure exceeded
the size limit. Such occurrences were recognized by the rejected source
having an axial ratio much larger than unity.
 
It should therefore, be stressed that the absence of a small extended
source where one was expected, in crowded or uncrowded regions, may be
due to the presence of a neighbor; the two sources may have combined into
too large a source.
 
 Table V.E.1 traces the number of small extended
sources that were processed through clustering analysis and weeks-confirmation
with the final choice for the thresholds in Regions A and B. The fraction
of sources that survived cluster analysis and went on to weeks-confirmation
was much higher in Region A (high latitude) than in Region B (low latitude).
At 12 and 25 um, about 90% of the sources surviving cluster
analysis did not pass weeks- confirmation and were therefore discarded
this percentage decreased at longer wavelengths but remained substantial.
The main reason for this high failure rate was the lack of a rigorous 
requirement for hours-confirmation, such as was required for point sources. 
Detector noise or other transients could trigger detections which 
seconds-confirmed, and then were used to construct a source that was 
discarded only at weeks-confirmation.
 
The excess of 25 um detections in Region A was a direct result
of the lack of hours-confirmation: the dead detectors in this band relaxed
the seconds-confirmation filter, and therefore allowed many more. stray
detections than in other bands. The problem was hardly noticeable in Region
B because most detections there were triggered by real but complex structure
on the sky. That difference just reflects the contrasting definitions of
Regions A and B: A has a low surface density of sources at the survey 
sensitivity, and the noise was dominated by the detector noise; B was 
dominated by confusion noise, in the sense that it was densely packed with 
detectable sources.
The result was that most detections were discarded by cluster processing
in Region B, and by weeks-confirmation in Region A. When all bands were
combined it turned out that in both regions about one out of every seven
detections ended up contributing to a source in the catalog; this fraction
was remarkably similar for Regions A and B.
 
Region B was surveyed three times by the satellite, but only about a
quarter of all sources were detected on all three passes; this was mostly
due to "shadowing" by the Galactic plane, and hysteresis in the
detectors (see Section VIII.D ). The coverage
of Region A was more complex including areas with

 Chapter Contents 
| Introduction | Authors 
| References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous Section 
| Next Section