VII.B. General Statistics of the Point Source Processing and Catalog 

 IRAS Explanatory Supplement

VII. Analysis of Processing

B. General Statistics of the Point Source Processing and Catalog

 Chapter Contents 
| Authors | References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous Section 
| Next Section 

 The Generation of Reliable Point Sources 
 Distribution of Sources in the Catalog 

 B.1 The Generation of Reliable Point Sources

The complementary aims of completeness and reliability resulted in the
design of detection and confirmation programs that acted as a series of
filters to weed out spurious sources at each level of the data processing.
Because the detection thresholds were set low to improve completeness,
subsequent stages of confirmation were used to establish the reliability
of the IRAS sources.
 
Approximately 500,000 events per day triggered the square-wave filter
detection algorithm ( Section V.C.2 ). 
Approximately
20 to 40% of these detections passed the signal-to-noise and correlation
coefficient thresholds. The largest fraction of the detections that were
accepted, about one-third of the total, came at 25 um. Detections
at 12 um and 100 um, each contributed one-quarter
of the total number, while the remainder, about one-sixth of the total
number, came at 60 um. About two-thirds of the accepted detections
were sightings at different wavelengths of approximately 25,000 
seconds-confirmed
band-merged sources produced only. About one-third of the seconds-confirmed
sources were used in the roughly 4,000 hours-confirmed sources (hereafter
denoted as HCONs) generated per day of surveying.
 
Hour-confirmed sources were placed into a Working Survey Data Base (WSDB)
to await possible weeks-confirmation. At the completion of the initial
data processing the WSDB contained about 1.2 million hours-confirmed sources
spread over the entire sky. Of these, some 317,000 failed to be matched
with a weeks-confirimng partner during the initial processing. The remaining
885,000 HCONs were combined by the weeks-confirmation processor during
the normal processing into 319,000 distinct sources each consisting of
two or more HCONs. The clean-up processing discussed 
 Section V.H.2 forced close neighboring sources 
into single weeks-confirmed
sources, decreasing the number of distinct objects while increasing the
average number of HCONs per source. After clean-up there were about 304,000
single HCONs and 314,000 weeks-confirmed sources, each consisting of two
or more HCONs. The breakdown of the catalog by numbers of HCONs is given
in Table VII.B.1 .
 
There were three reasons why even a weeks-confirmed source could be
excluded from the catalog. first, the source could fail to satisfy the
criteria of having at least one high quality flux in one band or two or
more moderate quality fluxes in adjacent bands 
( Section
on V.H.5 ); some 12,000 sources were rejected for this reason. Second,
the high source density processing could eliminate a source due to the
strict selection rules imposed in such areas (Sections 
 V.H.6 
and VII.E.1.b ); about 57,000 sources which had
all survived the first test were rejected by these criteria. Third a source
could be deleted because it was a spurious object produced near a bright
source ( Section VII.E.4 ); there were 22 such sources
outside of the Galactic plane. Of the 314,000 weeks-confirmed sources in
the WSDB, 245,839 survived all these criteria to appear in the catalog.

 B.2 Distribution of Sources in the Catalog

 Figure VII.B.1 The number density (per sq. deg) of four kinds of IRAS
source (see text) is shown as a function of Galactic latitude, averaged
over all Galactic longitudes. 

 larger 
 largest 

As mentioned in Section I.C , there is a
meaningful astrophysical classification for almost all of the IRAS sources.
Objects detected at 12 um and having 
 f v (12 um)
> f v (25 um) are typically
stars ( Fig. I.C.2 , type S in 
 Table
VII.B.2 ). Objects detected at 60 um and having 
 f v (60 um)
> f v (25 um) are either
galaxies if they are located away from the Galactic plane or warm Galactic
objects if located near the plane (type C, Fig.
I.C.3 ). Objects detected only at 100 um are predominantly
cirrus sources, although some at very high Galactic latitudes may be external
galaxies (type C, Fig. I.C.4 ). Sources 
meeting
none of these criteria are classified "other" and lie mostly
in the Galactic plane. Figure VII.B.1 shows histograms
of the distribution of the four types of sources as a function of Galactic
latitude.
 
All cataloged sources can also be classified into 15 different spectral
groups depending on which bands have measurements of either moderate or
high quality. The numbers in each category are given in 
 Table
VII.B.2 , where a code has been used to specify which bands were reliably
detected. If the presence or absence of a measured flux density at 12,
25, 60 and 100 um is considered in that order to correspond
to a "1" or "0" in a four digit number, then a source
measured only at 12 um is denoted by "1000", while
one measured at 12 um and 60 um is denoted by "1010",
etc. The distribution on the sky of each of these color combinations is
shown in a series of equal area projections in Galactic coordinates. These
figures are shown in an appendix at the end of the chapter 
( Figs. VII.Ap.1-15 ). 

 Chapter Contents 
| Authors | References 

 Table of Contents |
 Index | Previous Section 
| Next Section